8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 1/505
Borough of Stroudsburg, PA
Monday, August 17, 2020
Foreword
Chapter FWD. Foreword
ATTACHMENTS
FOREWORD
Adopting Ordinance
Chapter AO. Adopting Ordinance
ATTACHMENTS
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
Municipal Code
Chapter 1. Administration and Government
Part 1. OFFICERS
§ 1-101. Time, Day and Place of Regular Meetings.
[Ord. 599, 12/19/1983; as amended by Ord. 690, 3/14/1990, § 1; and by Ord. 723, 5/19/1993, § 1]
The regular meetings of the Council of the Borough of Stroudsburg shall convene on every third
Wednesday of each month at 7:00 p.m., in the Municipal Building.
§ 1-102. Compensation of Councilpersons.
[Ord. 572, 3/12/1980; as amended by Ord. 748, 2/5/1997]
The compensation of each of the Councilmembers of the Borough of Stroudsburg is hereby fixed at the
sum of $2,500 per annum, payable in monthly installments, coming from the general funds of the
Borough. The Borough has at the present time a population of more than 5,000 persons therein.
§ 1-103. Compensation of Mayor.
[Ord. 571, 3/12/1980; as amended by Ord. 748, 2/5/1997]
The salary of the Mayor of the Borough of Stroudsburg, in the County of Monroe and State of
Pennsylvania, as of January 1, 1997, is hereby fixed at the sum of $3,000 per annum, payable in
monthly installments from the general funds of the Borough. The Borough has at the present time a
population of more than 5,000 persons, according to the latest census.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 2/505
1.
2.
3.
§ 1-104. Compensation of Tax Collector.
[Ord. 599, 12/19/1983]
The compensation of the Borough of Stroudsburg's Tax Collector for the collection of taxes shall be:
Two percent of all taxes collected.
§ 1-105. Auditor.
[Ord. 601, 3/14/1984]
The office of Borough Auditor is hereby abolished and an independent Auditor is hereby appointed
who shall be a Certified Public Accountant registered in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and
the same shall perform certain duties as specified by law.
It shall be the duty of the said Certified Public Accountant to make an independent examination of
the accounting records of the Borough for the fiscal year and shall perform such other duties and
exercise such powers as are conferred upon him by the Borough Code.
In the event that there should be a vacancy in the office of elected Auditor from and after the
effective date [of this section the] vacancy so occurring shall be filled by the said appointed
Certified Public Accountant who shall give bond as required by law.
Part 2. BOROUGH MANAGER
§ 1-201. Office of Manager Created.
[Ord. 563, 11/3/1978, § 1]
The office of Borough Manager is hereby created by the Borough of Stroudsburg, subject to the right of
the Borough, by ordinance, at any time to abolish such office.
§ 1-202. Election by Council.
[Ord. 563, 11/3/1978, § 2]
As soon as practicable after the enactment of this ordinance, the Borough Council shall elect, by
majority vote of all its members, one person to fill the office of Borough Manager who shall serve until
removed by a majority vote of Council.
§ 1-203. Criteria for Selection; Residency Requirements.
[Ord. 563, 11/3/1978, § 3; as amended by Ord. 718, 5/13/1992]
The Manager shall be chosen solely on the basis of his executive and administrative abilities, with
special reference to his actual experience in or his knowledge of accepted practices in respect to the
duties of the office as herein outlined. The Manager need not be a resident of the Borough or of the
State of Pennsylvania at the time of his appointment but within three months thereafter he shall
become, and during his tenure as Manager, shall remain a resident of the Borough. The Manager shall
reside within the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania within 15 miles of the Borough of Stroudsburg during
the term of the Managers contract and any renewals hereof.
§ 1-204. Payment of Bond Required.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 3/505
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
1.
[Ord. 563, 11/3/1978, § 4; as amended by Ord. 599, 12/19/1983]
Before entering upon his duties, the Borough Manager shall give a bond to the Borough with a bonding
company as surety, in the sum of $40,000, conditioned for the faithful performance of his duties,
premium for the said bond to be paid by the Borough of Stroudsburg. The bond of the Borough
Manager may be included in, and the Manager may be bonded under and covered by a blanket bond
which may now or hereafter be in force and effect for all Borough employees in the aforesaid amount
of $40,000.
§ 1-205. Compensation.
[Ord. 563, 11/3/1978, § 5]
The Borough Manager shall receive such compensation as shall be fixed from time to time by Council.
§ 1-206. Powers and Duties.
[Ord. 563, 11/3/1978, § 6]
The Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the Borough and he shall supervise and be
responsible to the Council as a whole for the proper and efficient administration of the affairs of the
Borough. His powers and duties shall relate to the general management of all Borough business not
expressly by statute or ordinance imposed or conferred upon other Borough officers.
Subject to recall by ordinance, the powers and duties of the Manager shall include the following:
He may with the approval of Council, hire and when necessary for the good of the service,
suspend or discharge all employees under his supervision, provided that persons covered by
the Civil Service provisions of the Borough Code shall be hired, suspended, or discharged in
accordance with such provisions.
He shall prepare and submit to Council, on a date designated by Council, a budget for the
next fiscal year with an explanatory budget message. In preparing the budget, the Manager
shall obtain from the head of each department, agency, board, or officer, estimates of
revenues and expenditures and other supporting data as Council requests. The Manager
shall review such estimates and may revise them before submitting the budget to the Council.
He shall be responsible for the administration of the budget after its adoption by the Council.
He shall hold such other municipal offices or head one or more of the municipal departments
as the Council may from time to time direct, and shall perform all the duties of such offices, in
addition to the specific duties assigned to the Manager by this ordinance.
He shall attend all meetings of Council and its committees with the right to take part in the
discussion and he shall receive notice of all special meetings of Council or its committees.
He shall prepare the agenda for each meeting with recommendations from Council and
supply facts pertinent thereto.
He shall keep the Council informed as to the conduct of Borough affairs; submit periodic
reports on the condition of the Borough finances and such other reports as the Council
requests; and make such recommendations to the Council as he deems necessary.
He shall submit to Council, as soon as possible after the close of the fiscal year, a complete
report on the financial and administrative activities of the Borough for the preceding year.
He shall see that the provisions of all franchises, leases, permits, and privileges granted by
the Borough are observed.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 4/505
J.
K.
L.
M.
N.
O.
He may employ, by and with the approval of Council, experts and consultants to perform work
and to advise in connection with any of the functions of the Borough.
He shall supervise the performance and faithful execution of contracts except insofar as such
duties are expressly imposed upon some other Borough officer by statute, or ordinance.
He shall take the necessary steps to collect any obligations owed to the Borough and will
make a reasonable effort to obtain payment of said obligations, including, when necessary,
the filing of claims and law suits subject to the approval of Council and after a review of the
claim by the Borough Solicitor.
He shall be the Purchasing Officer of the Borough and he shall purchase, in accordance with
the provisions of the Borough Code and the policies of Council, all supplies and equipment for
the various agencies, boards, departments and other offices of the Borough. He shall keep an
account of all purchases and shall from time to time or when directed by Council, make a full
written report thereof. He shall also issue rules and regulations — subject to the approval of
Council — governing the requisition and purchasing of all municipal supplies and equipment.
All complaints regarding services or personnel of the Borough shall be referred to the Office
of the Manager. He shall investigate and dispose of such complaints, and the Manager shall
report thereon to Council.
He shall cooperate with the Borough Council at all times and in all matters that the best
interests of the Borough and of the general public may be maintained.
§ 1-207. Council to Work Through Manager.
[Ord. 563, 11/3/1978, § 7]
Except for the purpose of inquiry, the Council, its committees, and its members, whenever practicable,
shall deal with the administrative service solely through the Borough Manager and neither the Council
nor any of its committees, or any of its members shall give orders, publicly or privately, to any
subordinates of the Manager.
§ 1-208. Absence of Manager.
[Ord. 563, 11/3/1978, § 8]
In case of illness or absence of the Manager from the Borough, the Council shall designate one
qualified person to perform the duties of the Manager during his absence or disability.
Part 3. BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, AND DEPARTMENTS
A.. Planning Commission.
§ 1-301. Creation of Commission.
[Ord. 570, 3/12/1980; as amended and reenacted by Ord. 599, 12/19/1983; and amended by Ord. No.
1049, 4/17/2018]
A Borough Planning Commission, to be composed of seven members, appointed as provided by law
(53 P.S. § 10202), is hereby created in and for the Borough of Stroudsburg. The Planning Commission
shall perform all duties and may exercise all powers conferred by law upon Borough planning
agencies; provided, the Planning Commission previously created in and for the said Borough of
Stroudsburg shall constitute the tenure of any of the members thereof, but any and all vacancies in the
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 5/505
said Commission, hereafter occurring, shall be filled in the manner and for the term provided in the law
governing Borough planning commissions in effect at the time of the happening of the said vacancy.
B.. Shade Tree Commission.
§ 1-311. Creation of Commission; Membership; Powers and
Duties.
[Ord. 124, 12/7/1921; as amended and reenacted by Ord. 599, 12/19/1983; as amended by Ord. 835,
11/19/2003]
The Council of the Borough of Stroudsburg hereby creates a Shade Tree Commission, to be
composed of five residents of the Borough, who shall be appointed by the Council and shall serve
without compensation for their terms of office and with all the rights, powers, duties and obligations
provided for by law (Act of February 1, 1966 (P.L. 1656, No. 581), as amended).
§ 1-312. Express Authority of Shade Tree Commission.
[Ord. 124, 12/7/1921; as amended and reenacted by Ord. 599, 12/19/1983]
The collection of assessments, the filing of liens, the levying of taxes and the collection of penalties,
whether by the Commission or on behalf of the Borough, are expressly authorized as provided for in
the law.
§ 1-313. Rules and Regulations Authorized; Penalty for Violation.
[Ord. 124, 12/7/1921; as amended and reenacted by Ord. 599, 12/19/1983]
The Commission is hereby authorized to prescribe such rules and regulations, and to impose such
penalties for the violation of same, as it may deem necessary and proper, provided that the rules and
regulations are approved by the Council and are not in conflict with other ordinances of the Borough.
§ 1-314. Annual Report.
[Ord. 124, 12/7/1921; as amended and reenacted by Ord. 599, 12/19/1983]
The Shade Tree Commission shall report annually to the Council on all transactions and expenses for
the preceding fiscal year.
C.. Recreation Board.
§ 1-321. Creation of Board.
[Ord. 589, 3/10/1982, § 1]
That there is hereby created a recreation board known as the Recreation Board of the Borough of
Stroudsburg.
§ 1-322. Membership and Term of Office.
[Ord. 589, 3/10/1982, § 2; as amended by Ord. 647, 5/4/1988; § 1]
That the Board shall be composed of six members, with one appointment a high school student
member to be appointed by the Borough Council of the Borough of Stroudsburg with the power to
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 6/505
provide, conduct, and maintain public recreation areas, facilities, and centers, subject to all the
responsibilities of the Recreation Enabling Legislation. The Board members shall serve for terms of
five years, with the exception of the high school student member, who shall be appointed to a term of
two years and until their successors are appointed except that the members first appointed shall be so
appointed that the term of one member shall expire annually thereafter. Vacancies shall be filled in the
same manner as original appointments and for the unexpired term. Members shall serve without pay.
§ 1-323. Administrative Responsibilities.
[Ord. 589, 3/10/1982, § 3]
That the Recreation Board shall appoint from its membership a chairman and such other officers as it
may deem necessary for the orderly procedure of its business, and may adopt by-laws, rules and
regulations covering its procedure not inconsistent with the provisions of the state laws. The
Recreation Board, shall from time to time, make rules governing the operation and conduct of the
recreational facilities operated by the Board. The Board shall hold regular meetings at such time and
places as it may designate.
§ 1-324. Maintain and Supervise Recreational Facilities.
[Ord. 589, 3/10/1982, § 4]
That the Recreation Board shall maintain, operate and supervise the public parks, playfields and all
outdoor and indoor recreation areas and facilities, owned or controlled by the Borough of Stroudsburg.
§ 1-325. Acceptance of Gifts, Incurrence of Debt.
[Ord. 589, 3/10/1982, § 5]
That the Recreation Board may accept any grant, gift, or donation of services, equipment, real estate,
or money from any individual or group to be used as specified by the donor, or by the terms of
acceptance. The Recreation Board shall have no authority to enter into any contract or incur any debt
or obligation binding upon the Borough Council of the Borough of Stroudsburg, unless so authorized by
Borough Council.
§ 1-326. Employment of Personnel.
[Ord. 589, 3/10/1982, § 6]
That the Recreation Board shall recommend to the Borough Manager the persons to be employed by
the Borough of Stroudsburg as recreation directors, supervisors and such other employees as the
Recreation Board deems necessary or advisable. The executive director of recreation, shall possess
the necessary qualifications and shall have demonstrated by actual work his ability to organize and
direct community recreation.
§ 1-327. Disbursement of Funds.
[Ord. 589, 3/10/1982, § 7]
That funds appropriated by the governing bodies of the Borough of Stroudsburg and budgeted to Parks
recreation shall be disbursed by the Borough Manager of Stroudsburg, upon vouchers issued by the
Recreation Board or Recreation Director, within the annual budget appropriations. Funds received by
the Recreation Board from sources other than budget appropriations shall be deposited by the
Borough Manager or Borough Treasurer of the Borough of Stroudsburg, to the credit and for the use of
the Borough, and disbursed as the budgeted funds are disbursed, except that funds received by gift,
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 7/505
bequest, or otherwise shall be disbursed in accordance with the terms of such gift, or bequest, or the
terms of the acceptance thereof.
§ 1-328. Reports to Be Made; Requested by Council.
[Ord. 589, 3/10/1982, § 8]
That the Recreation Board shall make full and complete reports to the governing body at such times as
may be designated or requested by the governing body.
§ 1-329. Powers Vested in Board.
[Ord. 589, 3/10/1982, § 9]
That such powers as are now or may hereafter be provided by statue of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, or by ordinance of the Borough Council of the Borough of Stroudsburg, relating to the
development and operation of recreation systems, public parks and playgrounds, are hereby vested in
the recreation board, to be exercised by it subject to any and all restrictions, contained in such powers
and ordinances or as designated by the Borough.
D.. Regional Police Department.
§ 1-351. Title.
[Ord. 775, 5/24/1999, § 1]
This Part 3D shall be known and may be cited as the "Borough of Stroudsburg Ordinance Authorizing
an Intergovernmental Agreement Establishing a Regional Police Department."
§ 1-352. Approval of Agreement Establishing Regional Police
Department.
[Ord. 775, 5/24/1999, § 2]
The "Intergovernmental Cooperation Agreement Establishing Regional Police Department" with the
Borough of East Stroudsburg and Stroud Township, marked as Exhibit "A," attached hereto and
incorporated herein by reference, is hereby approved, adopted and authorized, provided that the
Borough of East Stroudsburg, and Stroud Township by ordinance, approve, adopt and authorize the
execution of the same Agreement.
§ 1-353. Provision for Implementing Resolutions.
[Ord. 775, 5/24/1999, § 3]
The Borough Council of the Borough of Stroudsburg may by resolution adopt procedures and
regulations to implement the Agreement approved by this Part 3D, pursuant to the Intergovernmental
Cooperation Act, Act of December 19, 1996, P.L. 1158, No. 177, found at 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
E.. Board of Health; Health Officer.
§ 1-361. Establishment of Board of Health and Health Officer.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 8/505
There is hereby established a Board of Health and the position of Health Officer in and for the Borough
of Stroudsburg under and in accordance with the provisions of the Borough Code, 53 P.S. § 48101 et
seq. Such Board of Health and Health Officer shall enforce all health laws and ordinances of the
Borough as well as all environmental, health and safety rules and regulations which are promulgated
from time to time by the Pennsylvania Departments of Health and Environmental Resources (Titles 25
and 28, Pennsylvania Code), but not enforced by agents of those Departments within the Borough.
F.. Traffic/Pedestrian Safety Commission.
§ 1-371. Creation of the Board.
[Ord. 826, 10/16/2002, § 1]
There is hereby created a board known as the Traffic/Pedestrian Safety Commission of the Borough of
Stroudsburg.
§ 1-372. Purpose.
[Ord. 826, 10/16/2002, § 2]
The purpose of the board is to develop, revise, implement and recommend a comprehensive program
for traffic calming and pedestrian safety and define policies and procedures for the application and
funding of a comprehensive program of traffic calming and pedestrian safety.
§ 1-373. Membership and Terms of Office.
[Ord. 826, 10/16/2002, § 3]
The task force shall be composed of no less than five members nor more than nine members, one of
whom will be a member of the Jacob Stroud Corporation. All members shall be appointed by the
Council and shall serve without compensation for their terms of office. Members shall serve a term of
four years, except for the terms of the persons initially appointed, which shall be staggered so that
three terms begin on the date of appointment and expire one, two and three years, respectively, from
the start date of the task force. The initial terms will expire at the end of the year in which the date of
appointment was made, according to the one, two and three year terms.
§ 1-374. Administrative Responsibilities.
[Ord. 826, 10/16/2002, § 4]
The Traffic/Pedestrian Safety Commission shall appoint from its membership a Chairman and other
such officers as it may deem necessary for the orderly procedure of its business and may adopt
bylaws, rules and regulations covering its procedure not inconsistent with the provisions of the state
laws. The task force shall hold regular meetings at such time and place as it may designate.
§ 1-375. Disbursement of Funds.
[Ord. 826, 10/16/2002, § 5]
The funds appropriated by the Borough Council of the Borough of Stroudsburg and budgeted to the
Traffic/Pedestrian Safety Commission shall be disbursed by the Borough Manager of the Borough of
Stroudsburg, upon vouchers issued by the Traffic/Pedestrian Safety Commission within the annual
budget appropriation. Funds received by the Traffic/Pedestrian Safety Commission other than budget
appropriations shall be deposited by the Borough Manager or Borough Treasurer of the Borough of
Stroudsburg, to the credit and for use of the Traffic/Pedestrian Safety Commission, and disbursed as
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 9/505
1.
2.
3.
the budgeted funds are disbursed, except that funds received by gift, bequest or otherwise shall be
disbursed in accordance with the terms of such gift or bequest or the terms of the acceptance thereof.
§ 1-376. Reports.
[Ord. 826, 10/16/2002, § 6]
The task force shall make full and complete reports and recommendations to the Council at such times
as may be designated or requested by the Council.
G.. Human Relations Commission.
§ 1-381. Creation of Commission.
[Ord. 1027, 5/2/2017]
There is hereby created a commission known as the "Human Relations Commission of the Borough of
Stroudsburg."
§ 1-382. Purpose.
[Ord. 1027, 5/2/2017]
The purpose of the Commission is to ensure that all persons, regardless of actual or perceived
race, color, sex, height, weight, religion, ancestry, genetic information, national origin, sexual
orientation, gender identity or expression, familial status, marital status, age, mental or physical
disability, and use of guide or support animals and/or mechanical aids, enjoy the full benefits of
citizenship and are afforded equal opportunities for employment, housing and the use of public
accommodations and have equal access to postsecondary educational institutions. Specifically, a
business, person, or employer is not permitted to deny any person the full and equal enjoyment of
goods, services, housing, facilities, privileges, advantages, and accommodations on the basis of
any protected characteristic. A business is not permitted to exclude, refuse to provide services,
offer lesser services, or disadvantage a person because of any of the characteristics protected by
this Subpart. Additionally, a business may not advertise or post a sign indicating that it
discriminates based on these protected characteristics.
It is hereby declared to be the public policy of Stroudsburg Borough to foster the employment of all
individuals in accordance with their fullest capacities regardless of actual or perceived race, color,
sex, height, weight, religion, ancestry, genetic information, national origin, sexual orientation,
gender identity or expression, familial status, marital status, age, veteran status, mental or
physical disability, and use of guide or support animals and/or mechanical aids, and to safeguard
their right to obtain and hold employment without such discrimination, to assure equal
opportunities to all individuals and to safeguard their rights to public accommodation and to secure
housing accommodation and commercial property without regard to actual or perceived race,
color, sex, height, weight, religion, ancestry, genetic information, national origin, sexual orientation,
gender identity or expression, familial status, marital status, age, mental or physical disability, and
use of guide or support animals and/or mechanical aids, and to have equal access to
postsecondary educational institutions without regard to actual or perceived race, color, sex,
height, weight, religion, ancestry, genetic information, national origin, sexual orientation, gender
identity or expression, familial status, marital status, age, mental or physical disability, and use of
guide or support animals and/or mechanical aids.
Nothing in this Subpart shall be construed as supporting or advocating any particular doctrine,
position, point of view, lifestyle, or religious view. To the contrary, it is the intention of this Subpart
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 10/505
4.
1.
that all persons be treated fairly and equally, and it is the express intent of this Subpart to
guarantee fair and equal treatment under the law to all people of the Borough.
This Subpart shall be deemed an exercise of the police power of Stroudsburg Borough for the
protection of the public welfare, prosperity, health, and peace of the Stroudsburg community.
§ 1-383. Definitions.
[Ord. 1027, 5/2/2017]
The following words and phrases, when used in this Subpart, shall have the meanings given to
them in this subsection:
BOROUGH
The Borough of Stroudsburg, County of Monroe, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
BOROUGH COUNCIL
The Borough Council of Stroudsburg Borough.
BUSINESS
Any commercial establishment or person offering goods or services to the public, including,
but not limited to, professional services, property repairs, retail stores, medical facilities,
gyms, and banks.
DISCRIMINATION
Any discriminatory act(s) taken by any person, employer, employment agency, labor
organization or public accommodation on the basis of actual or perceived race, color, sex,
height, weight, religion, ancestry, genetic information, national origin, sexual orientation,
gender identity or expression, familial status, marital status, age, mental or physical disability,
or use of guide or support animals and/or mechanical aids.
DISCRIMINATORY ACTS
All acts defined in the Pennsylvania Human Relations Act[1] as unlawful discriminatory
practices. The fact that the Pennsylvania Human Relations Act would not define a practice as
unlawful when that practice is taken on the basis of actual or perceived sexual orientation,
gender identity or expression, genetic information or marital status shall not exempt such
practice from being considered a discriminatory act under this Subpart.
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION
Those postsecondary programs defined as educational institutions pursuant to the
Pennsylvania Fair Educational Opportunities Act, 24 P.S. § 5001 et seq.
EMPLOYEE
Does not include any individuals who, as a part of their employment, reside in the personal
residence of the employer.
EMPLOYER
Any person who employs one or more employees, including the Borough, its departments,
boards and commissions, and any other government agency within its jurisdiction.
ENTERTAINMENT AND RECREATION
Any establishment where the public may be provided facilities or services for the purpose of
recreation or entertainment, including, but not limited to, dance halls, ice or roller skating
rinks, adventure services, movie theaters, concert halls, billiard halls, sports facilities,
museums, sports and entertainment venues, campgrounds, pools, bowling alleys, shooting
ranges, rock climbing facilities, and art galleries.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 11/505
[1]
2.
1.
GENDER IDENTITY OR EXPRESSION
Self-perception, or perception by others, as male or female, and shall include an individual's
appearance, behavior, or physical characteristics, that may be in accord with, or opposed to,
one's physical anatomy, chromosomal sex, or sex assigned at birth, and shall include, but is
not limited to, persons who are undergoing or have completed sex reassignment, are
transgendered or are gender-variant.
GENETIC INFORMATION
That information which is defined as genetic information in the Genetic Information
Nondiscrimination Act of 2008, 42 U.S.C.A. § 2000ff.
LODGING
Any establishment or provider of hotel, motel, room-share, or bed-and-breakfast
accommodations.
ORDINANCE
This Subpart, which shall also be known as the "Anti-Discrimination Ordinance."
PERSON
Any natural person, fraternal, civic or other membership organization, corporation, general or
limited partnership, proprietorship, limited liability company, or similar business organization,
including the Borough, its departments, boards and commissions, and other for-profit and
nonprofit organizations.
PUBLIC ACCOMMODATION
An accommodation, recreation, refreshment, entertainment, or transportation facility of any
kind, whether licensed or not, whose goods, services, facilities, privileges, advantages or
accommodations are extended, offered, sold, solicited, or otherwise made available to the
general public, including loans, or is listed in Section 4(I) of the Pennsylvania Human
Relations Act, 43 P.S. § 954(I), but shall not include any accommodations which are in their
nature distinctly private.
REFRESHMENTS
Any eating and drinking establishment, including, but not limited to, restaurants, bars,
nightclubs, food trucks, diners, lunch stands, bakeries, coffee shops, snack shops, wineries,
and breweries.
SEXUAL ORIENTATION
Actual or perceived homosexuality, heterosexuality, and/or bisexuality.
TRANSPORTATION FACILITY
Any private provider of transportation services, including, but not limited to, taxicabs, taxi
companies, pedicabs, carriages, bicycle vendors, or ride-sharing services.
Editor's Note: See 43 P.S. § 951 et seq.
To the extent words and phrases appearing in this Subpart are not expressly defined herein, the
meaning of this Subpart shall be construed consistently with the Pennsylvania Human Relations
Act.
§ 1-384. Unlawful Practices.
[Ord. 1027, 5/2/2017]
Discrimination in housing, employment, public accommodations, or access to educational
institutions is prohibited under this Subpart.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 12/505
2.
3.
4.
5.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
1.
2.
Advertisements or signs indicating that a business discriminates based on characteristics
protected under this Subpart are prohibited under this Subpart.
Prohibiting a transgender person from using the restroom, locker room, or changing facility
consistent with the gender identified or expressed by that person is prohibited under this Subpart.
Note that this Subpart does not require the elimination of separate men's and women's facilities
and does not require a business to provide new or special restroom facilities. A business may
object to a nontransgender person seeking to use a restroom or changing facility for a false
reason, may require persons who do not have the protected characteristics of gender identity or
gender expression to use the appropriate restroom or changing facility, and may file a trespassing
complaint with the police if the person does not comply; such enforcement is not deemed to be
discrimination under this Subpart. Pennsylvania indecent exposure laws remain valid in all
restrooms and changing facilities within the Borough.
Retaliation against any individual because such individual has opposed any practice forbidden by
this Subpart, or because such individual has made a charge, testified or assisted in any manner in
any investigation, proceeding or hearing under this Subpart is prohibited under this Subpart.
Aiding, abetting, inciting, compelling or coercing the doing of any act declared by this Subpart to
be an unlawful practice, or obstructing or preventing any person from complying with the
provisions of this Subpart is prohibited under this Subpart.
§ 1-385. Exceptions.
[Ord. 1027, 5/2/2017]
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Subpart, exceptions shall be granted to the following:
To a private religious corporation or association, not supported in whole or in part by governmental
appropriations, to refuse to hire or employ an individual on the basis of religion.
To a private religious educational institution or private educational institution operated, supervised,
or controlled by a religious institution or organization which gives preference to applicants of the
same religion.
With respect to age only, to the sale, rental or lease of housing accommodations meeting the
requirements of federal, state or local housing programs for senior citizens, or accommodations
otherwise intended, advertised, designed or operated, bona fide, for the purpose of providing
housing accommodations for persons 50 years of age or older.
With respect to gender only, to a private educational institution which now or hereafter provides an
education to only persons of one gender.
To any action regulated by a governmental entity or agency where a person's qualification is
expressly limited by statute, charter, ordinance or policy as otherwise provided by law.
§ 1-386. Establishment of Human Relations Commission.
[Ord. 1027, 5/2/2017]
Pursuant to 43 P.S. § 962.1 of the Pennsylvania Human Relations Act, there is hereby established
a Human Relations Commission in and for Stroudsburg Borough (hereinafter referred to as the
"Stroudsburg Human Relations Commission" or the "Commission").
The Stroudsburg Human Relations Commission shall consist of no fewer than five and no more
than seven members, who shall serve overlapping terms of three years each. At all times there
shall be an odd number of members. All members of the Commission shall be appointed by the
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 13/505
3.
4.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
A.
B.
C.
1.
(1)
A.
2.
Borough Council. The Commission may elect up to three nonvoting, ex officio members to
broaden the diversity that serves on the Commission. Members shall be residents of the Borough
or individuals who work full-time within Stroudsburg Borough. No voting member of the
Stroudsburg Human Relations Commission shall hold any office in any political party. Members of
the Stroudsburg Human Relations Commission shall serve without salary but may be paid
expenses incurred in the performance of their duties, as approved by the Borough Council. Paid
staff may be hired, as approved by the Borough Council, to assist in the performance of the duties
of the Commission.
One of the Commission's members shall be appointed as the Chairperson of the Commission by
the Borough Council. The Chairperson will be responsible for setting Commission meetings,
coordinating with Stroudsburg Borough regarding received complaints and answers, and generally
ensuring that the duties of the Commission are fulfilled. The Chairperson may delegate
responsibility for Commission duties to specific Commissioners or to paid staff, if applicable.
The Borough Council hereby grants to the Human Relations Commission all of the powers
necessary to the execution of its duties (as set forth below), provided that those powers shall not
exceed those exercised by the Pennsylvania Human Relations Commission under the
Pennsylvania Human Relations Act.
§ 1-387. Procedures; Expanded Procedures.
[Ord. 1027, 5/2/2017]
Filing a Complaint.
Any person(s) claiming to be aggrieved by an unlawful practice may make, sign and file a
verified complaint alleging violations of this Subpart, which shall include the following
information:
The name and address of the aggrieved person(s);
The name and address of the person(s) alleged to have committed the prohibited
practice;
A concise statement of the facts, including pertinent dates, constituting the alleged
discriminatory practice;
If applicable, the address and a description of the dwelling unit or property involved; and
Such other information as may be required by the Borough.
Complaints may be filed in person at the Borough office or by mailing such complaints to the
Borough office or to the Chairperson of the Human Relations Commission. All complaints
must be received by the Borough office or by the Human Relations Commission within 180
days of the alleged act of discrimination to be considered timely.
The Borough office shall convey all original complaints received to the Chairperson of the
Human Relations Commission within 10 days of the office's receipt of such complaints.
Notification and Answer.
Within 30 days of its receipt of a complaint, the Human Relations Commission shall:
Send a copy of the complaint to the person(s) charged with a discriminatory practice [the
"respondent(s)"]; and
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 14/505
(2)
B.
A.
B.
C.
3.
4.
5.
6.
Send a notice to the person(s) aggrieved, informing them that the complaint has been
received. If the complaint alleges discrimination on a basis prescribed under federal or
state law, the notice sent to the person(s) aggrieved shall also inform them of the right to
file with the State Human Relations Commission and/or with the Federal Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission.
The respondent(s) shall file a written, verified answer to the complaint within 60 days of
receipt of the complaint. An answer to a complaint may be filed in the same manner as an
original complaint. If the answer is filed with the Borough office, it shall be conveyed by the
Borough to the Chairperson of the Human Relations Commission within 10 days of the
Borough office's receipt thereof. The Commission shall promptly send a copy of the answer to
the person(s) aggrieved.
Fact-Finding Conference.
After the answer has been received, the Commission shall, within 60 days, invite the parties
to voluntarily participate in a fact-finding conference concerning the dispute. The parties shall
respond to the invitation to participate in a fact-finding conference within 30 days of being
invited to participate.
If the parties agree to participate in a fact-finding conference, the parties shall meet with a
Commission member at a location mutually agreeable to the parties within 30 days of the
agreement to participate. Each party will be invited at the fact-finding conference to present
evidence and documents relevant to the complaint. The fact-finding conference will not be a
public event, and no record of the conference will be created, excepting the findings of fact
detailed in Subsection 3C.
The parties shall notify the Commission of whether the fact-finding conference resulted in a
resolution of the complaint. In the event the complaint is resolved, the Commission shall notify
the parties that the complaint has been dismissed. In the event the complaint is not resolved
through the fact-finding conference, then the Commissioner, within 30 days, shall prepare
findings of fact and a conclusion as to whether the Commissioner finds probable cause that
an unlawful practice has occurred.
Disposition of the Complaint. Provided the Commission has not elected under Subsection 5 of this
section to use expanded procedures, and if the complaint is not resolved through the fact-finding
conference, the Commission shall, at the second Commission meeting following the fact-finding
conference, consider the findings prepared by the Commissioner who conducted the fact-finding
conference. The Commission shall accept or reject the findings by public vote. The Commission
shall provide the parties with the findings of fact and conclusion and shall notify the parties of the
outcome of the vote, and this notice shall also indicate that the person aggrieved has a right to
pursue the matter in court by filing a lawsuit.
Option of the Commission to Elect for Expanded Procedures. The Commission shall have the
authority to elect to adopt expanded procedures as set forth in Subsections 6 through 13 of this
section, subject to approval by the Borough Council and appropriation of funding for such
procedures. A majority of Commission members must vote in favor of adopting expanded
procedures in order for such procedures to be adopted. In the event that such procedures are
adopted, they must, while in effect, be applied to all complaints that are not resolved through a
fact-finding conference. If the Commission has adopted expanded procedures, it may also, by
majority vote and in its sole discretion, eliminate such procedures.
Expanded Procedures: Dismissal or Nondismissal of the Complaint. If the fact-finding conference
was successful in resolving the complaint, the Commission shall follow the procedures set forth in
Subsection 3C of this section for dismissing the complaint. If the fact-finding conference was not
successful in resolving the complaint, the Commission shall not dismiss the complaint but shall
instead undertake the procedures set out in Subsections 7 through 13 of this section.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 15/505
7.
8.
9.
A.
B.
C.
10.
11.
12.
13.
Expanded Procedures: Investigation. The Commission shall, in a timely fashion, investigate the
allegations of discrimination set forth in the complaint. The Commission may, in the conduct of
such investigation, issue subpoenas to any person charged with an unlawful practice to furnish
information, records or other documents, or to give sworn testimony, as necessary to assist in its
investigation.
Expanded Procedures: Finding of No Cause. If it shall be determined after the Commission's
investigation that there is no basis for the allegations of the complaint, the Commission shall
cause to be issued and served upon the parties written notice of such determination. This notice
shall inform the person aggrieved that he/she has the right to pursue the matter in court by filing a
lawsuit.
Expanded Procedures: Conciliation. If the Commission, after investigation, determines that
probable cause exists for the allegations of the complaint, the Commission shall immediately
endeavor to eliminate the unlawful practice complained of by persuasion, conference, and
conciliation.
Expanded Procedures: Public Hearing.
If the Commission, in its discretion, finds it is not possible to eliminate the unlawful practices
by persuasion, conference, or conciliation, the Commission shall cause to be issued and
served a written notice, together with a copy of the complaint, which informs the respondent
that the respondent must answer the charges of such complaint at a hearing before the
Commission at a time and place to be specified in such notice.
The Commission may designate one or more of its members to preside at such a hearing, or
it may, at its election, conduct such hearing en banc.
At the public hearing, the case in support of the complaint shall be presented to the
Commission by pro bono counsel, by Commission staff or by the Borough Solicitor. The case
in support of the complaint may instead be presented by the complainant's attorney, if the
complainant is represented. Both the complainant and the respondent may appear at the
hearing with or without counsel and provide testimony. In addition, both the complainant and
the respondent may introduce the testimony of additional witnesses and may submit
documentary evidence. The Commission and the parties shall not be bound by the strict rules
of evidence at the hearing.
Expanded Procedures: Findings. If, upon all the evidence at the hearing, the Commission shall
find that a respondent has engaged in or is engaging in any unlawful discriminatory practice as
defined in this Subpart, the Commission shall state its findings of fact and shall issue and cause to
be served on such respondent an order requiring such respondent to cease and desist from such
unlawful discriminatory practice and to take such additional action as the Commission deems
appropriate. The Commission shall have the authority to order any remedies available to the
Pennsylvania Human Relations Commission under the Pennsylvania Human Relations Act.
Expanded Procedures: Finding of No Discrimination. If, upon all the evidence, the Commission
shall find that a respondent has not engaged in any unlawful discriminatory practice, the
Commission shall state its findings of fact and shall issue and cause to be served on the parties
an order dismissing the complaint as to such respondent.
The determination as to whether a business does or does not provide a place of public
accommodation is made on a case-by-case basis by the Human Relations Commission in
reviewing a complaint.
§ 1-388. Private Right of Action and Nonlimitation of Remedies.
[Ord. 1027, 5/2/2017]
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 16/505
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
1.
2.
3.
[1]
A.
[2]
B.
[3]
C.
1.
Any person(s) aggrieved by a violation of this Subpart shall have a right of action in the Monroe
County Court of Common Pleas or any other court of competent jurisdiction and may recover for
each violation the following remedies:
Back pay, front pay and other actual damages, as those remedies are defined in the
Pennsylvania Human Relations Act and case law interpreting the same;
Emotional distress damages;
Exemplary damages;
Reasonable attorneys' fees and court costs; and
Such other relief, including injunctive relief, as the court may deem appropriate.
The right of action created by this Subpart may be brought upon receipt by the aggrieved
person(s) of notice that the Commission has dismissed the complaint or, if no such notice is
received, after one year from the date of the filing of the complaint. If the person aggrieved has
received notice that the Commission has dismissed the complaint, an action under this Subpart
must be brought by the aggrieved person within one year from the date of receipt of said notice or
it will be barred. Equitable principles such as waiver, estoppel and equitable tolling shall apply to
the time limitations for the filing of any complaint or other pleading under this Subpart.
Nothing in this Subpart limits the right of an aggrieved person to recover under any other
applicable law or legal theory.
Part 4. STROUD AREA REGIONAL POLICE
DEPARTMENT PENSION PLAN
A.. Uniformed Pension Plan.
§ 1-401. Establishment of Plan; DROP Provisions; Effect on
Existing Provisions; Intent; When Effective.
[Ord. 791, 12/20/2000; as amended by Ord. 809, 11/7/2001; and by Ord. 891, 8/6/2008]
The Borough Council of the Borough of Stroudsburg approves and adopts the following revised
Stroud Area Regional Police Department Police Pension Plan, including the DROP provisions
(including release), the QDRO provisions, and the Act 30 changes, as set forth herein:
The "whereas" provisions of this ordinance are incorporated with the Police Pension Plan as if
fully set forth.[1]
Editor's Note: The "whereas" provisions of the ordinance adopting this Part are on file in the
Borough offices.
The existing Stroud Area Regional Police Department Police Pension Plan is amended in its
entirety to read as set forth in Exhibit A.[2]
Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Borough offices.
The DROP Release attached as Exhibit B is hereby adopted and will thereafter be attached
as an Exhibit A to the SARPD Police Pension Plan.[3]
Editor's Note: Exhibit B is on file in the Borough offices.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 17/505
D.
E.
F.
[1]
1.
[2]
2.
All provisions of the existing SARPD Police Pension Plan which are inconsistent herewith are
hereby repealed.
The provisions of this Part are severable. If any sentence, clause, section or part of this Part
is for any reason found to be illegal, invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision, and
such decision or holding of the court shall not affect or impair the validity of the remaining
provisions, sentences, clauses, sections or parts of this Part. It is hereby declared as the
intent of Council that this Part would have been adopted had such illegal, invalid or
unconstitutional sentence, clause, section or part thereof not been included therein.
Furthermore, it is the intent of this Part not to be contrary to any established laws or
regulations of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania regarding municipal police pension plans.
This Part shall be effective in five days.
§ 1-402. Amendments.
[Ord. 917, 5/5/2010, §§ 1, 2]
The "whereas" provisions of this ordinance are incorporated with the Police Pension Plan as if fully
set forth.[1]
Editor's Note: The "whereas" provisions of the ordinance adopting this Part are on file in the
Borough offices.
The following pages of said Plan are revised, or added, as the case may be, to reflect the
amendment, or addition, of the following sections:
Page Section Change Effective Date
(a) 15 4.5(a) The following language was deleted in its
entirety: "However a Death Benefit under
this section shall not be paid if the police
officer's Beneficiaries are entitled to receive
a Killed in Service Death Benefit under
subsection (c)."
(b) 16 4.5(c) The language in 4.5(c) is deleted in its
entirety and replaced with the following
language: "Repealed; the Killed in Service
Death Benefit is deleted from this Police
Pension Plan in its entirety."
(c) 16 4.5(d) The term "Killed in Service Death Benefit" is
deleted from 4.5(d) in its entirety.
Said pages, as revised and amended, are attached hereto[2] and made a part thereof.
Editor's Note: Pages are on file in the Borough offices.
B.. Nonuniformed Employees of Stroud Area Regional
Police Department Nonuniformed Employees Pension Plan.
§ 1-411. Stroud Area Regional Police Department Nonuniformed
Employees Pension Plan.
[Ord. 976, 10/16/2013]
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 18/505
[1]
1.
[2]
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
1.
2.
3.
The "whereas" provisions of this ordinance, are incorporated herein as if fully set forth.[1]
Editor's Note: The "whereas" provisions of the ordinance adopting this Part are on file in the
Borough offices.
The Stroud Area Regional Police Department Nonuniformed Employees Money Purchase Pension
is hereby renamed the Nonuniformed Employees Pension Plan, and the Plan document for such
Nonuniformed Employees Pension Plan, as amended and restated and attached hereto as Exhibit
A,[2] is hereby approved and adopted. The provisions of the prior SARPD Nonuniformed
Employees Pension Plan are repealed to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent with the
amended and restated provisions as adopted herein.
Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Borough offices.
The actions of the SARPD Nonuniformed Employees Pension Board, or its designees, in the
negotiating, maintaining, and operating the Nonuniformed Employees Pension Fund pending
finalization of the amended and restated Nonuniformed Employees Pension Plan document are
hereby approved and ratified. Stroud Area Regional Police Commission in revising the Plan
document are hereby approved and ratified.
The actions of the Stroud Area Regional Police Commission (SARPC) in revising the amended
and restated Nonuniformed Employees Pension Plan document and negotiating with the Municipal
Retirement Trust of the Pennsylvania State Association of Boroughs (MRT-PSAB) to allow the
Nonuniformed Employees Pension Plan to participate in the MRT-PSAB is approved and ratified
and the Stroud Area Regional Police Commission shall continue as agent of the participating
municipalities to implement and administer the Pension Plan as amended and restated.
The MRT-PSAB, having complied with the provisions of Act 44, is appointed to be Investment
Manager and Custodian of the SARPD Nonuniformed Employees Pension Plan. The MRT-PSAB
shall serve at the pleasure of the SARPC and the position of Investment Manager and Custodian
may be changed by resolution of the SARPC enacted in accordance with applicable law.
This Part is adopted conditioned upon the Borough of East Stroudsburg and the Township of
Stroud taking the same action, and shall become effective on the latest effective date that either of
the governing bodies of the above municipalities takes action to adopt this same amended and
restated Pension Plan document by ordinance.
The effective date of the amended and restated SARPD Nonuniformed Employees Pension Plan
for actuarial and tax purposes is established as January 1, 2013.
Part 5. NONUNIFORMED BOROUGH EMPLOYEE
PENSION PLAN
§ 1-501. Administration.
[Ord. 817, 6/5/2002, § 1]
Borough Council shall administer the plan by such regulations as shall, from time to time, be
necessary for the effective maintenance of the plan; provided that no regulations shall be contrary
to the statutes of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and/or applicable federal regulations.
The Council may appoint a Committee which shall act as an advisory body to the Council in the
administration of the plan according to the regulations established pursuant to this section.
The Committee shall consist of seven members, which number shall include the Council
President, a Council member, the Borough Secretary/Treasurer and four plan participants. All
persons so designated shall serve at the pleasure of the Council. Any member may resign upon
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 19/505
4.
5.
6.
7.
A.
B.
1.
1.
written notice to the Council and the Committee. Any vacancies in the Committee arising from
resignation, death or removal shall be filled by the Council by the procedure set out herein for the
member of the Committee whose resignation, death or removal has created the vacancy. The
Committee shall meet no less than annually and shall serve without compensation for their
services.
The Committee shall act by such procedure as the Committee shall establish, provided that all
decisions shall be by majority vote. The Committee may authorize one of its members to execute
any document or documents on behalf of the Committee, may adopt bylaws and regulations as it
deems necessary for the conduct of its affairs, and may appoint such accountants, counsel
specialists or such other personnel as it may deem desirable for the proper administration of the
plan; provided that all such executions of documents, adoptions of bylaws and regulations, and
appointments shall be approved by Council.
The Committee shall keep a record of all its proceedings and acts which shall relate to the plan,
and shall keep all such books of accounts, records and other data as shall be necessary for the
proper administration of the plan. All actions of the Committee shall be communicated to the
Council.
All such reasonable expenses incurred in the administration of the plan including, but not limited
to, fees for the services of specialists including actuaries, accountants, consultants and legal
counsel shall be approved by the Council and all may be paid from the plan, provided that no such
payment shall be contrary to the statutes of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
No member of the Council or the Committee established pursuant to this section shall incur any
liability for any action or failure to act, excepting only liability for its own gross negligence or willful
misconduct. The employer shall indemnify each member of Council and the Committee against
any and all claims, loss, damages, expenses and liability arising from any action or failure to act,
except for such that is the result of gross negligence or willful misconduct of such member.
§ 1-502. Coverage.
[Ord. 817, 6/5/2002, § 2]
This plan shall cover all full-time nonuniformed Borough employees, hereinafter referred to as
"member," of the Borough. Membership for elected officials and new employees hired on a
temporary, part-time or seasonal basis is prohibited as is membership for individuals paid only on
a fee basis. Individual membership shall be effective as of the date of this Part or upon the date of
hire of the individual, whichever is more recent.
Credited service shall accrue from the original member's date of hire as long as there is
continuous uninterrupted employment to the Borough.
No credited service time shall be granted for time employed in a status other than active
employee of the Borough excluding credit for purchased military service or reinstatement of
previous service.
§ 1-503. Superannuation Retirement.
[Ord. 817, 6/5/2002, § 3; as amended by Ord. 855, 11/16/2005; by Ord. 961, 12/19/2012; and by Ord.
No. 1079, 6/18/2019]
Any member hired prior to January 1, 2018: Eligibility for superannuation retirement shall occur
upon the member's attainment of 60 years of age or older and the completion of at least 10 years
of credited service.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 20/505
2.
1.
2.
1.
2.
A.
B.
C.
1.
Any member hired after December 31, 2017: Eligibility for superannuation retirement shall occur
upon the member's attainment of 65 years of age or older and the completion of at least 10 years
of credited service.
§ 1-504. Basic Benefit.
[Ord. 817, 6/5/2002, § 4; as amended by Ord. 961, 12/19/2012; and by Ord. No. 1079, 6/18/2019]
Any member hired prior to January 1, 2018: The basic annual benefit shall be equal to 5% of the
member's final salary multiplied by all years of credited service; provided, however, in no event
shall the basic benefit exceed 50% of the member's final salary.
Any member hired after December 31, 2017: The basic annual benefit shall be equal to 2% of the
member's final salary multiplied by all years of credited service; provided, however, in no event
shall the basic benefit exceed 50% of the member's final salary.
§ 1-505. Final Salary.
[Ord. 817, 6/5/2002, § 5]
The final salary shall be the average annual compensation earned and paid during the member's
highest five consecutive years of employment, or if not so long employed, then the average annual
compensation earned and paid during the whole period of such employment. Final salary shall not
include lump-sum payments for unused sick, vacation, personal or other leave.
§ 1-506. Early Retirement.
[Ord. 817, 6/5/2002, § 6; as amended by Ord. 855, 11/16/2005; by Ord. 961, 12/19/2012; and by Ord.
No. 1079, 6/18/2019]
Any member hired prior to January 1, 2018, who has separated from employment after 20 years of
credited service may retire early. Benefits will be actuarially reduced for each year or partial year
thereof that early retirement takes place prior to age 60.
Any member hired after December 31, 2017, who has separated from employment after 20 years
of credited service may retire early. Benefits will be actuarially reduced for each year or partial
year thereof that early retirement takes place prior to age 65.
§ 1-507. Death Benefit.
[Ord. 817, 6/5/2002, § 7]
Should a member die who has either:
Met the requirements for a superannuation retirement found in § 1-503 of this Part but has not
yet retired; or
Met the requirement for vesting found in § 1-510 of this Part but has not yet vested; or
Actually elected to vest a benefit but has failed to attain superannuation retirement age, then
the death benefit shall be paid to the member's named beneficiary. The death benefit shall be
a payment equal to the present value of the accrued benefit as of the date of the member's
death.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 21/505
2.
3.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
1.
A member who is entitled to a superannuation retirement allowance because of meeting the
requirements found in § 1-503, or a member who is eligible to vest or who has vested in
accordance with § 1-510 of this Part may file a written application for a retirement benefit,
selecting a retirement option and requesting that such election become effective upon the death of
the member. The application must be filed with the Borough.
If no application for retirement was prefiled by a member who dies and who was eligible for the
death benefit found in this section, it shall be considered that the member elected Option 1 as
provided in § 1-511 of this Part. In such event the payment under Option 1 shall be made to the
beneficiary designated in the nomination of beneficiary form on file with the Borough or in the
absence of such a form, the estate of the member.
§ 1-508. Military Service.
[Ord. 817, 6/5/2002, § 8]
Any member employed by the Borough who enters the uniformed services as defined by the 1994
Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act (P.L. 103-353) and returns to the
Borough to again be a member of the plan within the authorized time period of the law, shall have
the authorized time spent in such service credited to the member's employment record for pension
or retirement benefits if the individual makes the required employee contributions.
An active member may also purchase credit for other than intervening military service performed
for the United States in times of war, armed conflict or national emergency, so proclaimed by the
President of the United States, for a period not to exceed five years, provided the member has
completed five years of service to the Borough subsequent to such military service. An active
member may file an application with the Borough for permission to purchase credit for
nonintervening military service upon completion of five years of subsequent service to the
Borough.
The amount due from the member shall be certified by the Borough in accordance with methods
approved by the actuary. It shall be paid in a lump sum within 30 days of the date the amount is
determined.
The rate of interest to be charged to a member on purchase of credit for nonintervening military
service shall be the rate being credited by the plan to members' accounts in effect on the date of
the member's application, compounded annually, which as of the date of this Part is 6.5%. This
rate may be amended in the future by resolution.
A member may purchase credit for intervening or nonintervening military service only if discharge
or separation from the service was granted under other than dishonorable conditions. A member
may not purchase military credit for any service that is covered by another retirement system
administered and wholly or partially paid for by any other government agency or private employer.
§ 1-509. Contributions by Members.
[Ord. 817, 6/5/2002, § 9; as amended by Ord. 938, 1/3/2011]
Members shall contribute 5% of their total compensation. If sufficient funds exist, the Borough may
annually elect to waive or lower the required member contribution rate by adopting a resolution.
Payment shall be made by payroll deductions and transmitted to the fund in accordance with
established fund procedures. Member contributions will be treated as taxed at the time they are
made to the fund, will be tracked separately, and will not be treated as taxable when paid out to
the member.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 22/505
2.
A.
B.
C.
D.
1.
2.
If a member terminates prior to becoming eligible for any benefit or the member elects not to
receive a benefit, that individual shall be entitled to all accumulated contributions and interest
allocated to the member's account.
§ 1-510. Vesting.
[Ord. 817, 6/5/2002, § 10]
After five years of credited service, a member shall be 50% vested. For each complete year of service
thereafter, the member's vested benefit shall increase by 10% until, after 10 years of credited service,
the member shall be 100% vested in the benefit. A member shall file an application with the Borough
within 90 days of separation from employment. Upon attainment of the superannuation age
requirement found in § 1-503 of this Part, a basic benefit will be calculated in accordance with § 1-504
of this Part.
§ 1-511. Options on Superannuation, Early Retirement or
Vesting.
[Ord. 817, 6/5/2002, § 11]
At the time a member elects to receive a retirement benefit allowance, the benefit may be payable
throughout the member's life, in which case, the benefit is known as a single life annuity. The
member may alternatively elect at the time of retirement to receive the equivalent actuarial value
in a lesser allowance, payable throughout life with provisions that:
Option 1. If the member dies before receiving in payments the present value of the retirement
allowance as it was at the time of retirement, the balance, if less than $5,000, shall be paid in
a lump sum to the designated beneficiary if living, or if the named beneficiary predeceased
the member or if no beneficiary was named, then to the member's estate. If the balance is
$5,000 or more, the beneficiary shall be paid an annuity having a present value equal to the
balance payable to the member.
Option 2. Upon the annuitant's death, the retirement allowance shall be continued throughout
the life of and paid to the survivor annuitant, if then living.
Option 3. Upon the annuitant's death, 1/2 of the retirement allowance shall be continued
throughout the life of and paid to the survivor annuitant, if then living.
Option 4. A member may elect to receive, in one payment at the time of retirement, the full
amount of the member's accumulated deductions standing to the member's credit in the
member's account. In so electing this option, the member forfeits the portion of the annuity
paid for from the accumulated contributions, but shall continue to be entitled to an annuity
comprised of the Borough contribution and any investment monies so credited to the account.
Any member electing this option shall be entitled to receive his remaining annuity calculated
in accordance with any of the other options provided for in this section.
Should a member who has elected a single life annuity die before receiving in annuity payments
the full amount of the total accumulated deductions standing to their credit in the member account
on the effective date of retirement, the balance shall be paid to the designated beneficiary.
§ 1-512. Social Security Offset.
[Ord. 817, 6/5/2002, § 12]
There shall be no offset for social security retirement benefits received by a member.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 23/505
1.
2.
1.
2.
§ 1-513. Cost of Living Increases.
[Ord. 855, 11/16/2005]
Cost-of-living increases may be provided for members of the plan receiving retirement benefits as
authorized by the Borough Council of the Borough of Stroudsburg at a duly called public meeting. Any
such cost of living increase shall not exceed the percentage increase in the Consumer Price Index
(U.S. City Average for All Urban Consumers). In no case shall the total municipal employee pension
benefits exceed 75% of the salary for computing retirement benefits. The total cost of living increase
shall not exceed 30%. No cost of living increase shall be granted which would impair the actuarial
soundness of the Pension Fund.
§ 1-514. Determination of Borough Liability.
[Ord. 817, 6/5/2002, § 13; as amended by Ord. 855, 11/16/2005]
The Borough will actuarially determine the normal cost of the plan and any liability associated with
the plan's actuarial experience which shall be contributed annually by the Borough for the service
credits of the members.
The amounts so determined shall be computed in accordance with the requirements of Act 205 of
1984, the Municipal Pension Plan Fund Standard and Recovery Act, the Borough Code and
subsequent amendments to either Act.
§ 1-515. Procedure.
[Ord. 817, 6/5/2002, § 14; as amended by Ord. 855, 11/16/2005]
Matters or procedure not covered in this Part shall be as set forth in the Borough Code and as
found in Act 205 of 1984, as they shall, from time to time, be amended.
Should any change or mistake in records result in any member, beneficiary or survivor annuitant
receiving from the plan more or less than the individual would have been entitled to receive had
the records been correct, then regardless of the intentional or unintentional nature of the error and
upon the discovery of such error, the Borough will correct the error and so far as practicable adjust
the payments which may be made for and to such person in such a manner that the actuarial
equivalent of the benefit to which the individual was correctly entitled shall be paid.
§ 1-516. (Reserved)
[Added by Ord. 894, 11/20/2008; as amended by Ord. 961, 12/19/2012]
Part 6. FIRE INSURANCE PROCEEDS
§ 1-601. Designated Officer.
[Ord. 741, 1/6/1993, § 1]
The Borough Manager or their designee is hereby appointed as the designated officer who is
authorized to carry out all responsibilities and duties stated herein.
§ 1-602. Procedures.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 24/505
A.
B.
C.
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
E.
1.
[Ord. 741, 1/6/1993, § 2]
No insurance company, association or exchange (hereinafter the "insuring agent") doing business
in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall pay a claim of a named insured for fire damage to a
structure located within the Borough of Stroudsburg where the amount recoverable for the fire loss
to the structure under all policies exceeds $5,000, unless the named insured or insuring agent is
furnished by the Borough Treasurer with a municipal certificate pursuant to § 508(B) of Act 98 of
1992 and unless there is compliance with § 508(C) and (D) of Act 98 of 1992 and the provisions of
this Part. Where pursuant to § 508(B)(1)(I) of Act 98 of 1992, the Borough Treasurer issues a
certificate indicating that there are no delinquent taxes, assessments, penalties or use charges
against real property, the insuring agent shall pay the claim of the named insured; provided,
however, that if the loss is agreed upon by the named insured and the insuring agent equals or
exceeds 60% of the aggregate limits of liability on all fire policies covering the building restructure,
the following procedures must be followed:
The insuring agent shall transfer from the insurance proceeds to the designated officer of the
Borough of Stroudsburg in the aggregate of $1,000 for each $20,000 of a claim and for each
fraction of the amount of a claim, this section to be applied such that if the claim is $20,000 of
less, the amount transferred to the Borough of Stroudsburg shall be $1,000; or,
If at the time of a proof of loss agreed to between the named insured and the insuring agent,
the named insured has submitted a contractor's signed estimate of the costs of removing,
repairing or securing the building or other structure, the insuring agent shall transfer to the
Borough of Stroudsburg from the insurance proceeds the amount specified in the estimate.
The transfer of proceeds shall be on pro rate basis by all companies, associations or
exchanges insuring the building or other structure.
After the transfer the named insured may submit a contractor's signed estimate of the costs of
removing, repairing or securing the building or other structure, and the designated officer shall
return the amount of the funds transferred to the Borough of Stroudsburg in excess of the
estimate to the named insured, if the Borough has not commenced to remove, repair or
secure the building or other structure.
Upon receipt of proceeds under this section, the Borough of Stroudsburg shall do the
following:
The designated officer shall place the proceeds in the separate fund to be used solely as
security against the total costs of removing, repairing or securing the building or structure
which are incurred by the Borough of Stroudsburg. Such costs shall include, without
limitation, any engineering, legal or administrative costs incurred by the Borough of
Stroudsburg in connection with such removal, repair or securing of the building or any
proceedings related thereto.
It is the obligation of the insuring agent when transferring the proceeds to provide the
Borough of Stroudsburg with the name and address of the named insured. Upon receipt
of the transferred funds and the name and address of the named insured, the designated
officer shall contact the named insured, certify that the proceeds have been received by
the Borough of Stroudsburg and notify the named insured that the proceeds under this
subsection shall be followed.
When repairs, removal or securing of the building or other structure have been completed
in accordance with all applicable regulations and orders of the Borough of Stroudsburg
and the required proof of such completion received by the designated officer, and if the
Borough of Stroudsburg has not incurred any costs for repairs, removal or securing of the
building or other structure, the Borough of Stroudsburg shall transfer the remaining funds
to the named insured.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 25/505
(4)
1.
2.
3.
To the extent that interest is earned on proceeds held by the Borough of Stroudsburg
pursuant to this section, and not returned to the named insured, such interest shall
belong to the Borough of Stroudsburg. To the extent that proceeds are returned to the
named insured, interest earned on such proceeds shall be distributed to the named
insured at the time that the proceeds are returned. Nothing in this section shall be
construed to limit the ability of the Borough of Stroudsburg to recover any deficiency.
Furthermore, nothing in this Subsection shall be construed to prohibit the Borough of
Stroudsburg and the named insured from entering into an agreement that permits the
transfer of funds to the named insured as if some other reasonable disposition of the
damaged property has been negotiated.
§ 1-603. Power of Borough Council.
[Ord. 741, 1/3/1993, § 4]
Borough Council may by resolution adopt procedures and regulations to implement Act 98 of 1992 and
this Part and may be resolution fix reasonable fees to be charged for municipal activities or certificates
and bills, performance of inspections and opening separate fund accounts.
§ 1-604. Penalties.
[Ord. 741, 1/3/1993, § 5]
An owner of property, any named insured or any insuring agent who violates this Part shall be subject
to a penalty of up to $1,000 per violation.
Part 7. COMMUNITY BILL OF RIGHTS
§ 1-701. Findings and Intent.
[Ord. 982, 12/18/2013, § 1]
The Borough Council finds that the commercial extraction of and exploration for natural gas in
Stroudsburg Borough violates the rights of residents, neighborhoods, and natural communities,
and poses a significant threat to their health, safety, and welfare. Moreover, widespread
environmental and human health impacts have resulted from commercial gas extraction and
exploration in other areas. The regulation of commercial gas development de facto allows
commercial gas development to occur; the impacts of development endanger the health and
violate the rights of residents, neighborhoods, and natural communities through deposition of
toxins into the air, soil, water, environment and bodies of residents of the Borough.
The Borough Council recognizes that environmental and economic sustainability cannot be
achieved if the rights of municipal majorities are routinely overridden by corporate minorities
claiming certain legal powers. The Borough Council also recognizes that sustainability cannot be
achieved within a system of preemption which enables those corporations to use state
governments to override local self-government, and which restricts municipalities to only that
lawmaking specifically authorized by state government.
The Borough Council believes that the protection of residents, neighborhoods, and the natural
environment constitutes the highest and best use of the police powers that this municipality
possesses. The Borough Council also believes that local legislation that embodies the interests of
the community is mandated by the doctrine of the consent of the governed, and the right to local,
community self-government. Thus, the Borough Council hereby adopts this Part, establishing a Bill
of Rights for the human and natural communities of the Borough, banning commercial extraction
of and exploration for natural gas within Stroudsburg Borough.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 26/505
1.
2.
3.
4.
§ 1-702. Definitions.
[Ord. 982, 12/18/2013, § 2]
CORPORATIONS
For purposes of this Part, shall include any corporation, limited partnership, limited liability
partnership, business trust, or limited liability company organized under the laws of any state of
the United States or under the laws of any country, and any other business entity that possesses
state-conferred limited liability attributes for its owners, directors, officers, and/or managers.
EXTRACTION
The digging, drilling or operation of a well for the purpose of exploring for, developing, removing or
producing natural gas or other hydrocarbons, as well as the construction or siting of compressor
stations, new pipelines, waste water pits or confinement pits, condensation tanks or any structure,
process, or ancillary facility, dwelling or vehicle employed in the extraction of or exploration for
natural gas. The term shall also include the treatment, confinement or transportation of "produced
water."
NATURAL GAS
Any gaseous substance, either combustible or noncombustible, which is produced in a natural
state from the earth and which maintains a gaseous or rarefied state at standard temperature or
pressure conditions, and/or gaseous components or vapors occurring in or derived from petroleum
or natural gas.
§ 1-703. Statements of Law; Rights of Stroudsburg Residents
and the Natural Environment.
[Ord. 982, 12/18/2013, § 3]
Right to Water. All residents, natural communities and ecosystems in Stroudsburg Borough
possess a fundamental and inalienable right to sustainably access, use, consume, and preserve
water drawn from natural water cycles that provide water necessary to sustain life within the
Borough.
Rights of Natural Communities. Natural communities and ecosystems, including, but not limited to,
wetlands, streams, rivers, aquifers, and other water systems, possess inalienable and
fundamental rights to exist and flourish within Stroudsburg Borough. Residents of the Borough,
along with the municipality, shall possess legal standing to enforce those rights on behalf of those
natural communities and ecosystems.
Right to a Sustainable Energy Future. All residents, natural communities, and ecosystems in
Stroudsburg Borough possess a right to a sustainable energy future, which includes, but is not
limited to, the development, production, and use of energy from renewable fuel sources.
Right to Self-Government. All residents of Stroudsburg Borough possess the fundamental and
inalienable right to a form of governance where they live which recognizes that all power is
inherent in the people, that all free governments are founded on the people's authority and
consent, and that corporate entities and their directors and managers shall not enjoy special
privileges or powers under the law which make community majorities subordinate to them.
§ 1-704. Statements of Law; Prohibitions Necessary to Secure
Bill of Rights' Protections.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 27/505
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
1.
2.
[Ord. 982, 12/18/2013, § 4]
It shall be unlawful for any corporation to engage in the extraction of natural gas within
Stroudsburg Borough, with the exception of pipelines already installed and operating at the time of
enactment of this Part.
It shall be unlawful for any corporation to extract water from any source, whether surface or
subsurface, within Stroudsburg Borough, for use in the extraction of subsurface natural gas. It
shall be unlawful for a corporation to import water into Stroudsburg Borough for use in the
extraction of subsurface natural gas. It shall be unlawful for any corporation to deposit waste
water, "produced" water, water resulting from hydraulic fracturing operations ("frack" water), brine
or other materials or by-products of natural gas extraction activities, into the land, air or waters
within Stroudsburg Borough.
Corporations and persons using corporations to engage in natural gas extraction in a neighboring
municipality, county or state shall be strictly liable for all harms caused to natural water sources,
ecosystems human and natural communities within Stroudsburg Borough and its jurisdiction.
Corporations in violation of the prohibition against natural gas extraction, or seeking to engage in
natural gas extraction, shall not have the rights of "persons" afforded by the United States and
Pennsylvania Constitutions, nor shall those corporations be afforded rights under the First or Fifth
Amendments to the United States Constitution or corresponding sections of the Pennsylvania
Constitution, nor shall those corporations be afforded the protections of the commerce or contracts
clauses within the United States Constitution or corresponding sections of the Pennsylvania
Constitution. "Corporations," for purposes of this Part, shall include any corporation, limited
partnership, limited liability partnership, business trust, or limited liability company organized under
the laws of any state of the United States or under the laws of any country, and any other business
entity that possesses state-conferred limited liability attributes for its owners, directors, officers,
and/or managers.
Corporations engaged in the extraction of natural gas shall not possess the authority or power to
enforce state or federal preemptive law against the people of Stroudsburg Borough, or to
challenge or overturn municipal ordinances adopted by the Borough Council of Stroudsburg, when
that enforcement or challenge interferes with the rights asserted by this Part or interferes with the
authority of the municipality to protect the health, safety, and welfare of its residents.
No permit, license, privilege or charter issued by any state or federal agency, Commission or
Council to any person or any corporation operating under a state charter, or any director, officer,
owner, or manager of a corporation operating under a state charter, which would violate the
prohibitions of this Part or deprive any Borough resident(s), natural community, or ecosystem of
any rights, privileges, or immunities secured by this Part, the Pennsylvania Constitution, the
United States Constitution, or other laws, shall be deemed valid within Stroudsburg Borough.
§ 1-705. Enforcement.
[Ord. 982, 12/18/2013, § 5]
Any person, corporation, or other entity that violates any prohibition of this Part shall be guilty of a
summary offense and, upon conviction thereof by a district justice, shall be sentenced to pay the
maximum fine allowable under state law for that violation, and shall be imprisoned to the extent
allowed by law. A separate offense shall arise for each day or portion thereof in which a violation
occurs and for each section of this Part found to be violated.
Stroudsburg Borough may also enforce this Part through an action in equity brought in the Court
of Common Pleas of Monroe County. In such an action, Stroudsburg Borough shall be entitled to
recover, without limitation, all costs of litigation, including, but not limited to, expert and attorney's
fees.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 28/505
3. Any Borough resident shall have the authority to enforce this Part through an action in equity
brought in the Court of Common Pleas of Monroe County. In such an action, the resident shall be
entitled to recover all costs of litigation, including, without limitation, expert and attorney's fees.
§ 1-706. Effective Date and Existing DEP Permit Holders.
[Ord. 982, 12/18/2013, § 6]
This Part shall be effective five days after the date of its enactment, at which point this Part shall apply
to any and all extractions of natural gas regardless of the date of any applicable DEP permits.
§ 1-707. People's Right to Self-Government.
[Ord. 982, 12/18/2013, § 7]
The foundation for the making and adoption of this law is the people's fundamental and inalienable
right to govern themselves, and thereby secure their rights to life, liberty, and pursuit of happiness. Any
attempts to use other units and levels of government to preempt, amend, alter, or overturn this Part, or
parts of this shall require the Borough Council to hold public meetings that explore the adoption of
other measures that expand local control and the ability of residents to protect their fundamental and
inalienable right to self-government.
Chapter 2. Animals
Part 1. DOGS RUNNING AT LARGE
§ 2-101. Unlawful for Owners to Allow Dogs to Run at Large.
[Ord. 387, 6/1/1955, § 1; amended by Ord. 753, 6/4/1997]
It shall be unlawful for the owner, custodian or keeper of any dog, bearing the current license tag, to
allow such dog to run at large at any time, either upon any of the streets, alleys or public grounds in the
Borough of Stroudsburg or upon the property of someone other than the owner, custodian or keeper of
such dog, unless accompanied by and under the immediate physical control of such owner, custodian
or keeper.
§ 2-102. Duties of Police Officers.
[Ord. 387, 6/1/1955, § 2; amended by Ord. 784, 4/5/2000, § 2]
It shall be the duty of any police officer of the Stroud Area Regional Police Department who witnesses
any dog running at large in conflict with the provisions of § 2-101 of this Part, or who receives
information of any dog so running at large, to seize such dog and to convey it to the place designated
by the Borough Council as a pound. Notice of such seizure shall be sent to the owner of such dog in
the manner prescribed by law, and such dog may be redeemed by the owner thereof within the time
specified by law, upon payment of the charges incurred by reason of such detention. Rates for such
charges shall be determined from time to time by the Borough Council.
§ 2-103. Penalties.
[Ord. 387, 6/1/1955, § 3; amended by Ord. 599, 12/19/1983]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part 1 shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $300, together with costs of prosecution, or to
imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 29/505
1.
2.
1.
Part 2. KEEPING OF ANIMALS
§ 2-201. Definitions.
[Ord. 599, 12/19/1983]
As used in this Part 2, the following terms, shall have the meanings indicated, unless a different
meaning clearly appears from the context:
ANIMAL
Any domestic animal or fowl, any wild animal or any household pet.
DOMESTIC ANIMAL
Any animal as hereinafter defined as a household pet, a large animal, or a small animal.
HOUSEHOLD PET
Any dog, cat, or other domestic animal normally and ordinarily kept in or permitted to be at
large in the dwelling of its owner.
LARGE ANIMAL
Any domestic animal of the bovine, equine, or sheep family.
PERSON
Any person, firm, partnership, association, or corporation.
SMALL ANIMAL
Any domestic animal such as a rabbit, hare, guinea pig, rat, mouse, or chinchilla; and any
domestic fowl such as a chicken, turkey, goose, duck, or pigeon (excepting homing pigeons).
WILD ANIMAL
Any animal, bird, fowl, or reptile not normally or ordinarily domesticated; not normally or
ordinarily raised in this area and climate as livestock or for work or breeding purposes; or not
normally or ordinarily kept as a household pet.
In this Part 2, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall include the singular, and the
masculine shall include the feminine.
§ 2-202. Certain Animals Prohibited.
[Ord. 599, 12/19/1983]
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any pig or hog, or wild animal at any place within the
Borough of Stroudsburg except where the same shall be permitted under the Zoning Ordinance, in a
park, zoological garden, or similar establishment for public exhibition.
§ 2-203. Violations.
[Ord. 599, 12/19/1983]
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any domestic animals, except household pets, except as
provided in this section:
Large animals shall be confined in quarters no part of which shall be closer than 100 feet from the
exterior limits of any dwelling or of any property line.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 30/505
2.
3.
4.
5.
1.
2.
Small animals shall be kept confined in quarters no part of which shall be closer than 25 feet from
the exterior limits of any dwelling or of any property line.
The keeper of every such domestic animal shall confine the same in an enclosure sufficient to
prevent such animal from running at large, and such enclosure shall be of a size conducive to
good sanitary practices and adequate and sanitary drainage facilities shall be provided.
Every keeper of a domestic animal shall cause the litter and droppings therefrom to be collected
daily in a container or receptacle that when closed shall be rat-proof and fly-tight, and after every
such collection shall cause such container or receptacle to be kept closed. At least twice a week,
every such keeper shall cause all litter and droppings so collected to be disposed of in such
manner as not to permit the presence of fly larvae.
Every keeper of a domestic animal shall cause all feed provided therefor to be stored and kept in a
rat-proof and fly-tight building, box, container, or receptacle.
§ 2-204. Household Pets.
[Ord. 599, 12/19/1983]
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any household pet, except as provided in this section:
If any such pet shall be kept in a dwelling owned or occupied by its owner, such owner shall be
required to follow such procedures and practices, as to the number of such pets to be kept there,
and as to sanitation, to insure that no public nuisance shall be created or maintained and no threat
to the health of persons living elsewhere than in such dwelling shall be created.
If any such pet shall be kept in an enclosure outside such dwelling, the provisions of § 2-203 of
this Part 2, insofar as the same applies to small animals, shall be applicable to the keeping of such
household pet.
§ 2-205. Violation of State Law.
[Ord. 599, 12/19/1983]
Any violation of this Part 2 that would also violate any state law shall be prosecuted under that state
law and not under this ordinance.
§ 2-206. Penalties.
[Ord. 599, 12/19/1983]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this Part 2 shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced
to pay a fine not exceeding $300 together with costs of prosecution, or to undergo imprisonment for a
term not to exceed 30 days, Each day that a violation of this ordinance continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
Part 3. ANIMAL DEFECATION
§ 2-301. Animal Defecation on Public and Private Property
Restricted.
[Ord. 754, 5/21/1997, § 1]
No person having possession, custody or control of any animal shall knowingly or negligently permit
any dog or other animal to commit any nuisance, i.e., defecation, upon any gutter, street, driveway,
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 31/505
A.
B.
1.
alley, curb or sidewalk in the Borough of Stroudsburg, or upon the floors or stairways of any building or
place frequented by the public or used in common by the tenants or upon the outside walls, walkways,
driveways, alleys, curbs or stairways of any building abutting on a public street or park, or upon the
grounds of any public park or public area or upon any private property other than the property of the
owner of such animal.
§ 2-302. Disposal of Animal Feces.
[Ord. 754, 5/21/1997, § 2]
Any person having possession, custody or control of any dog or other animal that commits a
nuisance, i.e., defecation, in any area other than private property of the owner of such dog or other
animal, as prohibited in § 2-301, shall be required to immediately remove any feces from such
surface and either:
Carry same away for disposal in a toilet.
Place same in a nonleaking container for deposit in a trash or litter receptacle.
§ 2-303. Dogs Accompanying Blind or Handicapped Persons
Exempted.
[Ord. 754, 5/21/1997, § 3]
The provisions of §§ 2-301 and 2-302 hereof shall not apply to a guide dog accompanying any blind
person or to a dog used to assist any other physically handicapped person.
§ 2-304. Penalties.
[Ord. 754, 5/21/1997, § 4]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600.
Chapter 3. Bicycles
Part 1. BICYCLE LICENSES
§ 3-101. Definitions.
[Ord. 449, 9/5/1962, § 1]
BICYCLE
Includes every device propelled by human power upon which any person might ride, having two
tandem wheels, either one or both of which is of a diameter of 20 inches or more.
LICENSE
Shall be a metallic plate having numbers stamped thereon in numerical order and indicating the
period for which the same is issued.
PERSON
Includes any individual person, firm, association or corporation.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 32/505
§ 3-102. Bicycle License Required.
[Ord. 449, 9/5/1962, § 2; as amended by Ord. 784, 4/5/2000, § 2]
It shall be unlawful for any person who is a resident of the Borough of Stroudsburg to operate a bicycle
upon any of the public streets, alleys or highways within the Borough of Stroudsburg without obtaining
a license as herein provided through the Stroud Area Regional Police Department.
§ 3-103. Application for License; Fee.
[Ord. 449, 9/5/1962, § 3; as amended by Ord. 784, 4/5/2000, § 2]
All persons who are residents of the Borough of Stroudsburg owning or operating bicycles within the
said Borough shall make an application for a bicycle license plate upon the form provided by the
Borough of Stroudsburg and issued through the Stroud Area Regional Police Department under the
supervision of the Mayor of the Borough of Stroudsburg, and shall pay therefor a biennial license fee of
$0.50 for each biennial period or part thereof for which the license plate or renewal is issued.
§ 3-104. License Plates; Expiration Date.
[Ord. 449, 9/5/1962, § 4]
The Borough shall provide metallic license plates, together with ownership certificates, both of which
shall be numbered or have numbers stamped thereon in numerical order, and shall indicate the period
for which the same are issued. The Chief of Police, under the supervision of the Mayor of the Borough
of Stroudsburg, upon receiving proper executed application, is authorized to issue a license plate and
certificate, which shall be effective during the remainder of the period in which the same is issued and
shall expire on May 31 of each odd-numbered year.
§ 3-105. Records of Licenses.
[Ord. 449, 9/5/1962, § 5; as amended by Ord. 784, 4/5/2000, § 2]
The Stroud Area Regional Police Department, under the supervision of the Mayor, shall keep a record
of each license issued, showing thereon the date of issuance, the name of the person to whom issued,
and the identification number of the bicycle for which issued, together with a record of the fees
collected for such licenses.
§ 3-106. Attachment of License Plate to Bicycle.
[Ord. 449, 9/5/1962, § 6]
The license plate issued shall be attached to the frame of the bicycle for which it is issued so that the
same is visible at all times and shall remain so attached during the term for which the license is issued.
§ 3-107. Renewal or Replacement of License.
[Ord. 449, 9/5/1962, § 7]
Upon the expiration of the bicycle license or upon the loss of any bicycle license, the same may be
renewed or replaced upon a proper application and payment of the fees set forth hereinabove, through
the Police Department under the supervision of the Mayor of the Borough of Stroudsburg.
§ 3-108. Inspection of Bicycles.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 33/505
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
[Ord. 449, 9/5/1962, § 8; as amended by Ord. 784, 4/5/2000, § 2]
All persons, residents of the Borough of Stroudsburg, making application for a license for a bicycle
shall have the bicycle inspected by the Stroud Area Regional Police Department, and a license shall
be refused to any person making an application therefor for a bicycle which the Police Department
deems to be in an unsafe mechanical condition and not equipped with a proper braking device.
§ 3-109. Removal of License Plate After Sale or Transfer of
Bicycle; Transfer of License.
[Ord. 449, 9/5/1962, § 9; as amended by Ord. 784, 4/5/2000, § 2]
If any person to whom a license has been issued for a bicycle sells or transfers said bicycle, the
license plate shall be removed and surrendered to the Stroud Area Regional Police Department or
may, upon proper application, without any charge or an additional fee, have the said license
transferred to another bicycle owned by the same person.
§ 3-110. Requirements for Bicycles Lent or Rented.
[Ord. 449, 9/5/1962, § 10]
No person shall lend any bicycle or offer the bicycle for rent unless the same is duly licensed, the plate
attached to said bicycle, and the bicycle equipped in accordance with the provisions of this Part 1.
§ 3-111. Regulations for Operation of Bicycles.
[Ord. 449, 9/5/1962, § 11]
All persons operating bicycles upon any public street, alley or highway within the Borough of
Stroudsburg shall be subject to the provisions of the traffic regulations of the Borough of Stroudsburg
as the same are applicable to the operator of any motor vehicle, except as otherwise herein provided,
and all such persons operating bicycles within the Borough of Stroudsburg shall obey instructions of
official traffic signals, signs and other traffic control devices, unless otherwise provided herein, and
shall be subject to the following regulations:
All persons operating a bicycle shall ride only upon the regular seat provided thereon and shall not
permit any other person to ride said bicycle at the same time, except upon a regular seat provided
in tandem.
No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the number for which it is
designed and equipped.
No person shall operate a bicycle at any time unless both hands are upon the handlebars.
No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle or other article which in any way
prevents the operator from keeping both hands upon the handlebars.
All persons operating bicycles upon any public street, alley or highway within the Borough of
Stroudsburg shall operate said bicycle as close to the right-hand side of said street, alley or
highway as practicable under the circumstances, exercising due care when passing standing
vehicles or passing one proceeding in the same direction.
All operators of bicycles when emerging from an alley, driveway or hidden entrance shall, upon
approaching a sidewalk or crosswalk, yield the right-of-way to all pedestrian traffic, and upon
entering the traveled portion of the street, alley or highway, shall yield the right-of-way to all
vehicles approaching thereon.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 34/505
7.
8.
All persons operating bicycles upon any public street, alley or highway within the Borough of
Stroudsburg shall not ride with more than two bicycles abreast at any one time, except in such
areas or upon such portions of said highways, streets or alleys as may be set aside for the
exclusive use and operation of bicycles.
No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk in the Borough of Stroudsburg.
§ 3-112. Equipment.
[Ord. 449, 9/5/1962, § 12]
All bicycles owned and operated by residents of the Borough of Stroudsburg, before a license can be
issued therefor upon application, shall have said bicycle equipped with a bell or other signaling device
capable of rendering a signal audible for a distance of at least 100 feet, and all bicycles must be
equipped with a braking device enabling the operator thereof to make or cause the wheel of said
bicycle to skid on a dry, level pavement.
§ 3-113. Protection of Identification Number and License Plate;
Police to Provide Identification Numbers if Lacking.
[Ord. 449, 9/5/1962, § 13]
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, destroy, mutilate or in any way alter or change the
identification number on any bicycle frame of any licensed bicycle under the terms of this Part 1, and
further it shall be unlawful for any person to remove, destroy, mutilate, alter or change any license plate
or certificate during the term for which said plate and certificate is issued; provided, however, that the
Police Department, under the supervision of the Mayor of the Borough of Stroudsburg, may cause to
be stamped upon bicycles identifying numbers if any such bicycles have no numbers of identification.
§ 3-114. Suspension of License.
[Ord. 449, 9/5/1962, § 14]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Part may, in lieu of conviction thereof, have the
license plate and certificate suspended for a period not to exceed 30 days. In such event, the license
plate shall be removed by the Police Department under the supervision of the Mayor of the Borough of
Stroudsburg, and subsequent operation of said bicycle during the period of said suspension shall
constitute a violation of this Part 1.
§ 3-115. Penalty for Violation.
[Ord. 449, 9/5/1962, § 15; as amended by Ord. 599, 12/19/1983; and by Ord. 878, 11/7/2007]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Part shall, upon conviction thereof before any District
Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $100 and costs of prosecution.
Part 2. SKATEBOARDS
§ 3-201. Definitions.
[Ord. 648, 5/31/1998; § 1; as amended by Ord. 820, 7/3/2002]
ROLLER SKATES
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 35/505
1.
A.
2.
3.
4.
5.
Any footwear or other device that can be attached to the foot containing wheels allowing the
wearer to propel himself or herself along a surface. As used in this Part, roller skates include roller
blades and in-line skates.
SCOOTER
Every device propelled by human power, having one or more wheels affixed to a board or platform
upon which any person might ride, stand, or sit and having handlebars or a similar device
designed for steering.
SKATEBOARD
Every device propelled by human power, having one or more wheels affixed to a board or platform
upon which any person might ride, stand or sit.
§ 3-202. Regulations.
[Ord. 648, 5/31/1998; § 2; as amended by Ord. 820, 7/3/2002]
All persons operating skateboards, scooters, roller skates and other similar devices on any public
street, alley, highway, sidewalk, public parking lot or Borough property within the Borough of
Stroudsburg shall be subject to the following regulations:
No person shall ride or operate roller skates, a skateboard, scooter or other similar device upon
any public street, alley, highway, or public parking lot within the Borough of Stroudsburg.
No person shall ride or operate roller skates, a skateboard, scooter, or other similar device upon
any sidewalk located within the following area bounded as follows:
Ninth Street on the west including the sidewalk on the west side of Ninth Street, east to the
Interborough Bridge, the south side of Sarah Street between Fifth and Ninth; Sarah Street
Extension and McConnell Street on the north including the sidewalks located on the north
side thereof; south to the sidewalk on the south side of Main Street.
No person shall ride or operate roller skates, a skateboard, scooter or other similar device upon
any sidewalk located adjacent to any other street, alley or highway located in the Borough of
Stroudsburg except during daylight hours.
No person shall operate roller skates or a skateboard while hanging onto another vehicle
(including a bicycle or another skateboard or a motorized vehicle).
No skateboard ramp shall be constructed, used or maintained on any sidewalk.
§ 3-203. Right-of-Way.
[Ord. 648, 5/31/1998; § 3; as amended by Ord. 820, 7/3/2002]
All operators of roller skates, skateboards, scooters and other similar devices shall yield the right-ofway
to pedestrian traffic by not operating any skateboard within 20 feet of any pedestrian and shall
otherwise operate such devices in a reasonable and safe manner.
§ 3-204. Penalties for Violation.
[Ord. 648, 5/31/1998; § 4; as amended by Ord. 820, 7/3/2002; and by Ord. 877, 10/3/2007]
Any person violating any provision of this Part 2 shall, upon conviction before a District Justice, be
subject to a fine not to exceed $100, plus court costs. The Police Department shall have the right to
confiscate the skateboard, scooter, and/or roller skates of any person violating this Part 2, which
equipment shall be retained as evidence pending conclusion of disposition of the violation.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 36/505
1.
2.
A.
B.
3.
4.
5.
A.
B.
6.
Chapter 4. Buildings
Part 1. HOUSE NUMBERING
§ 4-101. Numbering Buildings.
[Ord. 940, 5/4/2011]
Numbering of Buildings Required. The Stroudsburg Borough Council hereby declares with the
adoption of this Part that all dwellings, residences, offices, stores and places of business within
this Borough, whether fronting on public streets or alleys or not, shall be numbered in accordance
with the system adopted and used as follows:
Numbers Allotted to Each Block. Except as hereinafter provided, 100 numbers shall be allotted to
each block.
Odd/Even Sides Designated.
All streets and alleys extending in a general north and south direction shall have the odd
numbers on the west side and even numbers on the east side; and the numbers shall
increase from south to north.
All streets and alleys extending in a general east and west direction shall have the odd
numbers on the south side and even numbers on the north side.
Numbering of Rear Buildings. Buildings at the rear of others shall be numbered by adding the unit
number followed by the word "rear" to the proper number of the building in front. The unit numbers
shall be numbered starting with the number corresponding to the floor level where the unit is
located.
Duties of Owners. It is hereby made the duty of every owner or part owner of a building required
by this Part 1 to be numbered, to properly number the same within 10 days after the passage of
this Part and to keep the same so numbered; and in case the owner of any such building shall not
reside within the Borough, said duty shall devolve upon the resident agent of such owner; and if
there be no such resident agent, then said duty shall devolve upon any tenant or occupant of such
building. The tenant or occupant of any such building shall furnish to the proper Borough
authorities, on demand, the name of the resident owner of such building, or of the proper agent, if
such owner be a nonresident; and any such tenant or occupant who shall fail or refuse to do so
shall be held liable to number such building in the first instance.
Requirements for Numbers.
House numbers shall be a minimum of four inches in height with a contrasting background
showing the address. Numbers shall be placed in such a position as to be plainly visible from
the street adjoining the property.
Exception: Properties with numbers, existing prior to the adoption of this Part, that are less
than four inches in height can be retained provided they are still easily visible from the street.
Buildings located greater than 50 feet from the street or which are not visible from the street
adjoining the property shall have a sign or other method of display of the numbers complying
with Subsection 6A and shall be located and be visible no further than 50 feet from the street
adjoining the property.
§ 4-102. Enforcement and Penalties.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 37/505
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
[1]
G.
1.
[Ord. 940, 5/4/2011]
Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $300, together with the costs of
prosecution, or to undergo imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of
this Part continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Part 2. HISTORIC PRESERVATION DISTRICT
§ 4-201. Short Title.
[Ord. 901, 2/19/2009]
The short title of this Part is "Stroudsburg Historic Preservation District Ordinance" of 2008.
§ 4-202. Legal Authorization.
[Ord. 901, 2/19/2009]
In accordance with the provisions of the Pennsylvania Historic District Act, as amended, there is
hereby created in the Borough of Stroudsburg a historic district to be known as the "Stroudsburg
Historic Preservation District." This Part 2 shall apply within such Historic District.
§ 4-203. Purposes.
[Ord. 901, 2/19/2009]
This Part is enacted:
To protect an architecturally distinctive and historical area of Stroudsburg by protecting those
portions and buildings of the Borough which reflect the cultural, economical, social, political
and architectural history of the Borough of Stroudsburg.
To encourage interest in Stroudsburg's past.
To promote the general welfare and education of the Borough's people.
To improve property values.
To enhance the Borough's attractiveness to residents and visitors.
"The people have a right to clean air, pure water, and to the preservation of the natural,
scenic, historic, and esthetic values of the environment. Pennsylvania's public natural
resources are the common property of all the people, including generations yet to come. As
trustees of these resources, the commonwealth shall conserve and maintain them for benefit
of all the people." (Article 1, Section 27, of the Pennsylvania Constitution)
To serve the historic preservation purposes as are authorized by the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended,[1] and the Pennsylvania Historic District Act.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 4-204. Interpretation.
[Ord. 901, 2/19/2009]
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 38/505
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
1.
1.
2.
All standards in this Part are to be interpreted as minimums required. Nothing prevents property
owners from using higher standards, as long as they meet or exceed the standards of this Part.
§ 4-205. Severability.
[Ord. 901, 2/19/2009]
If any section or subsection of this Part shall be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be
invalid, such decision shall be limited to such provision and shall not affect the validity of this Part as
whole or any part thereof.
§ 4-206. Certification by Pennsylvania Historical and Museum
Commission.
[Ord. 901, 2/19/2009]
This Part recognizes that the Pennsylvania Historical and Museum Commission has certified, by
resolution, to the historical significance of the Stroudsburg Historic Preservation District.
§ 4-207. Interpretation of Terms.
[Ord. 901, 2/19/2009]
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following shall, for the purposes of this Part, have the
meanings herein indicated:
Words in the present tense include the future tense.
The word "person" includes a profit or nonprofit corporation, company, partnership, or
individual or any other applicant, legal entity or landowner.
The term "structure" includes "building." The term "building" includes parts thereof.
The word "shall" is always mandatory, while "should" is recommended.
If a term is not defined by this Part but is defined by the Zoning Ordinance [Chapter 27], the
Zoning Ordinance definition shall apply to this Part.
§ 4-208. Definition of Terms.
[Ord. 901, 2/19/2009; as amended by Ord. 990, 6/3/2014, Part 2]
Where a term is not defined by this Part and is not defined by the Zoning Ordinance [Chapter 27],
then in administering this Part, the Borough and HARB may utilize a definition or interpretation
provided in the "Secretary of the Interior's Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties with
Guidelines for Preserving, Rehabilitating, Restoring and Reconstructing Historic Buildings," or its
successor publication.
The following terms shall the meanings indicated:
ALTERATION
Changing the architectural features of a structure.
APPURTENANT ELEMENTS
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 39/505
Significant items subordinate to a building. Features such as doghouses, mailboxes, house
numbers and similar improvements shall not be regulated by this Part.
AWNING OR CANOPY
An unenclosed structure that is attached to a building and is primarily intended to provide
overhead protection from the sun and rain, or to reduce solar exposure into a window, and
which mainly uses an approved flexible material (such as fabrics), and which may include a
rigid frame or support posts where necessary, and which may be retractable. An awning that
is detached from a building may also exist as part of a temporary tent for occasional special
events. If an awning or canopy is architecturally integrated into the structure of a building
(such as for an adjustable solar canopy near the roof over windows), then non-flexible
materials may be approved. A rigid canopy that is attached or detached from a building may
also exist over fuel pumps. See also § 4-214, Subsection 1B(18)(d).
BOARD OF HISTORICAL ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW (HARB)
The Agency that advises the Borough Council on any requests for authorization to demolish,
raze, construct or alter all or a part of any building or structure within the Historic District.
BOROUGH COUNCIL
The governing body of the Borough of Stroudsburg.
BUILDING
Any enclosed or open structure that is a combination of materials to form a construction for
occupancy and/or use for human habitation and is permanently affixed to the land, including
manufactured homes.
BUILDING OR DEMOLITION PERMIT
An approval statement signed by the Code Administrator/Code Enforcement Officer
authorizing the construction, alteration, reconstruction, repair, restoration, demolition or razing
of all or part of any building.
BUILDING PERMIT APPLICATION
For the purposes of this Part, the request filed by any person with the Code
Administrator/Code Enforcement Officer that seeks authorization to undertake an activity or
change regulated by this Part.
CERTIFICATE OR APPROPRIATENESS
The statement signed by the President of the Borough Council which certifies that the
Borough Council has approved or disapproved an activity or change that is regulated by this
Part.
CODE ADMINISTRATOR OR CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER
A municipal employee of or individual retained and designated by the Borough Council as the
individual who enforces compliance with construction and/or fire codes and issues the permit
for the erection, alteration, reconstruction, repair, restoration, demolition or razing of all or a
part of any building or structure within the Historic District.
COMPLETED APPLICATION
A completed certificate of appropriateness application that conforms to the submittal criteria of
this Part.
DEMOLITION BY NEGLECT
The absence of routine maintenance and repair which can lead to a building's structural
weakness, decay and deterioration, which could eventually result in its demolition.
DEMOLITION/RAZING
The dismantling or tearing down of all or part of any building and all operations incidental
thereto.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 40/505
1.
2.
ERECTION
The result of construction, such as a building, structure, monument, sign, or object on the
ground or on a structure or building.
PERMIT
An approval statement signed by the Code Enforcement Officer authorizing the demolition,
razing, construction or alteration of all or part of any building or structure.
RECONSTRUCTION
The act or process of reproducing by new construction the exact form and detail of a vanished
building, structure, or object, or a part thereof, as it appeared at a specific period of time but
not necessarily of original material.
REPLACEMENT
To install new materials or components in place of existing materials or components, such as
removing roofing or porch railings and installing new roofing or porch railings, regardless of
whether the same material and design or a different material or design.
[Added by Ord. 1042, 9/19/2017]
STRUCTURE
Anything constructed or erected, having a permanent or semi-permanent location on another
structure or in the ground, including, but not limited to, buildings, sheds, manufactured homes,
garages, and billboards.
§ 4-209. District Description.
[Ord. 901, 2/19/2009]
The Stroudsburg Historic Preservation District shall be described in writing in this section and
delineated on a map designated as the "Historic Preservation District Map of the Borough of
Stroudsburg." Such map shall be located in the office of the Borough Manager and made available
for public inspection.
The Stroudsburg Historic Preservation District is hereby created and described as follows:
ALL that certain piece or parcel of land situate in the Borough of Stroudsburg, County of Monroe
and Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, being more fully described as follows:
BEGINNING at a point, said point being located at the northwesterly property corner of 827B Ann
Street; thence in a westerly and then northwesterly direction along the southerly side of Ann Street
to the southeasterly property corner of 921-923 Main Street; thence westerly along the southerly
property line of said 921-923 Main Street and 1009 Main Street to the southerly side of Main
Street; thence crossing said Main Street in a northerly direction and along the westerly property
line of 1012 Main Street and 5 Elm Street to the northwesterly property corner of said 5 Elm
Street; thence in an easterly direction along the northerly property line of said 5 Elm Street to the
westerly side of Elm Street; thence in a northerly direction to the northerly side of said Elm Street;
thence easterly along the northerly side of said Elm Street to the westerly side of an unnamed
alley; thence northerly along 9 and 11 Elm Street to a point located on the property line of 39 North
10th Street; thence easterly along the northerly line of said unnamed alley to the intersection with
the westerly side of said North 10th Street; thence crossing said North 10th Street in a
northeasterly direction to the northwesterly property corner of 36 North 10th Street; thence
easterly along the southerly side of Sarah Street and northerly property lines of 36 and 34 North
10th Street and 917, 915, 913, 911-909 Sarah Street and 31 North 9th Street to the northeasterly
property corner of said 31 North 9th Street; thence in a northeasterly direction crossing North 9th
Street to the northwesterly property corner of 30 North 9th Street, said corner being located at the
intersection of the easterly side of said North 9th Street and the southerly side of said Sarah
Street; thence in a southerly direction along the easterly side of said North 9 Street to the
intersection with the northerly side of Monroe Street; thence easterly along the southerly property
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 41/505
line of 828 Monroe Street to the southwesterly property corner of 816-826 Monroe Street; thence
along the westerly property line of said 816-826 Monroe Street and crossing Sarah Street to the
southerly common property corner of 822 and 862-864 Sarah Street; thence in a southwesterly
direction along the southerly property line of said 862-864 Sarah Street to the southwesterly
corner of said lot; thence northerly along the westerly property line of said 862-864 Sarah Street to
the intersection with the southeasterly property corner of 827 Thomas Street; thence from 862-864
Sarah Street proceed east on the north side of Sarah Street, northerly property line of 822, 816,
814, 806, 804, 802, 800A, 800 and across North Eighth Street to the northeast corner, 730 Sarah
Street; proceed north on the east side of North Eighth Street to and including 214, 220 North
Eighth Street, to the southeast corner of 722 Scott Street, to and including 308 North Eighth Street
to southeast corner of 729 Scott Street and then to the northeast corner 730 Scott Street; thence
easterly along the northerly property line of 730, 726, 724, 722, 720, 716, 714-712, 710, 708-706
and 626 Scott Street to a point on the northerly property line of said 626 Scott Street; thence
northerly along the westerly property line of Tax Parcel ID 18730118409212 Fulmer crossing
Fulmer Avenue and along the westerly property line of 704 Fulmer Avenue to the northwesterly
property corner of said 704 Fulmer Avenue; thence easterly along the northerly property line of
704 Fulmer Avenue to the northwesterly property corner of said 700 Fulmer Avenue; thence in a
southerly direction along the westerly property line of said 700 Fulmer Avenue and crossing to the
southerly side of Fulmer Avenue, said point being located on the northerly property line of 626
Scott Street; thence along the northerly property line of said 626 Scott Street and 602, 600 Scott
Street and 613 and 611 Fulmer Avenue to a point on line of 611 Fulmer Avenue; thence northerly
crossing Fulmer Avenue and along the westerly property line of 610 Fulmer Avenue to the
northwesterly property corner of said 610 Fulmer Avenue; thence easterly along the northerly
property line of 610, 608, 606, 604, 602, 600 Fulmer Avenue to the northeasterly property corner
of said 600 Fulmer Avenue; thence southerly along the easterly property line of said 600 Fulmer
Avenue and crossing Fulmer Avenue to the northeasterly property corner of 307-315 Wallace
Street; thence easterly and crossing said Wallace Street to the northeasterly property corner of
312 Wallace Street, said property corner being located on the southerly side of Fulmer Street;
thence southerly along the easterly property line of 312 and 306-308 Wallace Street to the
southeasterly property corner of said 306-308 Wallace Street, said property corner being located
on the northerly property line of 520-522 Scott Street; thence along the northerly property line of
520-522, 516-518, 512-514, 508-510 and 500 Scott Street in an easterly direction to the
northeasterly property of said 500 Scott Street, said property corner being located on the westerly
side of North 5th Street; thence along said westerly side of North 5th Street in a southerly direction
along 500 Scott Street crossing said Scott Street and along the easterly property line of 501 Scott
Street and 209 North 5th Street crossing an alley to a point on the easterly property line of 500
Thomas Street; thence easterly crossing said North 5th Street and along the northerly property
line of 200 North 5th Street to the northeasterly property corner of said 200 North 5th Street;
thence following various southerly and southwesterly directions along the easterly property line of
200, 124-126 and 122 North 5th Street to the southeasterly property corner of said 122 North 5th
Street; thence westerly to the southwesterly property corner of said 122 North 5th Street; thence
northerly along the westerly property line of said 122 and 124-126 North 5th Street to the
northwesterly property corner of 124-126 North 5th Street, said point being located on the easterly
side of North 5th Street; thence southwesterly along the easterly side of said North 5th Street and
crossing the Sarah Street Extension to the northeasterly property corner of 32 North 5th Street;
thence along the easterly property line of said 32 North 5th Street to the southeasterly property
corner of said lot; thence southwesterly crossing an alley to the northerly most corner of 26 North
5th Street; thence along various southeasterly and southwesterly directions along the easterly
property lines of said 26 and 20 North 5th Street crossing McConnell Street to the northwesterly
property corner of 15 North 4th Street; thence along various northeasterly directions crossing
North 4th Street and along the northerly property line of Tax Parcel ID 18730007695 McConnell,
344, 340, 336, 334, 330, 312 Main Street crossing Kane Street and continuing along the northerly
property line of 306 and 304-300 Main Street to the northeasterly corner of said 304-300 Main
Street, said property corner being located on the westerly side of North 3rd Street; thence
southeasterly along the easterly property line of said 304-300 Main Street to the southeasterly
property corner of said lot, said corner being located at the northwesterly intersection of Main
Street and North 3rd Street; thence southwesterly along the southerly property line of said 304-
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 42/505
1.
2.
3.
4.
300, 306 and 308 Main Street to a point on the property line of said 308 Main Street; thence
southeasterly crossing Main Street and along the easterly property line of 315 Main to the
southeasterly property corner of said 315 Main; thence following along various southerly courses
to the southeasterly property corner of 355 Main, said property corner being located along the
northerly side of McMichaels Creek; thence along said northerly side of a creek following various
southwesterly and northwesterly courses and the southerly property line of 355, 411-415, 427-429
and 437 Main crossing North 5th Street to a point on the easterly property line of the Ann Street
Park; thence continuing along said northerly side of a creek by various courses and distances and
also along the southerly property line of said Ann Street Park and 537, 539, 541, 543, 559-561,
563, 601, 603, 605-607, 613-615, 617, 621 Ann Street crossing Garden Street and continuing
along the southerly property line of 701, USA and 727 Ann Street to a point on the southerly side
of an alley, said point being located due south of the southeasterly property corner of said 727 Ann
Street; thence westerly along the southerly side of said alley to the easterly side of South 8th
Street, thence in a southerly direction along said South 8th Street to the southeasterly property
corner of 117 South 8th Street; thence following along the southerly property line of said 117
South 8th Street crossing Palmer Alley and along the southerly property line of 821 and 825 Ann
Street to the easterly side of an alley that lies between 825 and 827B Ann Street, by various
westerly and northwesterly courses; thence southerly along said alley to a point; thence by various
westerly and northwesterly courses crossing said alley and along the southerly and westerly
property line of 731 and 827B Ann Street to a point, said point being the POINT OF BEGINNING.
§ 4-210. HARB.
[Ord. 901, 2/19/2009; as amended by Ord. 993, 10/7/2014]
Creation and Membership. The existing Board of Historical Architectural Review (HARB) is hereby
continued and shall be composed of nine members appointed by the Borough Council. One
member shall be a registered architect, one member shall be a licensed real estate broker, one
member shall be the Building Inspector, at least two members shall be resident property owners of
the Historic District, and all members shall have knowledge of and an interest in preservation of
historic structures.
Terms of Office. Of the initial appointees to the Board, one shall be designated until the first day of
January following July 19, 2006, two until the first day of the second January thereafter, two until
the first day of the third January thereafter, and two until the first day of the fourth January
thereafter. These successors shall be appointed on the expiration of their respective terms to
serve four-year terms.
Vacancies. The term of the registered architect, the licensed real estate broker or the Code
Enforcement Officer shall be considered vacant if the member no longer engages in the
occupation. The membership of the resident property owners in the district shall cease if the
member no longer resides or owns property in the district. The Board shall promptly notify the
Borough Council of vacancies. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term.
Conflict of Interest. It shall be the duty of each HARB member to remain conscious of and
sensitive to any possible conflict of interest (including, but not limited to, financial considerations)
that may arise by virtue of her or his membership on the HARB. A member, promptly upon her or
his determining a conflict relative to any matter brought, shall disqualify herself/himself from
participating as a HARB member in the presentation or deliberation of and the voting on any such
manner.
§ 4-211. HARB Duties.
[Ord. 901, 2/19/2009]
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 43/505
1.
2.
3.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
4.
5.
6.
7.
1.
Advisory Role. The HARB shall provide recommendations to the Borough Council regarding the
advisability of issuing a certificate of appropriateness required under this Part.
Board Rules and Guidelines. The HARB may make and alter rules and bylaws for its own
organization and procedure, provided that they are consistent with the laws of Pennsylvania and
this Part. The HARB may also prepare advisory guidelines that are intended to provide
recommendations to applicants on the types of changes the Borough is likely to approve and likely
to deny.
Removal of Members. A HARB member may be removed for malfeasance, misfeasance, or
nonfeasance in office or for any other just cause by a majority vote of the Borough Council. The
Borough Council shall notify the Board member of the charges 15 days before the vote. A hearing
on the vote shall be held if the member requests it in writing.
Annual Reports. The members of HARB shall make an annual report to the Borough Council,
which shall include:
Any recommendations for changes in this Part;
The number and types of cases reviewed;
The number of cases for which a certificate of appropriateness was either approved or
denied;
The number of HARB meetings which each member attended;
Historic-preservation-related training which each member attended; or
A narrative summary describing the state of preservation in the preservation district, with
recommendations in policy, goals, and objectives for Borough Council consideration.
Organization. The Board will meet at least once each month if the Code Enforcement Officer has
received applications for review. If no such applications have been submitted, no meeting shall be
necessary. The HARB Chairperson may call any additional meetings considered necessary to
carry out its duties indicated in this Part. Such meetings shall be open to the public. Officers,
elected from the membership, shall serve annual terms and may succeed themselves. A majority
of the HARB members shall need to be present to constitute a quorum. Affirmative actions shall
require a majority vote of the members present, provided that there is a quorum. No HARB
member shall take part as a HARB member in a discussion or vote on issuing a certificate of
appropriateness for any property in which that member has a direct interest. The Board shall keep
full public records of its business.
Expenditures for Services. Within the limits of funds appropriated by the Borough Council, the
HARB may employ or contract for technical and clerical services. HARB members shall serve
without compensation, except that the Borough Council may reimburse members for expenses
incurred in the performance of their duties.
Training. The Borough Council may require that HARB members and support staff attend up to
eight hours of seminars, conferences or workshops related to historic preservation and HARB
administration.
§ 4-212. Additional Functions of the HARB.
[Ord. 901, 2/19/2009; as amended by Ord. 990, 6/3/2014, Part 1]
The HARB may conduct research and recommend to the Borough Council whether to modify this
Part or the Historic Preservation District boundaries.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 44/505
2.
3.
4.
5.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
A.
1.
The HARB shall apply the provisions included in this Part and shall require plans, drawings or
other information necessary to review and recommend action upon a certificate of
appropriateness.
The HARB may advise owners of properties in the Historic District on the physical and financial
aspects of preservation, rehabilitation and reuse. Applicants are encouraged to discuss their
project with a Borough Code Enforcement Official or to request an informal review at a HARB
meeting before an official submittal is made. An informal review may result in a streamlined
approval process for the applicant, because many issues can be addressed before an official
submittal was made.
The HARB may call upon experts in historic preservation and in other technical fields for advice.
The HARB Chairperson may testify before boards and commissions on any matter affecting
buildings or sites of historic or architectural significance in the Borough. In addition, any HARB
member may be designated by the HARB to speak on behalf of the HARB, or a HARB member
may speak as an individual.
§ 4-213. Application and Approval Procedures.
[Ord. 901, 2/19/2009; as amended by Ord. 990, 6/3/2014, Part 1]
Certificate of Appropriateness.
A review by the HARB and the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness by the Borough
Council shall be required for the following activities or changes affecting all or part of any
building or structure located in the Historic Preservation District that is visible from a public
street or adjacent public sidewalk or Quaker Alley, Church Alley or Bank Alley, except as is
provided by Subsection 1D:
Changes to rooflines and/or roofs.
[Amended by Ord. 1042, 9/19/2017]
Changes in the size, style, shape or number of doors, windows or other openings or a
proposed blocking of a window or door opening.
Any erection, placement, rehabilitation, removal, exterior alteration, expansion,
replacement or demolition of any building or portion thereof.
[Amended by Ord. 1042, 9/19/2017]
Enclosure of a porch or demolition, removal and/or construction of walls and fences,
provided that this Part shall not regulate removal of wooden or chain-link metal fences.
Structural enlargement or partial or complete demolition of principal or accessory
buildings, or parts thereof.
Construction or placement of a new building, other than a single accessory building of
100 square feet of floor area or less.
Changes in exterior surface materials, except as is provided by Subsection 1D(2).
Painting of previously unpainted brick and other masonry exterior surfaces.
Any erection or posting of a freestanding or wall sign of more than 20 square feet in sign
area. Signage applied to barricades in the seasonal outdoor cafe dining licensed area.
See sign standards and guidelines in § 4-214, Subsection 1B(18), below.
[Amended by Ord. 1028, 6/20/2017]
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 45/505
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
D.
A.
B.
C.
D.
2.
Sandblasting of masonry surfaces.
Removal, replacement or covering of cornices, pillars, shutters and architectural details.
Installation of a wind turbine.
Erection, alteration or relocation of a public monument within the Historic District.
Placement of planters placed on a sidewalk, or benches, bollards or closely similar
improvements within the public street right-of-way, other than temporary items that are
only used during special events.
No other Borough permit for such activity or change shall be valid until the Borough Council
has approved a certificate of appropriateness as required under this Part.
Visibility. If a feature regulated by this Part is only obstructed by landscaping or a fence from
being visible from a street, such feature shall still be considered to be visible.
Changes Needing Review. The following actions shall be provided to the HARB for review but
shall not need Borough Council approval, provided that the following standards are met. If the
following standards are not met, then an approval of a certificate of appropriateness by
Borough Council shall be required, after HARB review.
[Amended by Ord. 1042, 9/19/2017]
Chemical or mechanical cleaning (other than sandblasting or low-pressure water
cleaning) of masonry surfaces of a building. The gentlest possible method shall be used
to clean brick and stone, such as low-pressure water cleaning with a mild detergent and
soft brushes.
The replacement of windows or the addition of storm windows and storm doors, provided
that the size and shape of the door or window opening is not changed and the windows
maintain the same appearance, unless the window or door opening is being restored to
its original size and shape, and provided that any front storm door shall be a minimum of
75% clear. If an existing window had an upper and lower sash, the replacement window
shall also appear to have an upper and a lower sash. Nonrectangular windows, such as
brow, gothic, round, half-round, or eyebrow windows, must be replaced with a product
that reproduces the original shape of the glass, unless the change is approved with a
certificate of appropriateness by the Borough Council. For example, under this section, a
brow window may not be replaced with a rectangular window that is filled in at the top.
See Subsection 2I below concerning decks.
The installation of solar energy collection devices that are visible from a street.
Exceptions. The following actions shall not require review and approval under this Part:
Repairs, interior changes and below-ground changes that do not affect the exterior
appearance of a building.
Changes that are not visible from a public street or adjacent public sidewalk, such as changes
that would only be visible from an alley; provided, however, that features visible from Quaker
Alley, Bank Alley and Church Alley shall be regulated by this Part.
Painting, other than painting of previously unpainted masonry, or removing paint.
The repointing of brick or stone with mortar that is similar in color across a facade and that
does not involve an excessive percentage of cement in the mix that would make the mortar
stronger than the brick or stone and thereby cause the brick or stone to crack over time.
However, the applicant or his/her contractor shall first discuss such work with the Borough
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 46/505
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
(1)
(2)
(3)
M.
N.
O.
P.
Codes Office before initiating the work. Applicants are encouraged to review Preservation
Briefs one and two, which are available for free at www.nps.gov/hps.
The cleaning of a building that does not chemical, abrasive or mechanical methods or
sandblasting of the exterior of a building, and provided that the cleaning process does not
harm the exterior. See also Subsection 1D(1) above.
The installation of outdoor light fixtures, other than as part of regulated signs.
The installation, repair or replacement of curbing or sidewalks.
The erection or placement of an accessory building of 100 square feet or less of floor area
within a rear yard.
The construction or placement of a swimming pool, hot tub, children's swing set, unroofed
deck or unroofed patio within a rear yard or the construction of a ground-level patio; or the
construction of a deck that is raised less than 30 inches above grade level at any point and
that is not visible from a public street.
The installation or replacement of gutters and downspouts, provided that the same style,
shape and attachment system are used and provided that character-defining features are not
covered.
Other work which does not change the exterior appearance of the building but which consists
solely of normal and routine maintenance designed and carried out to protect and preserve
the building, such as caulking and weatherstripping.
Installation of heating, air conditioning or ventilation equipment, provided that a new system is
not placed within the front yard or on the front porch. However, the following shall require the
issuance of a certificate of appropriateness by Borough Council if they are visible from a
public street: (1) an exterior ventilation system for a restaurant, or (2) any air conditioning unit
that is built into a building wall (as opposed to an air conditioning unit placed in a window
which is not regulated by this Part).
Satellite dishes with a diameter of three feet or less each, an antenna for receiving broadcast
television signals, or utility lines or meters.
To the maximum extent feasible, new utility meters should be placed at a location that is
not immediately adjacent to a public street, and satellite dishes should be placed at a
location other than on the front building facade where a reasonable alternative location
exists.
To the maximum extent feasible, when satellite dishes are attached to the front of a
building, they should be placed above the point where the building roof meets the
building wall, or another location that is less prominent as viewed from the sidewalk.
Satellite dishes should be avoided in locations along the first floor or on a front porch.
The owner of the building shall remove any satellite dishes, antenna or similar outdoor
communications equipment once it is no longer in use.
Demolition of an accessory building or deck that is clearly less than 50 years old. Any repairs
to a principal building that are needed as part of the demolition shall need HARB review.
If a feature would not need approval under this Part if that feature was newly placed on the
lot, that same type of feature shall also not need approval if the feature is removed.
Changes that are listed in Subsection 1D as only needing review, but not approval.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 47/505
3.
4.
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
C.
5.
6.
Color. This Part shall not regulate paint colors. In advisory reviews, particular emphasis should be
placed upon avoiding colors that are clearly and seriously incompatible, such as garish or dayglow
colors. However, painting previously unpainted masonry surfaces shall need approval under
this Part.
[Amended by Ord. No. 1078, 5/7/2019]
Preapproval. Based upon recommendations of the HARB, the Borough Council may, by
resolution, preapprove certain standard designs, such as specific types of porches, fences, walls,
or window replacements. Once such preapproval is granted, then a separate approval is not
needed under this Part for a change that meets such standard design. If such standard design is
met, then the Code Enforcement Officer may issue permits in the same manner as would apply
outside of the Historic District.
Procedures of the Code Enforcement Officer. When the Code Enforcement Officer receives an
application for an activity or change regulated by this Part, the procedures of this section shall be
followed. A fee shall not be required under this Part.
If the proposed work requires HARB review and/or Borough Council approval, no related
permit(s) shall be issued by the Code Enforcement Officer until proper actions have been
rendered by the HARB and the Borough Council as described in this Part. All applications
requiring review must be received at least seven days prior to a scheduled HARB meeting to
be considered.
Application Materials. The applicant shall complete the Borough's application form and shall
provide a written description of the changes that are proposed for approval. The Code
Enforcement Officer shall require that the application be sufficiently detailed to fully
understand the extent and design of the proposed changes. If needed to determine
compliance with this Part, the Code Enforcement Officer may require that the applicant submit
photos of the existing features of the lot, photos of adjacent buildings, a detailed sketch of
proposed changes, an elevation drawing to scale showing the front facade of any proposed
new building or building addition, and photographs or illustrations showing materials that are
proposed to be used. As part of the application, where available, the applicant shall provide a
manufacturer's product sheet, photos or direct internet links that fully show proposed building
materials (such as a proposed new door or replacement window visible from a public street).
If a proposed demolition is involved, the applicant shall submit evidence showing the
condition of the building, shall describe the reasons for the demolition, and shall comply
with § 4-214, Subsection 4, concerning any future building.
For a sign regulated by this Part, the applicant shall provide a sketch showing the design
of the sign and a plan showing its proposed location and shall describe the proposed
size, dimensions and materials to be used.
At the time of application, or after the application is considered complete, the owner of record
or his/her representative shall be advised of the time and place of the HARB meeting when
his/her application will be considered and shall be advised that his/her or said representative's
attendance at the meeting is required.
[Added by Ord. 1042, 9/19/2017]
Schedule. Within seven days of receipt of an application requiring review, the Code Enforcement
Officer shall notify the HARB of said application. Upon receipt of the notice from the Code
Enforcement Officer that an application requiring review has been filed, the HARB should, within
30 days of receipt of such notice, schedule a meeting to consider the recommendation which it will
present to the Borough Council. The Borough Council will then make a final decision based on
information obtained from the HARB. The applicant or his/her representation shall be notified of
the HARB and Borough Council meeting place and time.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 48/505
7.
8.
9.
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
1.
Recommendation. If the HARB decides to recommend against the granting of a certificate of
appropriateness, the HARB shall indicate to the applicant the changes in the plans and
specifications, if any, which would protect the distinctive historic character of the district. If the
applicant determines that he/she will make the changes suggested by the HARB, he/she shall so
notify the HARB and the Borough Council.
Action. (Note: The goal of the Borough in most cases is to provide a decision within 45 days after
receiving a complete application.) The Borough Council shall approve, conditionally approve or
disapprove an application under this Part within a maximum of 90 days after a complete
application has been duly received by the Code Enforcement Officer, unless a written time
extension is provided by the applicant. If such time limit is not met, the decision shall be deemed
to have been rendered in favor of the applicant, unless the applicant has agreed, in writing, to an
extension of time.
Denial. If the Borough Council denies an application for a certificate of appropriateness, it shall be
in writing, stating reasons for the denial, and a copy shall be given to the applicant, to the Code
Enforcement Official and to the Pennsylvania Historical and Museum Commission. The Borough
Council shall also indicate the types of changes that would be needed to a denied application to
increase the likelihood of it being approved if resubmitted. A denial may be appealed within a
maximum of 30 days after the applicant receives a written decision to the County Court of
Common Pleas.
§ 4-214. Application Review.
[Ord. 901, 2/19/2009; as amended by Ord. 990, 6/3/2014, Part 1]
Standards. In determining the recommendations to be made to the Borough Council concerning
the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness, the HARB shall consider only those matters that
are pertinent to the preservation of the historical and/or architectural aspect and nature of the
building, or structure site, area, or district, certified to have historical significance. The HARB shall
consider the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties with
Guidelines for Preserving, Rehabilitating, Restoring and Reconstructing Historic Buildings and the
following additional standards, which shall supersede the former in the event of a conflict:
The effect of the proposed change upon the general historic and architectural nature of the
district shall be considered.
The general design, arrangement, texture, and material of a building or structure and the
relation of such factors to similar features of buildings or structures in the district shall be
considered, including, but not limited to, the following standards:
Proportion of Building Front Facades. The relationship between the width of the front of
the building and the height of the front of the building should be maintained. The Borough
may require that a long building be designed to have the appearance of two or more
smaller buildings. A new building with a length of greater than 50 feet along a public rightof-
way should have the appearance of two or more interconnected buildings, such that
the width of each interconnected portion does not exceed two-thirds the height of the
building.
Proportion of Openings Within the Building. The relationship of the width to height of
windows and doors should be maintained. For example, if adjacent historic buildings
have window openings of a certain size, that size should be maintained on a new
building. With the exception of street-level storefront windows, transoms, and nonfunctioning
accent windows, windows on facades facing a public right-of-way should
maintain a proportion such that the width is no more than two-thirds the height of the
window. Windows on each story should maintain a uniform height, with the exception of
bathrooms and stairwells. Windows should also be stacked above and/or below windows
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 49/505
(a)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
on other stories wherever possible. Mirrored glass shall not be used as an exterior
building material.
If a building is proposed under the Borough's C-O Overlay District option for
additional height, it shall have windows separated from each other so that the
predominant siding material continues uninterrupted between them. In such case,
the distance between windows should be no less than two-thirds of the width of
adjacent windows. Individual window openings of sizes typically found in buildings
constructed before 1950 along Main Street in the Borough shall be used, as
opposed to more modern connected strips of windows. In such case, multiple-unit
windows installed in a single rough-opening shall not be permitted.
Rhythms of Solids to Voids in the Front Facade. The relationship between a recurrent
alteration or strong and weak architectural elements should be maintained, thereby
maintaining a rhythm of solids to voids. Building walls that have few or no window and
door openings along a public sidewalk shall be avoided. Where a window opening to the
interior of the building is not possible for a security reason, then an enclosed display
window may be used.
Rhythm of Spacing of Buildings on Streets. The existing rhythm of recurrent or repeated
building masses to spaces between each building should be maintained.
Entrance and/or Porch Projections. The existing rhythm of entrances or porch projections
should be maintained to continue a pedestrian scale.
Materials. Whenever feasible, existing historic materials shall be repaired, as opposed to
being replaced.
If a property owner submits an application to replace existing historic materials,
HARB and/or Borough Council may elect to have the property owner seek up to
three estimates from contractors registered with the Pennsylvania Attorney
General's Office, with each estimate comparing the cost of replacement with
alternative methods of rehabilitation as suggested by the HARB.
If replacement is warranted, the replacement shall have the same or a more-original
appearance when viewed from a public street or adjacent public sidewalk or Quaker
Alley, Bank Alley or Church Alley.
A particular emphasis shall be placed upon preserving the predominant historic
materials of brick, stone and wood siding. Such replacement features do not
necessarily need to involve the same materials as long as the appearance and
detailing is identical to the material it is replacing. No substitute material should be
approved which is incompatible with the original fabric of the building or structure.
Textures. The predominant historic textures should be maintained, such as rough or
smooth brick.
Architectural Details. Architectural details and character-defining features of buildings
shall be preserved and shall not be covered, such as but not limited to cornices, lintels,
arches, quoins, trim, balustrades and iron work, stained glass, and chimneys. Historic
porches shall not be removed, and porch details shall be consistent with older styles of
construction.
Roofs. Existing historic roof shapes and pitches shall be maintained. Where adjacent
historic buildings have a pitched roof, a new building or addition should include a similarly
pitched roof. Roof styles shall follow a style that is present among historic buildings in the
Historic District. A building shall not have the appearance of a flat roof as viewed from the
street, unless it has a decorative cornice or overhanging eaves or a parapet wall.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 50/505
(10)
(11)
(12)
(a)
(13)
(14)
(15)
(16)
(17)
(a)
(18)
Mansard, gambrel, or other highly visible steep-pitched roofs, as well as prominent
details such as patterned shingles, turrets, and eyebrow arches, shall be maintained
using original materials wherever possible. Buildings opting into the C-O Overlay District
shall be roofed with slates, simulated slates such as PVC, or cedar shakes wherever the
roof is visible from the street. In such case, asphalt shingles, clay tiles, or corrugated
metal roofing are not permitted, but standing-seam metal roofing may be substituted
where deemed appropriate by Borough Council, after a review by the HARB.
Walls of Continuity. Physical elements which provide visual continuity and cohesiveness
as part of a streetscape shall be maintained, such as brick walls, wrought-iron fences,
building facades or combinations of these elements.
Directional Expression of Front Elevation. The orientation of structural shapes, plan of
openings and architectural detail that reflect a predominantly vertical or horizontal
character to the building's facade should be maintained.
Scale. The scale of the built environment created by the size of units of construction and
architectural detail that relate to the size of persons shall be maintained. In addition,
building masses should be maintained in relation to open space.
Siding, Stucco and Capping. No vinyl or aluminum siding, stucco or similar material shall
be allowed to cover the exterior of a brick, stone, or wood-sided building or structure. No
capping with aluminum or vinyl or other material shall be allowed on the exterior of
character-defining features of a building or structure, unless the Borough Council
determines that there is no reasonable alternative. Where vinyl siding with aluminum-clad
trim is deemed appropriate, the window trim shall be "padded out" with wood so that the
trim stands out from the face of the siding.
Buildings opting into the C-O Overlay District shall have facades of an architectural
masonry product such as brick, stone, or of materials similar to those found in
facades immediately adjacent if deemed historically appropriate, or of a simulated
masonry product that has the appearance, texture, scale, and durability of the
material it is made to simulate. The use of concrete masonry unit block, stucco,
exposed concrete, glass block, board-and-batten, T1-11 materials, and aluminum or
vinyl siding are not permitted on such buildings.
Storage and Parking. The views of outdoor storage and vehicle parking lots from public
streets shall be minimized.
Placement of the Building on the Lot. A new principal building shall be constructed with a
front setback that is similar to existing buildings on the same block.
Placement of Additions. Where feasible, a building addition shall be located and
designed to maintain a consistent streetscape along the front lot line. A more modern
addition shall be placed to the rear of a building.
Heights. Buildings should be similar in height to adjacent historic buildings. Buildings
fronting along Main Street shall include two or more habitable stories.
Signs. Signs should not be internally illuminated. See the provisions of the Zoning
Ordinance [Chapter 27], which may prohibit internally illuminated signs in certain areas.
Where a sign may be approved to be internally illuminated, it should include individual
letters as opposed to a box-type design. Animated, blinking or flashing signs shall not be
allowed. Signs shall not cover architectural details.
Signs shall be attached in ways that will avoid permanent damage to historic
masonry. It is preferable to attach sign fasteners to surfaces other than actual bricks.
Where sign fasteners are attached to a brick surface, the anchor should be placed in
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 51/505
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(19)
(20)
(21)
(22)
(23)
(24)
C.
D.
a masonry joint of sufficient width that will not result in damage to the brick. Where
the masonry joint is not wide enough for a needed anchor and no other alternatives
exist, then it is usually best to place an anchor through the middle of a brick.
Signs that have the appearance of wood and that have carved, raised or painted
lettering are encouraged. (Note: the Uniform Construction Code may not allow the
actual use of wood for fire safety reasons).
New box-type rectangular internally illuminated signs shall not be used, but an
existing box sign in good condition may be reused with a new face. Where internally
illuminated signs are used, they should consist of channelized letters and/or logos,
as opposed to being a single rectangle.
Signs may be placed on approved awnings, provided a sign or awning shall not be
added in a location that would cover historic architectural details. A Borough
encroachment permit may be needed for any awning or improvement that extends
into the public right-of-way (which is usually the public portion of a sidewalk).
Awnings shall not have the appearance of a stretched plastic material and shall not
be internally illuminated for the purposes of serving as a sign.
Most wall mounted signs are intended to be placed immediately above the first floor,
or next to a doorway, or to extend perpendicular to the front of a building.
Door and Window Gates. Gates that roll over doors and windows (such as a roll-down
metal gate over a business) shall be prohibited, except that the Borough Council may
approve a design that can be seen through if needed for security reasons.
Sandblasting. Abrasive sandblasting of stone and brick surfaces shall not be allowed in a
manner that erodes the outer surface of the material and causes deterioration.
Mechanicals. Wherever possible, rooftop mechanical and communications equipment
shall be located toward the rear one-third of the building as viewed from the principal
public street. The equipment shall be totally screened from view at street level and shall
not exceed eight feet in height above the roof. Packaged terminal air conditioners
(PTACs) that are installed within a wall are not permitted on any wall visible from a public
right-of-way, including Quaker Alley, Bank Alley, and Church Alley. This provision is not
intended to regular standard air conditioners inserted into a window.
Porches. Where a porch is visible from a public right-of-way, porch railings shall follow a
traditional design and shall be painted and constructed of wood, solid PVC, solid PVCwood
composite, cast iron, or metal made to resemble cast iron. All exposed pressuretreated
wood shall be painted or treated with a solid-based stain.
[Amended by Ord. 1042, 9/19/2017]
Window Construction. Wherever possible, the style of window shall be complementary to
historic structures nearby (for example, a hooded window with a masonry sill). Where
divided lites are deemed appropriate, the width of each lite shall not be greater than its
height. Any use of mirrored glass is prohibited on doors and windows.
Mortar Joints. Acceptable mortar joint styles for brick structures include beaded joints,
rodded or flush joints. Weathering joints, deep raked joints and "weeping" joints are not
permitted.
The HARB may also consider the Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings and other
explanatory guidelines and reports issued by the United States National Park Service.
In such rare cases where the HARB recommends and the Borough Council approves
demolition of an historic building or structure, a good-faith effort shall be made by the Borough
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 52/505
E.
2.
3.
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
C.
4.
Council and the owner(s) to move said building or structure to a proximate site. If moving a
building or structure slated to be demolished is economically or practically infeasible, efforts
shall be made to salvage architectural features of said building or structure for use within the
Borough of Stroudsburg.
Financial Feasibility. The HARB shall consider any evidence provided by an applicant or
others regarding the financial feasibility of its recommendations in response to a request for a
certificate of appropriateness. Financial feasibility shall include considering whether a
proposed repair, rehabilitation or replacement in kind would cause an unreasonable cost and
whether an acceptable alternative exists that is more cost-effective. The HARB and/or
Borough Council may require that an applicant provide up to three estimates from bona-fide
contractors and/or vendors substantiating her or his claims regarding financial feasibility.
Evidence shall be provided that these contractors are registered with the Pennsylvania
Attorney General's Office, and the number of years of operation under the current business
name shall be stated. If the property owner is proposing to replace existing historic materials,
the HARB and/or Council may require that these estimates compare the cost of replacement
with alternative methods of rehabilitation as suggested by HARB. If any estimate shows
evidence of bias or conflict of interest, HARB and/or Borough Council may require the
applicant to obtain additional estimates. Failure of the applicant to supply the requested
estimates and/or documentation may result in a denial of the application. The HARB shall
determine as to the condition of said architectural feature based on its inspection,
photographs or report from the Code Enforcement Officer or consultant(s).
Other Ordinances. All other requirements of any Borough ordinance must be complied with.
Markers. Historical markers may be authorized by the HARB, subject to the provisions stipulated,
and such markers shall not be considered as signs but are to be erected in accordance with the
requirements established for historic markers by the HARB.
Demolition.
Purpose. The intent of this subsection is to ensure that valuable historic resources are not
permanently destroyed unless there are no reasonable alternatives available.
This Subsection 4 shall apply to any existing principal building or enclosed portion of a
principal building within the Historic District. Such building shall not be demolished unless one
or more of the following standards is satisfied, in the determination of the Borough Council,
considering the recommendations of the HARB:
That the building is noncontributing to the Historic District, based upon the advice of the
HARB, and any additional professional evaluation of historic significance that may be
available;
That the applicant proves by credible evidence that no reasonable beneficial use of the
building is possible and that such situation is not the result of intentional neglect by the
current owner;
That the applicant proves by credible evidence that the denial of the demolition would
result in unreasonable economic hardship to the owner and the hardship was not selfcreated,
following the process of § 4-215; or
That there is substantial credible evidence that the demolition is necessary to allow a
project to occur that will have substantial, special and unusual public benefit that would
greatly outweigh the loss of the historic building.
The burden of proof shall be upon the applicant to prove compliance with this Subsection 4.
The HARB and/or the Borough Council may require the applicant to submit written
documentation and/or expert testimony to support the applicant's claims, such as but not
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 53/505
D.
E.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
1.
limited to a professional appraisal, income and expense statements for the property,
estimates of the rehabilitation costs, testimony concerning efforts to market the property over
time, and similar relevant information.
If a building is proposed to be demolished to provide a site for a new building, the applicant
shall provide a preliminary architectural elevation of the new building. The applicant shall
describe the proposed timeline for the new building. The Borough Council may require that
evidence be provided that the applicant has the resources to construct the new building and
that the project is feasible and not merely speculative.
The Borough Council may place a condition on a proposed building demolition to state that
the demolition permit shall not be issued until after zoning approval, land development
approval and/or construction permits for a new building on the site have been approved by
the Borough.
§ 4-215. Unreasonable Economic Hardship.
[Ord. 901, 2/19/2009; as amended by Ord. 990, 6/3/2014, Part 1]
When a claim of unreasonable economic hardship is made due to the effect of this Part, the
applicant, with the cooperation of the owner of record, must present credible evidence sufficient to
prove that, as a result of a requirement under this Part, the owner of record is unable to obtain a
reasonable return or a reasonable beneficial use from a resource. The following shall be submitted
to the Borough, as applicable to the claim:
Date the property was acquired by its current owner.
Price paid for the property (if acquired by purchase) and a description of the relationship, if
any, between the buyer and the seller of the property.
Mortgage history of the property, including current mortgage and the annual debt service, if
any, for the previous two years.
Current market value of the property.
Equity in the property.
Past and current income and expense statements for the past two years.
Past capital expenditures during ownership of the current owner.
Appraisals of the property obtained within the previous two years.
Income and property tax factors affecting the property.
All appraisals obtained within the previous two years by the owner or applicant in connection
with purchase, offerings for sale, financing or ownership of the property, or state that none
were obtained.
All studies commissioned by the owner as to profitable renovation, rehabilitation or utilization
of any structures or objects on the property for alternative use, or a statement that none were
obtained.
Estimate(s) of the cost of the proposed erection, reconstruction, alteration, restoration,
demolition or razing and an estimate(s) of any additional cost(s) that would be incurred to
comply with the recommendations of the HARB for changes necessary for it to approve a
certificate of appropriateness.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 54/505
M.
2.
3.
4.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
1.
1.
2.
Form of ownership or operation of the property, whether sole proprietorship, for-profit or
nonprofit corporation, limited partnership, joint venture or other.
The HARB and/or Borough Council may require that an applicant furnish additional information
relevant to its determination of unreasonable economic hardship.
The applicant's claim shall consider whether there are any other uses currently allowed that would
provide a reasonable return and whether such a return could be obtained through investment in
the property for rehabilitation purposes.
Should the applicant satisfy the Borough Council that she/he will suffer an unreasonable economic
hardship if a certificate of appropriateness is not approved, and should an alternative solution not
be identified which can relieve the owner's economic hardship, the Borough Council must
recommend a certificate of appropriateness for demolition.
§ 4-216. Demolition by Neglect.
[Ord. 901, 2/19/2009; as amended by Ord. 990, 6/3/2014, Part 1]
All buildings and structures within the Historic Preservation District shall be maintained in good
repair, so as to remain structurally sound and reasonably protected against decay and
deterioration. Examples of such deterioration, which shall not be allowed to occur, include:
Deterioration of exterior walls and other vertical supports.
Deterioration of roofs or other horizontal members.
Deterioration of exterior chimneys.
Deterioration or crumbling of exterior stucco or mortar.
Ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roofs, or foundations, including broken window(s)
or doors.
Deterioration of any features so as to create a hazardous condition which could lead to the
claim that a demolition is necessary for the public safety.
§ 4-217. Immediate Hazards.
[Ord. 901, 2/19/2009; as amended by Ord. 990, 6/3/2014, Part 1]
In the event that a building within the Historic District suffers from an unforeseen emergency
situation that requires immediate action to stabilize and secure the building, because of fire,
explosion or similar causes, in order to avoid a clear and present danger, the property owner may
take such necessary action without completing the procedures established in this Part. The
property owner shall notify the Code Enforcement Official as soon as possible and apply for a
permit for such work at the earliest possible date. The owner shall accomplish the minimal amount
of work regulated by these Historic District regulations that is necessary to stabilize and secure the
building.
The Code Enforcement Official may approve the demolition of part or all of a building or the
removal of certain features if there is an immediate hazard to public safety, without requiring prior
approval under this Part. However, an application shall then be required by the owner under this
Part to determine a resolution of the matter, including whether any removed features need to be
reattached or replaced.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 55/505
3.
1.
2.
3.
4.
[1]
If demolition or other actions regulated by this Part occur that the Code Enforcement Official
determines were not of a necessary emergency nature, then the owner shall bear the expense of
remedying the unauthorized demolition and actions, including reconstructing and replacing historic
features.
§ 4-218. Notice of Violation.
[Ord. 901, 2/19/2009; as amended by Ord. 990, 6/3/2014, Part 1]
The Code Enforcement Officer or his/her designee shall provide a notice of violation of this Part in
the same manner as is provided under the Zoning Ordinance [Chapter 27]. Prior to issuing a
formal notice of violation, the Code Enforcement Office may also informally notify a person of a
violation and request compliance.
Violations of this Part shall include but are not limited to: (1) failure to apply for and receive
approval by the Borough Council when it is required; (2) failure to apply for a review by the HARB
when it is required; (3) completing work without having received a certificate of appropriateness
required by this Part; or (4) failure to comply with Borough-approved work. Such notice shall direct
the abatement of said violation within a specified time period to be determined by the Code
Enforcement Officer.
In the event the construction, alteration, demolition or other matter regulated by this Part does not
comply with the approved certificate of appropriateness, the Code Enforcement Officer shall have
the authority to issue a stop work order. The Code Enforcement Officer shall require that the
building owner obtain a new certificate of appropriateness, unless the work is revised to comply
with the certificate of appropriateness. Failure to adhere to the certificate of appropriateness shall
constitute a violation of this Part and shall be subject to the penalties provided in this section.
If any activity is occurring without the needed approval under this Part, the Code Enforcement
Officer shall have the authority to issue a stop work order.
§ 4-219. Enforcement.
The Code Enforcement Officer or his/her designee shall have the power to institute any proceedings at
law or in equity necessary for the enforcement of this Part. Enforcement shall occur in the same
manner as is provided in the Construction Code in effect in the Borough, under the Pennsylvania
Construction Code Act, as amended,[1] with such provisions hereby included by reference.
Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 7210.101 et seq.
§ 4-220. Violations and Penalties.
[Ord. 901, 2/19/2009]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall fail to comply with the requirements of this Part or shall
violate the terms hereof shall, upon conviction thereof before a District Magistrate, be sentenced to pay
a fine of not more than $500 per violation, plus court costs and reasonable attorney's fees incurred by
the Borough. Each day's continuance of a violation of any of the provisions of this Part shall constitute
a separate offense, subject to an additional fine. Each removal of an architectural feature shall
constitute a separation violation, as well as any other action regulated by this Part.
§ 4-221. Amendments.
[Ord. 901, 2/19/2009]
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 56/505
1.
2.
3.
The provisions of this Part may be amended in the future by the Borough Council after notice and
hearing as provided by law.
§ 4-222. Repealer.
[Ord. 901, 2/19/2009; as amended by Ord. 990, 6/3/2014, Part 1]
Any portions of Borough ordinances or resolutions which are clearly in direct conflict in regards to the
same matter with this amendment are hereby repealed. This amendment shall replace the specified
sections of the existing Historic Preservation District Ordinance with new text.
Chapter 5. Code Enforcement
ATTACHMENTS
Attachment 1 - Appendix A, Rental Agreement Addendum
Part 1. CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER
§ 5-101. Establishing of Office of Code Enforcement.
[Ord. 519, 12/1/1971, § 1]
Creation of Office of Code Enforcement. There is hereby created by the Council of the Municipality
an office of the Municipality to be known as the "Office of Code Enforcement." Said office shall
have the responsibility for administering and enforcing the provisions of this Part and of those
other codes and/or ordinances of the Municipality (hereinafter referred to as the "Applicable Codes
and Ordinances"), which designate said Office of Code Enforcement as their Official
Administration and Enforcement Agency. The Council may also enter into agreements with
adjoining or contiguous municipalities and may designate in such agreements the creation of a
joint office of Code Enforcement for said municipalities having all of the powers and duties of the
Office of Code Enforcement herein provided.
Appointment of Code Enforcement Officer. There shall be appointed by the Council of the
Municipality, a Code Enforcement Officer who shall be in charge of the Office of Code
Enforcement of the Municipality. The Code Enforcement Officer shall supervise such other
employees or assistants as shall be necessary for the administration and execution of the
responsibilities of said office, as appointed and approved by the Council of the Municipality. Said
Code Enforcement Officer and other personnel including officials or persons designated to serve
on a Code Policy Board, may consist of employees directly hired and compensated by the
Municipality and/or employees designated pursuant to any agreements entered into with adjoining
municipalities in accordance with the agreements provided for under Subsection 1 above. Any
such Code Enforcement Officer and other personnel designated pursuant to such agreements
shall be deemed to have all of the duties and powers provided in this Part and in the Applicable
Codes and Ordinances of the Municipality and shall represent the Municipality to the same extent
as if appointed directly by the Municipality. However, no such agreement shall restrict the power of
the Municipality to discharge any employee at any time by a majority vote of the Council of the
Municipality.
Relief from Personal Liability. The Code Enforcement Officer or other official or employee shall
not, while acting for the Municipality, render himself liable personally because of any act or
omission as required or permitted in the discharge of his official duties. Any suit instituted against
such Code Enforcement Officer, official or employee, because of any act performed by him in the
lawful discharge of his duties, shall be defended by the Solicitor of the Municipality and in no case
will said officer, official or employee be liable for costs in any action, suit or proceeding.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 57/505
4.
1.
2.
3.
1.
Official Record. An official record shall be kept of all business and activities of the Office of Code
Enforcement and all such records shall be open to the public for inspection at all appropriate
times, except that no individual, owner, operator, occupant or other person shall be subject to
unwarranted invasion of privacy and except that all evidence or information obtained in the course
of any inspection shall be considered privileged information and shall be kept confidential. Such
evidence or information shall not be disclosed except as may be necessary in the judgment of the
Code Enforcement Officer for the proper and effective administration and enforcement of the
provisions of this Part and shall not otherwise be made public without the consent of the owner,
occupant, operator or other person in charge of the unit, structure or premises inspected.
§ 5-102. Duties and Powers of Code Enforcement Officer.
[Ord. 519, 12/1/1971, § 2; as amended by Ord. No. 533, 12/27/1972]
Enforcement by Code Enforcement Officer. The Code Enforcement Officer shall enforce and
administer all of the provisions of this Part and of those other Applicable Codes and Ordinances
which establish the office of Code Enforcement as their official administration and enforcement
agency.
Duties of Code Enforcement Officer. The duties of the Code Enforcement Officer shall include the
receipt of applications, the issuance of permits, notices, certificates and orders, the making of
inspections to determine conformance with Applicable Codes and Ordinances, the undertaking of
systematic inspection programs, the undertaking of research and investigations, the
recommendation of appropriate administrative rules for review and adoption by the Code Hearing
Board, the keeping of records, the issuance of written annual reports and such other activities as
may be required.
Right of Entry. In the discharge of his duties the Code Enforcement Officer or his authorized
representative, upon showing proper identification where requested, is hereby authorized to enter
and inspect, at any reasonable hour, any structure or premises in the Municipality to enforce the
provisions of this Part and of those other Applicable Codes and Ordinances.
The Code Enforcement Officer and the owner, operator, or occupant or other person in charge of
any structure or premises subject to the provisions of this Part may agree to an inspection at a
mutually convenient time.
The owner, operator, or occupant or other person in charge of any structure or premises shall give
the Code Enforcement Officer entry and free access thereto and to every part of the structure or to
the premises surrounding the structure.
If any owner, operator or occupant or other person in charge fails or refuses to permit entry and
free access to the structure or premises under his control, or any part thereof, with respect to any
authorized inspection, the Code Enforcement Officer may, upon a showing that probable cause
exists for the inspection may file a complaint and may petition for and obtain an order directing
compliance with the inspection requirements of this Part from a court of competent jurisdiction.
Any person who refuses to comply with such an order issued pursuant to this section shall be
subject to such penalties as may be authorized by law for violation of a court order.
§ 5-103. Permits, Certificates and Fees.
[Ord. 519, 12/1/1971, § 3; as amended by Ord. No. 548, 7/2/1975; and by Ord. 573, 3/12/1980]
Permit Required. An application for a permit shall be required in accordance with the provisions of
those other Applicable Codes and Ordinances which the office of Code Enforcement has the
responsibility to administer. Said application shall be submitted in such form as may be prescribed
by the Code Enforcement Officer and shall be accompanied by any required fee.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 58/505
2.
1)
2)
3)
4)
5)
6)
(a)
1)
(b)
1)
(c)
(d)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
A.
3.
Action on Application. The Code Enforcement Officer shall examine said application to determine
compliance with those other Applicable Codes and Ordinances of the Municipality and shall, within
15 days after filing, either approve or reject said application. If said application is rejected, the
Code Enforcement Officer shall inform the applicant in writing, stating the reasons for such
rejection.
Required Fees. Applicants for permits required by any of the following Applicable Codes and
Ordinances shall pay at the time of application, to the Code Enforcement Officer, for use by the
Municipality, fees according to the following schedule.
BOCA Basic Building Code. The fees required for permits under the BOCA Basic Building
Code shall be as follows:
New Construction and Alterations.
Residential.
Single Family dwellings (new) $5 for each 100 square feet or fraction thereof
(outside dimensions) including attached garages, and excluding areas of crawl
space, unfinished basements and attics.
Apartments: $50 per living unit.
Motels: $25 per unit and non-residential rate for nonliving spaces.
Town Houses & Condominiums: same as single-family dwellings.
Alterations: $10 minimum for first $1,000 of construction cost, $5 each additional
$1,000 or fraction thereof.
Detached garages, sheds, etc.: $10 for single garage, $15 for double garage.
Non-Residential.
New: $100 for first 1,000 square feet, $50 for each 1,000 square feet or fraction
for next 4,000 square feet $25 for each additional 1,000 square feet or fraction
thereof.
Alterations and Additions.
Ten dollars (minimum) for first $1,000 of construction cost, $5 for each additional
$1,000 of construction.
Detached garages, sheds, etc. Same as alterations or additions.
Swimming Pool. Over 24 inches of water capacity minimum $20 for first $1,000 of
construction cost, $5 for each additional $1,000 of cost.
Mobile Homes. Same as residential.
Temporary Trailers and Buildings. (on construction sites) $20 (limited to one year).
Moving of Building. A fee of $1 for each $100 of the estimated cost of moving any
structure, plus the cost of new foundations and all other necessary work required to affix
the structure to the site.
Demolition. A fee of $10 for each $1,000 of the cost of demolition. In addition, for any
structure to be demolished which has assessed valuation in excess of $500, the
applicant shall post a bond with the Code Enforcement Officer for a sum equal to no less
than four times the assessed valuation of the building to be demolished which bond shall
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 59/505
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
C.
D.
[1]
4.
A.
B.
1.
be for the faithful performance of the demolition in accordance with the Applicable Codes
and Ordinances.
National Electrical Code. A fee of $2 for the first $100 of job cost.
BOCA Basic Plumbing Code.
Air Conditioning: $5 for each ton capacity (one ton - 12,000 BTU)
Heating: $10 for each $1,000 of cost or fraction.
Fuel storage tanks (over 550 gallon capacity): $10 for each 1,000 gallon capacity.
Gasoline pumps: $10 for each pump.
Sprinkler system: $10 for first $1,000 cost; $5 for each $1,000 of cost.
All other plumbing: $0.75 for each $100 of cost with a minimum charge of $5.
BOCA Fire Prevention Code. A fee of $25 for the establishment and operation of any use or
activity provided in the BOCA Basic Fire Prevention Code where such uses require a permit.
All permits granted under any of the above Applicable Codes and Ordinances shall be good for a
period of one year, provided that extensions may be granted by the Code Enforcement Officer for
good reasons; except that any permit granted for demolition activities shall be valid for six months
only and if such demolition work is not completed within that time any bond posted by the applicant
shall be forfeited.
Certificates. The following certificates shall be required in accordance with the provisions of those
other Applicable Codes or Ordinances which the Office of Code Enforcement has the
responsibility to administer. Said certificates may be issued separately or combined in the form of
a single certificate.[1]
Editor's Note: Apparently information was omitted in typing of original Ord. No. 519 since
Subsections a through d dealt with violations and penalties rather than certificates, and the first
part of Section 4 was not present. A beginning for Section 4 (§ 5-104) has been added for the sake
of clarification.
§ 5-104. Violations and Penalties and Nuisances.
[Ord. 519, 12/1/1971, § 4; as amended by Ord. 548, 7/2/1975; and by Ord. 599, 12/19/1983]
Violations and Notices. The following procedures and guidelines are to be followed in cases of
alleged violations.
Serve notice in writing of the alleged violation which shall be signed by the Code Enforcement
Officer or his authorized representative. Said notice shall be served personally to the
responsible owner, occupant, operator or other person in charge; or served by registered mail
with a return receipt requested; or where such responsible person in charge cannot be found,
service may be made by posting a notice in or about the structure or premises or by
publishing such notice in a newspaper of general circulation for a period of three consecutive
days; or served by another method authorized under the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
Said notice shall include a statement of the reasons why the notice is being issued, the
sections of the Code and/or ordinances which have been violated, and the remedial actions
required.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 60/505
C.
D.
E.
2.
A.
B.
C.
3.
Said notice shall allow a reasonable time, not to exceed 100 days, for the initiation and
correction of the violation alleged or of the remedial actions required, except where
emergency conditions exist which require immediate corrective action.
Said notice shall contain a statement indicating that the notice will become an order if no
request and approval for an extension of time is made to the Code Enforcement Officer or if
no petition for an appeal or hearing is requested before the Code Hearing Board within 15
days from the receipt of said notice.
The Code Enforcement Officer may grant a request for a reasonable extension of time where
he has evidence to believe that the responsible person is attempting to remove the alleged
violation. However, no such extension of time may exceed a period of 130 days unless
authorized by the Code Hearing Board upon appeal of the responsible owner, operator,
occupant or other person in charge.
Penalties. Any person who fails to correct a violation or take a remedial action as ordered by the
Code Enforcement Officer or who violates a provision or fails to comply with any requirements of
this Part or of any of the other Applicable Codes and Ordinances shall be subject, for each
violation, to a fine of not more than $300 and costs of prosecution; or to imprisonment for not more
than 30 days. Each day's failure to comply with any such provision or requirement or any such
order shall constitute a separate offense.
The imposition of the penalties, herein prescribed shall not preclude the Solicitor representing the
municipality from initiating, and he is hereby ordered to initiate, appropriate actions or proceedings
at law, or in equity, to effect the purposes of this Part.
Dangerous and Unsafe Conditions and Structures and Dwellings Unfit for Human Habitation.
Structures which contain dwellings which are unfit for human habitation, or structures which are
dangerous or unsafe and structures which contain dangerous conditions or materials, as defined
by the Applicable Codes and Ordinances of the Municipality are hereby declared to be a public
nuisance.
General Procedure. The Code Enforcement Officer shall order the responsible owner,
operator, occupant or person in charge of the structure or premises which are dangerous,
unsafe or unfit for human habitation to vacate, repair and/or demolish said structure and to
remove the public nuisance as provided for in this Part and in the Applicable Codes and
Ordinances of the Municipality in accordance with the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
Failure to Comply. Whenever an order to vacate, repair and/or demolish a structure which is a
public nuisance because it is unsafe, dangerous or unfit for human habitation has not been
complied with, the Code Enforcement Officer may, in accordance with the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, proceed to cause the structure to be vacated, repaired
and/or demolished or take such other action as is necessary to abate the nuisance.
Abatement under this section shall not commence until at least 10 days after the service of
the order, except that the Code Enforcement Officer may determine that more immediate
action is required because of the special emergency or dangerous conditions which exist.
Recovery of Expenses. The expenses incurred pursuant to Subsection 3B above and of the
other Applicable Codes and Ordinances shall be paid by the responsible owner, operator or
occupant or by the persons who caused or maintained such a public nuisance. The Code
Enforcement Officer shall file on his records an affidavit stating with fairness and accuracy the
items and date of the expenses incurred. The Council of the Municipality may institute a suit
to recover such expenses to be charged against the property as a lien.
§ 5-105. Variances and Appeals.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 61/505
1.
A.
B.
C.
2.
3.
A.
B.
4.
5.
6.
[Ord. 519, 12/1/1971, § 5]
Code Hearing Board. There is hereby established a Code Hearing Board, appointed by the
Council of the Municipality consisting of not less than three members nor more than five members
who shall serve without compensation, but may be reimbursed for necessary and reasonable
expenses. Their terms of office shall be for three years, except for those first appointed, so fixed
that the term of office of at least one member shall expire each year. Appointments to fill
vacancies shall be only for the unexpired portion of the term.
Powers of the Code Hearing Board. The Code Hearing Board shall have the following powers and
duties:
Interpretation. On appeal from a determination of the Code Enforcement Officer or on request
of any Municipal Official, the Code Hearing Board shall decide any questions involving the
interpretation of any provision of this Part or of those other Applicable Codes and Ordinances.
Variances. The Code Hearing Board may grant a variance from the strict application of this
Part or of those other Applicable Codes. Such variances may be granted only in those cases
which would result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship and where the public health
and safety shall not be jeopardized.
Decide Appeals. The Code Hearing Board shall hear all appeals made to it and, depending
on its findings, shall decide whether such appeals shall be granted.
Requests for Appeals or Variances. Any person requesting a variance or aggrieved by a decision
of the Code Enforcement Officer or by any other employee or official charged with the
administration and enforcement of this Part and of those other Applicable Codes or Ordinances,
may take an appeal to the Code Hearing Board. All appeals shall be made in writing stating the
grounds upon which the appeal is based and shall be transmitted to the Office of Code
Enforcement. An appeal must be taken within 15 days of the action or of the receipt of written
notice of any decision or ruling which is being appealed.
Appeals and Variance Procedure.
Public Hearing. The Code Hearing Board shall meet and conduct a hearing within 30 days of
the receipt of an appeal or a request for a variance. All hearings shall be public and all
persons whose interest may be affected shall be given an opportunity to be heard. A record
shall be kept of all evidence and testimony presented at the hearing.
Decision of the Board. All decisions of the Board shall be in writing and a copy of each
decision shall be sent to the applicant and to the Code Enforcement Officer. The Code
Hearing Board shall also retain in its files a copy of each decision, which files shall be
available for inspection by the public. Each decision shall set forth fully the reasons for the
decision of the Code Hearing Board and the findings of fact on which the decision was based.
The Code Hearing Board shall make an order on its decision and the Code Enforcement
Officer shall take immediate action to carry out said order.
Appeals from the Decision of the Code Hearing Board. Any person or persons aggrieved by any
final order or decision of the Code Hearing Board may appeal such order or decision within 30
days, to the Court of Common Pleas in accordance with, as far as practicable, the Rules of Civil
Procedure of the Supreme Court regarding appeals from administrative agencies.
Reports by the Code Hearing Board. The Code Hearing Board shall report to the Council of the
Municipality periodically, at intervals of not later than 12 months. The report shall summarize all
applications and appeals made to it since the last report and shall contain a summary of the
Board's decision on each case. A copy of the report shall be filed with the Code Enforcement
Officer. The Code Hearing Board may also submit to the Council of the Municipality advisory
reports recommending changes and modifications in this Part or in those other Applicable Codes
or Ordinances.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 62/505
A.
B.
C.
1.
2.
3.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
A.
1.
§ 5-106. Regulation of Tradesmen.
[Ord. 519, 12/1/1971, § 6]
Qualifications of Tradesmen. No person, firm or corporation shall engage in the practice of
plumbing, building, electrical or other skilled trade activity within the municipality, unless excepted
by this Part, unless technically qualified to perform such activities in a competent manner. Such
technical qualification shall be demonstrated by the person, firm or corporation by the submittal of
the following information to the Code Enforcement Officer.
A statement describing the training course or courses satisfactorily completed.
A statement adequately describing the work experience of the person, firm or corporation.
A statement describing any plumbing, building, electrical or other licenses received from the
state, county or any other municipality.
Review of Qualifications. Such application shall be reviewed and, if deemed necessary,
investigated by the Code Enforcement Officer and a recommendation for the approval or
disapproval of said application shall be made to the Code Hearing Board. Said Board shall make
the final determination on the technical qualifications and competence of the applicant.
The above provision for the regulation of plumbers shall not apply to any person who applies for a
permit to do any work regulated by any of the applicable codes or ordinances in a single or two
family dwelling used exclusively for living purposes, including the usual accessory buildings and
quarters in connection with such dwelling, provided the person is the bona fide owner of such
dwelling and that the same will be occupied by said owner and that said owner shall personally
purchase all material and perform or supervise all labor in connection therewith.
Part 2. ADOPTION OF CODES
§ 5-201. Adoption by Reference.
[Ord. 584, 8/12/1981, § 1; as added by Ord. 586, 10/14/1981; as amended by Ord. 599, 12/19/1983;
by Ord. 643, 2/10/1988; § 1; by Ord. 711, 10/9/1991, § 1; by Ord. 750, 4/19/1995, § 1; and by Ord.
1004, 7/7/2015]
The following standard codes, as last amended or supplemented, are hereby adopted by
reference for the Borough of Stroudsburg:
The 2009 International Property Maintenance Code, with the following revisions:
Section 101.1. Insert: “Borough of Stroudsburg.”
Section 112.4. Insert: “$300 or more than $1,000.”
Section 302.4. Insert: “10 inches.”
Section 304.14. Insert: “April 15” and “October 15.”
Section 602.3. Insert: “October 1 to May 15.”
Section 602.4. Insert: “October 1 to May 15.”
§ 5-202. Copies on File.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 63/505
[1]
[1]
[1]
A.
B.
1.
[Ord. 584, 8/12/1981, § 2; as amended by Ord. 643, 2/10/1988; § 2]
Two copies of each of the standard codes referred to in § 5-201 have been placed on file in the
Stroudsburg Municipal Building, Pennsylvania.
§ 5-203. (Reserved)
Editor's Note: Former § 5-203, Modifications, as amended, was repealed 7/7/2015 by Ord. 1004.
§ 5-204. Administration, Enforcement and Fees.
[Ord. 584, 8/12/1981, § 4]
The standard codes referred to in § 5-201 above shall be administered by the Office of Code
Enforcement as provided in Ordinance No. 519 as amended [Part 1 this chapter]. Violations of any of
the provisions of said standard codes or of orders of the Code Enforcement Officer entered pursuant
thereto shall be subject to the penalties provided in Ordinance No. 519, as amended.
§ 5-205. (Reserved)
Editor's Note: Former § 5-203, Electrical Installations, was repealed 7/7/2015 by Ord. 1004.
Part 3. (RESERVED)
Editor's Note: Former Part 3, Floodplain Construction, adopted 3/9/1977 by Ord. 560, was superseded
3/6/2013 by Ord. 966. For current provisions, see Ch. 8.
§ 5-301. (Reserved)
Part 4. REGULATED RENTAL UNIT OCCUPANCY
§ 5-401. General.
[Ord. No. 822, 9/5/2002; as amended by Ord. 1037, 9/5/2017]
Purpose/Scope/Declaration of Policy and Findings. It is the purpose of this Part and the policy of
the Council of the Borough of Stroudsburg, in order to protect and promote the public health,
safety and welfare of its citizens, to establish rights and obligations of owners and occupants
relating to the rental of dwelling units in the Borough of Stroudsburg and to encourage owners and
occupants to maintain and improve the quality of rental housing within the community. It is also the
policy of the Borough that owners, managers and occupants share responsibilities to obey the
various codes adopted to protect and promote public health, safety and welfare. As means to
those ends, this Part provides standards for its enforcement and penalties for violations. This Part
shall be liberally construed and applied to promote its purposes and policies. In considering the
adoption of this Part, the Borough of Stroudsburg makes the following findings:
There is a greater incidence of violations of various codes of the Borough at residential
properties where owners do not reside in the Borough and rent such property than at owneroccupied
residential properties.
There is a greater incidence of problems with the maintenance and upkeep of residential
properties where owners do not reside in the Borough and rent such property than at owner8/
17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 64/505
C.
2.
occupied residential properties.
There is a greater incidence of disturbances which adversely affect the peace and quiet of the
neighborhood at residential properties where owners rent than at owner-occupied residential
properties.
Definitions. As used in this Part, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
BOROUGH
The Borough of Stroudsburg, Monroe County, Pennsylvania.
CODE
Any code or ordinance adopted, enacted and/or in effect in the Borough of Stroudsburg
concerning fitness for habitation or construction, maintenance, operation, occupancy, use or
appearance of any premises or dwelling unit. Included within, but not limited by, this definition
are the following which are in effect as of the date of enactment of this Part: BOCA Basic
Building Code; BOCA Basic Plumbing Code; BOCA Basic Property Maintenance Code;
BOCA Basic Fire Prevention Code; National Electrical Code; the Code of Ordinances of the
Borough of Stroudsburg; and any duly enacted amendment or supplement to any of the
above and any new enactment falling within this definition.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER
The duly appointed Code Enforcement Officer(s) having charge of the Office of Code
Enforcement of the Borough of Stroudsburg, and any assistants or deputies thereof.
COMMON AREA
In multiple-unit dwellings, space which is not part of a regulated rental unit and which is
shared with other occupants of the dwelling, whether they reside in regulated dwelling units or
not. Common areas shall be considered as part of the premises for purposes of this Part.
DISRUPTIVE CONDUCT
Any form of conduct, action, incident or behavior perpetrated, caused or permitted by any
occupant or visitor of a regulated dwelling unit that is so loud, untimely (as to hour of the day),
offensive, riotous or that otherwise disturbs other persons of reasonable sensibility in their
peaceful enjoyment of their premises such that a report is made to police and/or to the Code
Enforcement Officer complaining of such conduct, action, incident or behavior. It is not
necessary that such conduct, action, incident or behavior constitute a criminal offense nor that
criminal charges be filed against any person in order for a person to have perpetrated, caused
or permitted the commission of disruptive conduct, as defined herein; provided, however, that
no disruptive conduct shall be deemed to have occurred unless the Code Enforcement Officer
or police shall investigate and make a determination that such did occur and keep written
records, including a disruptive conduct report, of such occurrence.
DISRUPTIVE CONDUCT REPORT
A written report of disruptive conduct on a form to be prescribed therefor, to be completed by
the Code Enforcement Officer or police, as the case may be, who actually investigates an
alleged incident of disruptive conduct and which shall be maintained by the Code
Enforcement Officer.
DWELLING
A building having one or more dwelling units.
DWELLING UNIT
A room or group of rooms within a dwelling and forming a single unit and used for living and
sleeping purposes, having its own cooking facilities, and a bathroom with a toilet and a
bathtub or shower.
GUEST
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 65/505
A person on the premises with the actual or implied consent of an occupant.
LANDLORD
One or more persons, jointly or severally, in whom is/are vested all or part of the legal title to
the premises, or all or part of the beneficial ownership and a right to present use and
enjoyment of the premises, including a mortgage holder in possession of a regulated rental
unit (same as "owner").
MANAGER
An adult individual designated by the owner of a regulated rental unit under § 5-402,
Subsection 2. The manager shall be the agent or the owner for service of process and
receiving notices or demands and to perform the obligations of the owner under this Part and
under rental agreements with occupants.
MULTIPLE-UNIT DWELLING
A building containing two or more independent dwelling units, including, but not limited to,
double houses, row houses, townhouses, condominiums, apartment houses and conversion
apartments.
OCCUPANT
An individual who resides in a regulated rental unit, whether or not he or she is the owner
thereof or a person with whom a legal relationship with the owner/landlord is established by a
written or oral lease or by the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
OWNER
One or more persons, jointly or severally, in whom is/are vested all or part of the legal title to
the premises, or all or part of the beneficial ownership and a right to present use and
enjoyment of the premises, including a mortgage holder in possession of a regulated rental
unit.
OWNER-OCCUPIED DWELLING UNIT
A dwelling unit in which the owner resides on a regular, permanent basis, provided not more
than two unrelated individuals, in addition to the immediate members of the owner's family,
occupy the dwelling unit at any given time.
PERSON
A natural, partnership, corporation, unincorporated association, limited partnership, trust or
any other entity.
POLICE
The Police Department of the Borough of Stroudsburg, any regional police department or any
properly authorized member or officer thereof or of any other law enforcement agency having
jurisdiction within the Borough of Stroudsburg.
PREMISES
Any parcel of real property in the Borough, including the land and all buildings and
appurtenant structures or appurtenant elements, on which one or more regulated rental units
is located.
REGULATED RENTAL UNIT
A dwelling unit occupied by one or more persons.
RENTAL AGREEMENT
A written agreement between an owner/landlord and an occupant/tenant supplemented by the
addendum required under § 5-402, Subsection 5, of this Part, embodying the terms and
conditions concerning the use and occupancy of a specified regulated rental unit or premises.
TENANT
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 66/505
A.
B.
C.
D.
1.
2.
(1)
A.
3.
An individual who resides in a regulated rental unit, whether or not he or she is the owner
thereof or a person with whom a legal relationship with the owner/landlord is established by a
written or oral lease or by the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania (same as
"occupant").
§ 5-402. Owner's Duties.
[Ord. No. 822, 9/5/2002; as amended by Ord. 1037, 9/5/2017]
General.
It shall be the duty of every owner to keep and maintain all regulated rental units in
compliance with all applicable codes and provisions of all other applicable state laws and
regulations and local ordinances and to keep such property in good and safe condition.
As provided for in this Part, every owner shall be responsible for regulating the proper and
lawful use and maintenance of every dwelling which he, she or it owns. As provided for in this
Part, every owner shall also be responsible for regulating the conduct and activities of the
occupants of every regulated rental unit which he, she or it owns in the Borough, which
conduct or activity takes place at such regulated rental unit or its premises.
In order to achieve those ends, every owner of a regulated rental unit shall regulate the
conduct and activity of the occupants thereof, both contractually and through enforcement, as
more fully set forth below. This subsection shall not be construed as diminishing or relieving,
in any way, the responsibility of occupants or their guests for their conduct or activity; nor shall
it be construed as an assignment, transfer or projection over or onto any owner of any
responsibility or liability which occupants or their guests may have as a result of their conduct
or activity under any private cause of action, civil or criminal enforcement proceeding or
criminal law; nor shall this subsection be construed so as to require an owner to indemnify or
defend occupants or their guests when any such action or proceeding is brought against the
occupant based upon the occupant's conduct or activity. Nothing herein is intended to impose
any additional civil/criminal liability upon owners other than that which is imposed by existing
law.
This Part is not intended to, nor shall its effect be to, limit any enforcement remedies which
may be available to the Borough against an owner, an occupant or a guest.
Designation of Manager. Every owner who is not a full-time resident of the Borough of
Stroudsburg, or of Monroe County, shall designate a manager who shall reside within the county.
If the owner is a corporation, a manager shall be required if an officer of the corporation does not
reside within the county. If a corporate officer does reside within the aforesaid area, the officer
shall perform the same function as a manager. If the owner is a partnership, a manager shall be
required if a partner does not reside within the county. Said partner shall perform the same
function as a manager. The manager shall be the agent of the owner for service of process and
receiving notices and demands, as well as for performing the obligations of the owner under this
Part and under rental agreements with occupants. The identity, address and telephone number(s)
of the person who is designated as manager or the officer or partner who performs the function of
manager hereunder shall be provided by the owner or manager to the Borough, and such
information shall be kept current and updated as it changes.
Disclosure.
The owner or manager shall disclose to the occupant, in writing, on or before the
commencement of the tenancy:
The name, address and telephone number of the manager, if applicable.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 67/505
(2)
B.
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
C.
4.
[1]
A.
B.
C.
D.
5.
6.
The name, address and telephone number of the owner of the premises.
Before an occupant initially enters into or renews a rental agreement for a regulated rental
unit, the owner or manager shall furnish the occupant with the most-recent inspection report
relating to the property.
Maintenance of Premises.
The owner shall maintain the premises in compliance with the applicable codes of the
Borough and shall regularly perform all routine maintenance, including lawn mowing and ice
and snow removal, and shall promptly make any and all repairs necessary to fulfill this
obligation.
The owner and occupant may agree that the occupant is to perform specified repairs,
maintenance tasks, alterations or remodeling. In such case, however, such agreement
between the owner and occupant must be in writing. Such an agreement may be entered into
between the owner and occupant only if:
The agreement of the parties is entered into in good faith and not for the purpose of
evading the obligations of the owner or occupant.
The agreement does not diminish or affect the obligation of the owner to other occupants
in the premises.
In no case shall the existence of any agreement between owner and occupant relieve an
owner of any responsibility under this Part or other ordinances or codes for maintenance of
premises.
Written Rental Agreement.
All rental agreements for regulated dwelling units shall be in writing and shall be
supplemented with the addendum attached hereto as Appendix A.[1] No oral leases and no
oral modifications thereof are permitted. All disclosures and information required to be given
to occupants by the owner shall be furnished before the signing of the rental agreement. The
owner shall provide the occupant with copies of the rental agreement and addendum upon
execution.
Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
Terms and Conditions. The owner and the occupant may include in a rental agreement terms
and conditions not prohibited by this Part or other applicable ordinances, regulations and
laws, including rent, term of the agreement and other provisions governing the rights and
obligations of the parties.
Prohibited Provisions. Except as otherwise provided by this Part, no rental agreement may
provide that the occupant or owner agrees to waive or to forego rights or remedies under this
Part. A provision prohibited by this subsection included in a rental agreement is
unenforceable.
Attachment of Part to Rental Agreement. Following the effective date of this Part, a summary
of this Part shall be attached to each rental agreement delivered by or on behalf of an owner
when any such agreement is presented for signing to any occupant. If a summary has been
provided when the rental agreement was first executed, a summary does not have to be
provided upon renewal. Where a rental agreement has been entered into prior to the effective
date of this Part, the owner shall provide the occupants with a copy of the summary within 60
days of the enactment of this Part.
Complaints. The owner shall reply promptly to reasonable complaints and inquiries from
occupants. If the owner does not respond, the tenant may file a complaint with the Code
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 68/505
[2]
7.
8.
A.
B.
C.
D.
9.
10.
11.
12.
Enforcement Officer.
Landlord and Tenant Act. The owner shall comply with all provisions of the Landlord and Tenant
Act of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.[2]
Editor's Note: See 68 P.S. § 250.101 et seq.
Common Areas. Where an owner does not regulate the use of common areas and the behavior of
occupants and guests in the common areas, the owner shall be directly responsible for the
behavior of occupants and guests in the common area as if the owner were an occupant.
Enforcement.
Within 48 hours after receipt of written notice from the Code Enforcement Officer that an
occupant or regulated rental unit has violated a provision of this Part, the owner shall take
immediate steps to remedy the violation and take steps to assure that there is not a
reoccurrence of the violation.
Within five days after receipt of a notice of violation, the owner shall file with the Code
Enforcement Officer a report, on a form provided by the Borough, setting forth what action the
owner has taken to remedy the violation and what steps he or she has taken to prevent a
reoccurrence of the violation. The report shall also set forth a plan as to steps the owner will
take in the future if the violation reoccurs.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall review the report and, if adequate steps have been taken
and the plan and time for compliance is adequate to address future violations, shall approve
the plan. The owner shall, on his or her initiative, enforce the plan, and failure to do so shall
be a violation of this Part.
In the event that a second violation occurs within a twelve-month period involving the same
occupant or occupants, the Code Enforcement Officer may direct the owner to retake
possession from the occupant(s) who violated this Part and not to permit the said occupants
to occupy the premises during the twelve-month period following the said occupant's(s')
surrender or possession.
Code Violations. Upon receiving notice of any code violations from the Code Enforcement Officer,
the owner shall take action as prescribed in the notice, or cause the necessary action to be taken,
to abate the offending condition and eliminate the violation.
Borough Can Make Repairs. In case the owner of premises shall neglect, fail or refuse to comply
with any notice from the Borough or its Code Enforcement Officer to correct a violation relating to
maintenance and repair of the premises under any code within the period of time stated in such
notice, the Borough may, in accordance with procedures set forth in applicable laws, codes and/or
ordinances, cause the violation to be corrected. There shall be imposed upon the owner a charge
of the actual costs involved plus 10% of said costs for each time the Borough shall cause a
violation to be corrected, and the owner of the premises shall be billed after same has been
completed. Any such bill which remains unpaid and outstanding after the time specified therein for
payment shall be grounds for the imposition of a municipal lien upon the premises as provided by
law. Such a lien may be reduced to judgment and enforced and collected as provided by law,
together with interest at the legal rate, attorneys' fees permitted, the Borough's cost of
enforcement and court costs. The remedies provided by this Subsection 11 are not exclusive, and
the Borough and its Code Enforcement Officer may invoke such other remedies under this Part or
other applicable codes, ordinances or statutes, including, where appropriate, condemnation
proceedings or declaration of premises as unfit for habitation.
The owner shall permit inspections of any premises by the Code Enforcement Officer at
reasonable times upon reasonable notice.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 69/505
1.
A.
B.
2.
3.
4.
5.
A.
B.
6.
7.
8.
§ 5-403. Occupant Duties.
[Ord. No. 822, 9/5/2002; as amended by Ord. 1037, 9/5/2017]
General. The occupant shall comply with all obligations imposed upon occupants by this Part, all
applicable codes and ordinances of the Borough and all applicable provisions of state law.
Health and Safety Regulations.
The maximum number of persons, including occupants and guests, permitted in any
regulated rental unit at any time shall not exceed one person for each 40 square feet of
habitable floor space in said regulated rental unit. The maximum number of such persons
permitted in the common areas of any multiple-unit dwelling at any time shall not exceed one
person for each 15 square feet of common area on the premises.
The occupant shall dispose from his or her regulated rental unit of all rubbish, garbage and
other waste in a clean and safe manner, and separate and place for collection all recyclable
materials, in compliance with applicable laws, codes and ordinances.
Peaceful Enjoyment. The occupant shall conduct himself or herself and require other persons,
including, but not limited to, guests on the premises and within his or her regulated rental unit with
his or her consent, to conduct themselves in a manner that will not disturb the peaceful enjoyment
of the premises by others and that will not disturb the peaceful enjoyment of adjacent or nearby
dwellings by the persons occupying same.
Residential Use. The occupant shall, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law or ordinance,
occupy or use his or her regulated rental unit for no other purpose than as a residence.
Illegal Activities. The occupant shall not engage in, nor tolerate nor permit others on the premises
to engage in, any conduct declared illegal under the Pennsylvania Crimes Code (18 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 101 et seq.) or Liquor Code (47 P.S. § 1-101 et seq.), or the Controlled Substance, Drug and
Cosmetic Act (35 P.S. § 780-101 et seq.).
Disruptive Conduct.
The occupant shall not engage in, nor tolerate nor permit others on the premises to engage
in, disruptive conduct or other violations of this Part.
When police or the Code Enforcement Officer investigates an alleged incident of disruptive
conduct, he or she shall complete a disruptive conduct report upon a finding that the reported
incident did, in his or her judgment, constitute disruptive conduct as defined herein. The
information filled in on said report shall include, if possible, the identity or identities of the
alleged perpetrator(s) of the disruptive conduct and all other obtainable information, including
the factual basis for the disruptive conduct requested on the prescribed form. Where the
police make such investigation, the police shall then submit the completed disruptive conduct
report to the Code Enforcement Officer within five days of the investigation. In all cases, the
Code Enforcement Officer shall mail a copy of the disruptive conduct report to the owner or
manager within three working days of the occurrence of the alleged disruptive conduct, within
five days whether the person making the investigation on behalf of the Borough is the Code
Enforcement Officer or the police.
Compliance with Rental Agreement. The occupant shall comply with all lawful provisions of the
rental agreement entered into between owner and occupant. Failure to comply may result in the
eviction of the occupant by the owner as per the rental agreement.
Damage to Premises. The occupant shall not intentionally cause, nor permit nor tolerate others to
cause, damage to the premises. Conduct which results in damages in excess of $500 shall be
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 70/505
9.
A.
B.
C.
D.
1.
2.
A.
B.
C.
3.
4.
A.
B.
5.
considered a violation of this Part.
Presentation of Premises. The occupant shall permit inspections by the Code Enforcement Officer
of the premises at reasonable times, upon reasonable notice.
§ 5-404. Applicability and Inspections.
[Ord. No. 822, 9/5/2002; as amended by Ord. 1037, 9/5/2017]
Applicability. This Part does not apply to the following categories of rental properties:
Owner-occupied dwelling units, provided that not more than two unrelated individuals, in
addition to the immediate members of the owner's family, occupy the dwelling unit at any
given time.
Hotels, motels or bed-and-breakfasts (if permitted by applicable ordinances).
Hospitals and nursing homes.
Multiple-unit dwellings, except for regulated rental units within the structure. The foregoing
notwithstanding, all other provisions of this Part shall apply to the common areas of the
structure.
List of Occupants. The owner shall maintain a current list of occupants in each regulated dwelling
unit, which shall include their names, permanent addresses and permanent telephone numbers.
The owner shall furnish the list to the Borough upon request and shall notify the Borough of any
changes in the identity and number of occupants within 15 days of said changes.
Inspection.
All premises shall be subject to periodic inspection by the Code Enforcement Officer or
another duly authorized agent of the Borough.
The Code Enforcement Officer is hereby designated as the official authorized to enforce this
Part and to take appropriate measures to abate violations hereof, for and on behalf of the
Borough of Stroudsburg.
This subsection shall not be construed so as to limit or restrict the Code Enforcement Officer's
authority to conduct inspections of premises, whether or not subject to the inspection
requirements of this Part, pursuant to any other ordinance or Code.
Search Warrant. Upon a showing of probable cause that a violation of this Part or any other
ordinance of the Borough of Stroudsburg has occurred, the Code Enforcement Officer may apply
to the District Justice having jurisdiction in the Borough of Stroudsburg for a search warrant to
enter and inspect the premises.
Definition of Options.
Formal Warning: formal written notification of at least one violation of this Part. Upon
satisfactory compliance with this Part and any conditions imposed by the Code Enforcement
Officer and/or the Borough Council, the formal warning shall be removed when the owner
applies for license renewal at a time set by the Code Enforcement Officer or by the Borough
Council.
Nonrenewal: the denial of the privilege to apply for license renewal after expiration of the
license term. The Borough will permit the owner to maintain occupants in the premises until
the end of the license term but will not accept applications for renewal of the license until a
time set by the Code Enforcement Officer or by the Borough Council.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 71/505
C.
D.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
6.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
7.
Suspension: the immediate loss of the privilege to rent regulated rental units for a period of
time set by the Code Enforcement Officer or Borough Council. The owner, after the expiration
of the suspension period, may apply for license renewal without the need to show cause why
the owner's privilege to apply for a license should be reinstated. Upon suspension, the owner
shall take immediate steps to evict the occupants.
Revocation: the immediate loss of the privilege to rent regulated rental units for a period of
time set by the Code Enforcement Officer or the Borough Council and the loss of the privilege
to apply for renewal of the license at the expiration of the time period. Upon the loss of the
privilege to rent, the owner shall take immediate steps to evict the occupants.
Criteria for Applying Discipline. The Code Enforcement Officer, when recommending discipline,
and the Borough Council, when applying discipline, shall consider the following:
The effect of the violation on the health, safety and welfare of the occupants of the regulated
rental unit and other residents at the premises.
The effect of the violation on the neighborhood.
Whether the owner has prior violations of this Part and other ordinances of the Borough or
has received notices of violations as provided for in this Part and other ordinances of the
Borough.
Whether the owner has been subject to disciplinary proceedings under this Part.
The effect of disciplinary action on the occupants.
The action taken by the owner to remedy the violation and to prevent future violations,
including any written plan submitted by the owner.
The policies and lease language employed by the owner to manage the regulated dwelling
unit to enable the owner to comply with the provisions of this Part.
In addition to applying discipline as set forth above, the Code Enforcement Officer may
recommend, and Borough Council may impose upon the existing or subsequent licenses,
reasonable conditions related to fulfilling the purposes of this Part.
Grounds for Imposing Discipline. Any of the following may subject an owner to discipline as
provided for in this section:
Failure to abate a violation of Borough codes and ordinances that apply to the premises within
the time directed by the Code Enforcement Officer.
Refusal to permit the inspection of the premises by the Code Enforcement Officer as required
by Subsection 3 of this section.
Failure to take steps to remedy and prevent violations of this Part by occupants of regulated
rental units as required by § 5-402, Subsection 9, of this Part.
Failure to file and implement an approved plan to remedy and prevent violations of this Part
by occupants of a regulated rental unit as required by § 5-402, Subsection 9, of this Part.
Failure to evict occupants after having been directed to do so by the Code Enforcement
Officer of the Borough as provided for in § 5-402, Subsection 9, of this Part.
Three violations of this Part or other ordinances of the Borough that apply to the premises
within a lease term. For purposes of this Part, there need be no criminal conviction before a
violation can be found to exist. Before a prior violation can be considered under this
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 72/505
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
A.
8.
subsection, the owner must have received notice, in writing, of this violation within 30 days
after the Code Enforcement Officer received notice of the violation.
Procedure for Nonrenewal, Suspension or Revocation of License.
Notification. Following a determination that grounds for nonrenewal, suspension or revocation
of a license exist, the Code Enforcement Officer shall notify the owner of the action to be
taken and the reason therefor. Such notification shall be in writing, addressed to the owner in
question, and shall contain the following information:
The address of the premises in question and identification of the particular regulated
rental unit(s) affected.
A description of the violation which has been found to exist.
A statement that the license for said regulated rental unit(s) shall be either suspended or
revoked, or will not be renewed for one year from the date of suspension, or that the
owner will receive a formal warning. In the case of a suspension or revocation, the notice
shall state the date upon which such suspension or revocation will commence, and in the
case of a suspension shall also state the duration of said suspension.
A statement that, due to the nonrenewal, suspension or revocation (as the case may be),
the owner or any person acting on his, her or its behalf is prohibited from renting, letting
or permitting occupancy of the dwelling unit(s) by the individual/individuals subject to said
enforcement action, from and during the period said action is in effect.
A statement informing the owner that he, she or it has a right to appeal the decision
suspending, revoking or declining to renew the license to the Borough Council, by
submitting, in writing, to the Borough Secretary/Administrator, within 30 days from the
date printed on the notice, a detailed statement of the appeal, including the grounds
therefor and the reason(s) alleged as to why the determination of the Code Enforcement
Officer is incorrect or should be overturned and a statement of the relief requested by the
appellant. Such notice of appeal may be required to be submitted on a form to be
prescribed therefor by the Borough Council, to be signed by the appellant. There is
hereby imposed a fee for filing of such appeals, the amount of which shall be determined
and established, from time to time, by resolution of the Borough Council.
Upon receipt of such an appeal in proper form, accompanied with the requisite filing fee,
the Borough Secretary/Administrator shall schedule a hearing to be held at the time and
date of the next regularly scheduled Borough Council meeting not less than 10 days from
the date on which the appeal is filed.
The appellant, the Code Enforcement Officer and the owners of properties within a radius
of 300 feet from the premises for which the license is at issued shall receive written
notice of the hearing on the appeal and any continuation of said hearing.
The Borough Council shall hold a hearing on the appeal which shall be conducted in
accordance with the Local Agency Law, 2 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 551-555. The appellant and all
other parties having an interest may be heard. Based on the facts and arguments of the
appellant and of the Code Enforcement Officer and any police or other public officials
involved, and any relevant factual presentations of other parties, the Borough Council
shall make a decision either affirming, reversing or modifying the action of the Code
Enforcement Officer from whom the appeal was taken. Such decision shall be rendered
at a public meeting either immediately following the hearing or within 30 days thereafter.
The decision shall be reduced to writing, stating clearly the factual and legal basis for the
decision, within 45 days after the hearing. If the Borough Council deems it necessary or
desirable, it may continue the hearing to a subsequent time and date not later than 30
days from the initial hearing, which time and date shall be openly announced at the initial
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 73/505
(1)
(2)
B.
1.
2.
3.
A.
B.
C.
1.
hearing, and in such case, the time limits for rendering the decision and reducing it to
writing set forth herein shall be calculated from the last hearing date (at which the
substance of the decision is orally announced).
Delivery of Notification.
All notices shall be sent to the owner and manager, if applicable, by certified mail. In the
event that the notice is returned by the postal authorities marked "unclaimed" or
"refused," then the Code Enforcement Officer shall attempt delivery by personal service
on the owner or manager, if applicable. The Code Enforcement Officer shall also post the
notice at a conspicuous place on the premises.
If personal service cannot be accomplished after a reasonable attempt to do so, then the
notice may be sent to the owner or manager at the address stated on the most-current
license application for the premises in question, by regular first-class mail, postage
prepaid. If such notice is not returned by the postal authorities within five days of its
deposit in the United States mail, then it shall be deemed to have been delivered to and
received by the addressee on the fifth day following its deposit in the United States mail,
and all time periods set forth under Subsection 8A above shall thereupon be calculated
from said fifth day.
§ 5-405. Penalties and Other Remedies.
[Ord. No. 822, 9/5/2002; as amended by Ord. 1037, 9/5/2017]
Penalties. Any violation of this Part by an owner or occupant shall constitute a summary offense
punishable, upon conviction thereof by a District Justice, by a fine not to exceed $600 plus costs
of prosecution or, in default of payment of such fine and costs, by a term of imprisonment not to
exceed 30 days. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
Nonexclusive Remedies. The remedies provided for in this Part are cumulative and nonexclusive
of each other and of any other remedy available to the Borough in law or equity or under any other
code or ordinance.
The remedies and procedures provided in this Part for violation hereof are not intended to
supplant or replace, to any degree, the remedies and procedures available to the Borough in the
case of a violation of any other code or ordinance of the Borough, whether or not such other code
or ordinance is referenced in this Part and whether or not an ongoing violation of such other code
or ordinance is cited as the underlying grounds for a finding of a violation of this Part.
§ 5-406. Miscellaneous Provisions.
[Ord. No. 822, 9/5/2002; as amended by Ord. 1037, 9/5/2017]
Notices.
For purposes of this Part, any notice required hereunder to be given to a manager shall be
deemed as notice given to the owner.
There shall be a rebuttable presumption that any notice required to be given to the owner
under this Part shall have been received by such owner if the notice was given to the owner in
the manner provided by this Part.
Notices to be given the Code Enforcement Officer shall be given in writing and delivered to
said Code Enforcement Officer at the Borough Municipal Building, 700 Sarah Street,
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 74/505
2.
3.
A.
B.
C.
1.
Stroudsburg, Pennsylvania 18360. Information to be supplied to the Borough hereunder shall
also be directed to the Code Enforcement Officer at that address.
Changes in Ownership or Occupancy. It shall be the duty of each owner of a regulated rental unit
to notify the Code Enforcement Officer, in writing, of any change in ownership of the premises or
of the number of regulated rental units on the premises. It shall also be the duty of the owner to
notify the Code Enforcement Officer, in writing, of any increase in the number of occupants in any
regulated rental unit, or of the changing of a dwelling unit from owner-occupied to non-owneroccupied,
which thereby transforms the dwelling into a regulated rental unit for purposes of this
Part.
Owners Severally Responsible. If any regulated rental unit is owned by more than one person, in
any form of joint tenancy, as a partnership, or otherwise, each person shall be jointly and severally
responsible for the duties imposed under the terms of this Part and shall be severally subject to
prosecution for the violation of this Part.
Part 5. UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE; PROPERTIES
AND STOREFRONTS, VACANT AND ABANDONED
A.. Uniform Construction Code.
§ 5-501. General Provisions.
[Ord. 1009, 10/20/2015]
The Borough of Stroudsburg hereby elects to administer and enforce the provisions of the
Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, Act 45 of 1999, 35 P.S. § 7210.101 et seq., as amended from
time to time, and its regulations.
§ 5-502. Adoption of Code.
[Ord. 1009, 10/20/2015]
The Uniform Construction Code, contained in 34 Pa. Code, Chapters 401-405, as amended from time
to time, is hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference as the municipal building code of the
Borough of Stroudsburg.
§ 5-503. Administration and Enforcement.
[Ord. 1009, 10/20/2015]
Administration and enforcement of the code within the Borough of Stroudsburg shall be
undertaken in any of the following ways as determined by the governing body of this municipality
from time to time by resolution:
By the designation of the Code Enforcement Official of the Borough of Stroudsburg to serve
as the municipal code official to act on behalf of the municipality;
By the retention of one or more construction code officials or third-party agencies to act on
behalf of the municipality;
By agreement with one or more other municipalities for the joint administration and
enforcement of this Act through an intermunicipal agreement;
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 75/505
D.
E.
2.
1.
2.
By entering into a contract with another municipality for the administration and enforcement of
this Act on behalf of the municipality;
By entering into an agreement with the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry for
plan review, inspections, and enforcement of structures other than one-family or two-family
dwelling units and utility and miscellaneous use structures.
Any person or business entity or third-party entity retained to act as a construction code official
shall be duly appointed as a municipal official for the purpose of codes enforcement in the
Borough of Stroudsburg. Should the person, business entity or third-party agency utilize the
services of their/its own counsel to prosecute code enforcement actions, then said counsel shall
be specially appointed by the Borough Council to prosecute on behalf of the Borough.
§ 5-504. Documents, Fees and Records.
[Ord. 1009, 10/20/2015]
All documents submitted to or developed by the construction code official as part of the official duties
of the construction code official shall be kept at the Borough in accordance with the provisions of the
code. All fees, charges, and assessments charged by the construction code officials pursuant to the
Borough Fee Schedule shall be made payable to the Borough of Stroudsburg. All financial records
regarding the inspection and enforcement of the code in the Borough shall be made available to the
Borough Council, or subcommittees thereof, and/or the Borough auditors in a reasonable period upon
demand.
§ 5-505. Permits and Certificates of Occupancy.
[Ord. 1009, 10/20/2015]
The duly appointed construction code official and Borough of Stroudsburg Codes Officer shall
coordinate the issuance of any permits or certificates of occupancy, where relevant, to ensure that the
permit holder is in compliance with both the Uniform Construction Code and the Borough Code of
Ordinances, as set forth therein.
§ 5-506. Appeals.
[Ord. 1009, 10/20/2015]
A Board of Appeals shall be established by ordinance or resolution of the governing body of the
Borough of Stroudsburg in conformity with the requirements of the relevant provisions of the code,
as amended from time to time, and for the purposes set forth therein. If at any time enforcement
and administration is undertaken jointly with one or more other participating municipalities, said
Board of Appeals shall be established by joint action of the participating municipalities as required
by law.
The construction code official shall coordinate all appeals from the construction code official's
decisions with the Appeals Board, its solicitor or its designee to ensure the collection of
appropriate fees charged for appeals as well as to ensure that the time frames and procedures set
forth in the Municipalities Planning Code, the Borough Code, the Uniform Construction Code, the
Borough of Stroudsburg Code of Ordinances, and/or the Appeals Board rules and regulations
governing appeals from the decisions of the construction code official are followed.
§ 5-507. Effect on Existing Provisions.
[Ord. 1009, 10/20/2015]
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 76/505
1.
2.
3.
A.
B.
1.
2.
Chapter 12, Sections 12.9 through 12.14, as adopted on 12-17-2002, is hereby rescinded.
All building code ordinances, including portions of said ordinances, including Chapter 44, which
conflict with the provisions of the code or this Part 5 are hereby rescinded only to the extent that
the ordinance or portions thereof conflict with the code or this Part 5. All references in Chapter 44
to municipalities other than Borough of Stroudsburg shall be stricken and replaced with Borough of
Stroudsburg.
All relevant ordinances, regulations, and policies of the Borough of Stroudsburg not governed by
the code shall remain in full force and effect.
§ 5-508. Fees.
[Ord. 1009, 10/20/2015]
Fees assessed by the Borough of Stroudsburg for the administration and enforcement undertaken
pursuant to this Part and the code shall be established by the governing body by ordinance from time
to time.
B.. Properties and Storefronts, Vacant and Abandoned.
§ 5-509. Definitions.
[Ord. No. 1063, 1/2/2019]
As used in this subpart, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
OWNER
Includes the title holder, any agent of the title holder having authority to act with respect to a
vacant property, and any foreclosing entity, or any other entity determined by the Borough of
Stroudsburg to have authority to act with respect to the property.
PROPERTY
Any portion of improved or unimproved real estate located within the Borough of Stroudsburg
which includes the buildings or structures, or portions thereof located on it regardless of condition.
VACANT PROPERTY
Any building or structure which is not at present legally occupied or at which all lawful
business or construction operations or residential or other occupancy have ceased for a
period of six months, including, but not limited to, any property meeting any of the definitions
of "vacant property" below:
The property is in need of rehabilitation according to the adopted version of the
International Property Maintenance Code as determined by the Code Enforcement
Official, and no rehabilitation has taken place during that six-month period; or
Construction was initiated on the property and was discontinued prior to completion,
leaving the building unsuitable for occupancy, and no construction has taken place for at
least six months as of the date of a determination by the Code Enforcement Official
pursuant to this section.
A property which contains both residential and nonresidential space may be considered
abandoned so long as two-thirds or more of the total net square footage of the building was
previously legally occupied as residential space and none of the residential space has been
legally occupied for at least six months at the time of the determination of abandonment by
the Code Enforcement Official.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 77/505
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
1.
VACANT STOREFRONT
Any area within a building or structure that may be individually leased or rented for any purpose
other than residential use which is not present legally occupied or at which all lawful business or
construction operations or other occupancy have substantially ceased for a period of six months.
§ 5-510. Registration Requirements.
[Ord. No. 1063, 1/2/2019]
The owner of any vacant property or vacant storefront as defined herein shall, within 30 calendar
days after the building becomes a vacant property or storefront or within 30 calendar days after
assuming ownership of the vacant property or vacant storefront, whichever is later, or within 10
calendar days of receipt of notice by the municipality, file a registration statement for such vacant
property or storefront with the Code Enforcement Official on forms provided by the Borough for
such purposes. Failure to receive notice by the municipality shall not constitute grounds for failing
to register the property.
Each property having a separate block and lot number as designated in official records of the
municipality shall be registered separately, and only one statement is required for a property
that meets both the definition of "vacant property" and "vacant storefront."
The registration statement shall include the name, street address, telephone number, and email
address (if applicable) of a person 21 years or older, designated by the owner or owners
as the authorized agent for receiving notices of code violations and for receiving process in
any court proceeding or administrative enforcement proceeding on behalf of such owner or
owners in connection with the enforcement of any applicable code; and the name, street
address, telephone number, and e-mail address (if applicable) of the firm and the actual
name(s) of the firm's individual principal(s) responsible for maintaining the property. The
individual or representative of the firm responsible for maintaining the property shall be
available by telephone or in person on a twenty-four-hour-per-day, seven-day-per-week basis.
The two entities may be the same or different persons. Both entities shown on the statement
must maintain offices in the State of Pennsylvania or reside within the State of Pennsylvania.
The registration shall remain valid for one year from the date of registration, except for the
initial registration time, which shall be prorated through December 31. The owner shall be
required to renew the registration annually as long as the building remains a vacant property
or a portion thereof remains a vacant storefront and shall pay a registration or renewal fee in
the amount prescribed in § 5-513 of this subpart for each vacant property registered or vacant
storefront. The owner shall be required to renew the registration annually as long as the
building remains a vacant property or vacant storefront and shall pay a registration or renewal
fee in the amount prescribed in § 5-513 of this subpart for each vacant property or vacant
storefront registered.
The annual renewal shall be completed by January 1 each year. The initial registration fee
shall be prorated for registration statements received less than 10 months prior to that date.
The owner shall notify the Code Enforcement Official within 30 calendar days of any change
in the registration information by filing an amended registration statement on a form provided
by the Code Enforcement Official for such purpose.
The registration statement shall be deemed prima facie proof of the statements therein
contained in any administrative enforcement proceeding or court proceeding instituted by the
Borough against the owner or owners of the property.
§ 5-511. Access to Vacant Properties and Storefronts.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 78/505
1.
2.
3.
1.
A.
B.
C.
D.
2.
[Ord. No. 1063, 1/2/2019]
The owner of any vacant property or vacant storefront registered under this subpart shall provide
access to the Borough to conduct exterior and interior inspections of the building to determine
compliance with municipal codes, upon reasonable notice to the property owner or the designated
agent. Such inspections shall be carried out on weekdays during the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., or
such other time as may be mutually agreed upon between the owner and the Borough.
§ 5-512. Responsible Owner or Agent.
[Ord. No. 1063, 1/2/2019]
An owner who meets the requirements of this subpart with respect to the location of his or her
residence or workplace in the State of Pennsylvania may designate himself or herself as agent or
as the individual responsible for maintaining the property.
By designating an authorized agent under the provisions of this section, the owner consents to
receive any and all notices of code violations concerning the registered vacant property or
storefront and all process in any court proceeding or administrative enforcement proceeding
brought to enforce code provisions concerning the registered property by service of the notice or
process on the authorized agent. Any owner who has designated an authorized agent under the
provisions of this section shall be deemed to consent to the continuation of the agent's designation
for the purposes of this section until the owner notifies the Borough of Stroudsburg in writing of a
change of authorized agent or until the owner files a new annual registration statement.
Any owner who fails to register a vacant property or vacant storefront under the provisions of this
subpart shall further be deemed to consent to receive, by posting on the building, in plain view,
and by service of notice at the last known address of the owner of the property on record within
the Borough of Stroudsburg by regular and certified mail, any and all notices of code violations
and all process in an administrative proceeding brought to enforce code provisions concerning the
building.
§ 5-513. Fee Schedule.
[Ord. No. 1063, 1/2/2019]
The initial registration fee for each building or portion thereof shall be $500. The fee for the first
renewal is $1,500, and the fee for the second renewal is $3,000. The fee for any subsequent
renewal beyond the second renewal is $5,000. In the event that a property meets the definition of
both a "vacant property" and "vacant storefront," and it contains the same block and lot number as
designated in official records of the Borough, there shall only be one registration fee applied.
Vacant Property/Vacant Storefront Registration Fee Schedule.
Initial registration: $500.
First renewal: $1,500.
Second renewal: $3,000.
Subsequent renewal: $5,000.
§ 5-514. Requirements of Owners of Vacant Properties and/or
Storefronts.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 79/505
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
1.
2.
A.
B.
1.
[Ord. No. 1063, 1/2/2019]
The owner of any building or storefront that has become vacant and any person maintaining or
operating or collecting rent for any such building that has become vacant shall, within 30 days
thereof:
Enclose and secure the building and/or storefront against unauthorized entry as provided in
the applicable provisions of the Borough Code, or as set forth in the rules and regulations
supplementing those codes;
Post a sign affixed to the building and/or storefront indicating the name, address and
telephone number of the owner, the owner's authorized agent for the purpose of service of
process (if designated pursuant to this subpart), and the person responsible for the day-today
supervision and management of the building, if such person is different from the owner
holding title or authorized agent. The sign shall be of a size and placed in such a location so
as to be legible from the nearest public street or sidewalk, whichever is nearer, but shall be no
smaller than eight inches by 10 inches;
Secure the building and/or storefront from unauthorized entry and maintain the sign until the
building is again legally occupied or demolished or until repair or rehabilitation of the building
and/or storefront is complete;
Ensure that the exterior grounds of the structure or storefront, including yards, fences,
sidewalks, walkways, rights-of-way, alleys, retaining walls, attached or unattached accessory
structures and driveways, are well maintained and free from trash, debris, loose litter, and
grass and weed growth;
Continue to maintain the structure in a secure and closed condition, keep the grounds in a
clean and well-maintained condition, and ensure that the sign is visible and intact until the
building is again occupied or demolished, or until repair and/or rehabilitation of the building is
complete; and
Continue to maintain the property consistent with the requirements of the Borough Code.
All areas of vacant storefronts visible to the public from the public street or sidewalk must be
maintained in broom-clean condition and free of litter and debris.
§ 5-515. Waiver of Fees.
[Ord. No. 1063, 1/2/2019]
A waiver of the registration fee set forth herein may be granted, upon application, by the Borough
Manager for the current year if the following conditions are met:
All local municipal fees are paid in full; and
A consistent good faith effort is shown to market, rent, sell, or lease the vacant property or
storefront. Good faith efforts include but are not limited to contracts with a real estate
licensee, newspaper advertisements, electronic advertisements or other methods, list of
interested lessees, provided that the effort is actually likely to generate interest in the property
and the owner is actually willing to rent, sell or lease, and the pricing is consistent with other
similar properties or portions thereof as attested by a real estate licensee as licensed by the
Pennsylvania Real Estate Commission. The mere placement of a "for sale" or "for rent or
lease" sign on or in the building in and of itself does not meet the requirements of this
subsection.
§ 5-516. Violations and Penalties.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 80/505
1.
2.
3.
1.
2.
3.
4.
[Ord. No. 1063, 1/2/2019]
Any person who violates any provision of this subpart or of the rules and regulations issued
hereunder shall be fined not more than $600 for each offense. Every day that a violation continues
shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. Fines assessed under this subpart shall be
recoverable from the owner and shall be a lien on the property.
For purposes of this section, failure to file a registration statement within 30 calendar days after a
building or portion thereof becomes vacant property or a vacant storefront or within 30 calendar
days after assuming ownership of a vacant property or storefront, whichever is later, or within 10
calendar days of receipt of notice by the municipality, and failure to provide correct information on
the registration statement, or failure to comply with the provisions contained herein shall be
deemed to be violations of this subpart.
The Code Enforcement Official of the Borough of Stroudsburg shall be the enforcement agent of
the within subpart. Violations of the within sections of the Code shall be heard by the District
Magistrate.
§ 5-517. Severability.
[Ord. No. 1063, 1/2/2019]
Should any section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this subpart be declared unconstitutional
or invalid for any reason, the remaining portions of this subpart shall not be affected thereby and shall
remain in full force and effect, and to that end, the provisions of this subpart are hereby declared to be
severable.
Chapter 6. Conduct
Part 1. DISORDERLY CONDUCT
§ 6-101. Disorderly Conduct Prohibited.
[Ord. No. 599, 12/19/1983]
Disorderly conduct is hereby prohibited within the Borough of Stroudsburg. A person is guilty of
disorderly conduct if, with intent to cause public inconvenience, annoyance or alarm, or recklessly
creating a risk thereof, he:
Engages in fighting or in threatening, violent or tumultuous behavior;
Makes unreasonable noise;
Uses obscene language, or makes an obscene gesture; or
Creates a hazardous or physically offensive condition by any act which serves no legitimate
purpose of the actor.
Provided: as used in this section, the word public means affecting or likely to affect persons in a place
to which the public or a substantial group has access. Among the places included are streets, alleys
and sidewalks, transport facilities, schools, prisons, apartment houses, places of business or
amusement, any neighborhood, or any premises which are open to the public.
§ 6-102. Penalty for Disorderly Conduct.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 81/505
[Ord. No. 599, 12/19/1983]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this Part 1 shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced
to pay a fine of not more than $300 together with costs of prosecution, or, to imprisonment for a term
not to exceed 30 days.
Part 2. ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
§ 6-201. Definitions.
[Ord. No. 599, 12/19/1983]
Unless the context otherwise requires, the following words or phrases shall be construed according to
the definitions set forth below:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Any spirits, wine, beer, ale or other liquid containing more than 1/2% of alcohol by volume which is
fit for beverage purposes.
CONTAINER
Any bottle, can or other vessel in which alcoholic beverages are contained.
§ 6-202. Consumption.
[Ord. No. 599, 12/19/1983]
No person, including those in vehicles, shall consume any alcoholic beverage in any quantity upon any
street, avenue, alley, sidewalk, stairway, thoroughfare, or other public property within the Borough, nor
shall any person consume any alcoholic beverage within five feet of any public way or thoroughfare
while on a private stairway, doorway or other private property open to public view without the express
or implied permission of the owner, his agent or other party in lawful possession thereof.
§ 6-203. Possession.
[Ord. No. 599, 12/19/1983]
No person shall possess any container of alcoholic beverage, whether wrapped or unwrapped, which
has been opened or on which the seal has been broken in any manner, on any public street, avenue,
alley, thoroughfare or other public property within the Borough, nor shall any person possess any
container or alcoholic beverage within five feet of any public way or thoroughfare while on a private
stairway, doorway, or other private property open to public view without the express or implied
permission of the owner, his agent, or other person in lawful possession thereof.
§ 6-204. Exceptions.
[Ord. No. 599, 12/19/1983]
Provided however, that the provisions of §§ 6-202 and 6-203 above shall not apply to interior portions
of any private dwelling, habitat, building or firehouse, nor to the consumption or possession by persons
in the areas herein designated of any duly prescribed and dispensed medication having alcoholic
content as set forth in § 6-201 hereof; and provided further that the provisions of said §§ 6-202 and 6-
203 above shall not apply to premises duly licensed by the Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board and to
persons then and there patrons of said licensee.
§ 6-205. Penalties.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 82/505
1.
2.
3.
4.
[Ord. No. 599, 12/19/1983]
Whosoever violates any of the provisions of this Part 2 shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to
pay a fine of not more than $300 plus costs of prosecution, or to be imprisoned for a period not to
exceed 30 days.
Part 3. LOITERING
§ 6-301. Definitions.
[Ord. No. 599, 12/19/1983]
As used in this Part 3, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated, unless a different
meaning clearly appears from the context:
LOITERING
Remaining idle essentially in one location; spending time idly; loafing or walking about aimlessly;
or "hanging around."
PUBLIC PLACE
Any place to which the public has access including any public street or public sidewalk, the front of
and the area immediately adjacent to any school, parking lot, store, restaurant, tavern or other
place of business.
§ 6-302. Certain Types of Loitering Prohibited.
[Ord. No. 599, 12/19/1983]
No person shall loiter in a public place in such manner as to:
Create or cause to be created a danger of a breach of the peace.
Create or cause to be created any disturbance or annoyance to the comfort of any person.
Obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles.
Obstruct, molest or interfere with any person lawfully in any public place as defined in § 6-301 of
this Part 3. This shall include the making of unsolicited remarks of an offensive, disgusting or
insulting nature or which are calculated to annoy or disturb the person to, or in whose hearing,
they are made.
§ 6-303. Request to Leave.
[Ord. No. 599, 12/19/1983]
Whenever the presence of any person in any public place is causing or is likely to cause any of the
conditions enumerated in § 6-302 of this Part 3, any police officer may order that person to leave that
place. Any person who shall refuse to leave after being ordered to do so by a police officer shall be
guilty of a violation of this Part.
§ 6-304. Penalties.
[Ord. No. 599, 12/19/1983]
Any person, who shall violate any provision of this Part 3 shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced
to pay a fine of not more than $300, together with costs of prosecution, or to imprisonment for a term
not to exceed 30 days.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 83/505
Part 4. USE OF SHOPPING CARTS
§ 6-401. Definitions.
[Ord. No. 593, 9/8/1982, § 1; as amended by Ord. No. 599, 12/19/1983]
As used in this Part 4, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated, unless a different
meaning clearly appears from the context:
MERCHANT
Any owner or operator of any store or other retail mercantile establishment, or any agent, servant,
employee, lessee, consignee, officer, director, franchisee, or independent contractor of such
owner or proprietor.
PERSON
Includes any natural person, copartnership, association, firm or corporation. Whenever used in
any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, or both, the term "person" as applied to a
copartnership or association, shall mean the partnership or members thereof, and as applied to a
corporation, shall be the officers thereof.
PREMISES OF A STORE OR RETAIL MERCANTILE ESTABLISHMENT
The retail mercantile establishment, any common use areas in shopping centers and all parking
areas set aside by a merchant or on behalf of a merchant for the parking of vehicles for the
convenience of the patrons of such retail mercantile establishment.
SHOPPING CART
Those push carts of the type or types which are commonly provided by grocery stores, drug stores
or other retail mercantile establishments for the use of the public in transporting commodities in
stores and markets and, incidentally, from the stores to a place outside the store.
STORE OR OTHER RETAIL MERCANTILE ESTABLISHMENT
A place where merchandise is displayed, held, stored or sold or offered to the public for sale.
§ 6-402. Merchants to Identify Shopping Carts.
[Ord. No. 593, 9/8/1982, § 2]
It shall be unlawful for a merchant to provide shopping carts to be used on or off the premises of a
store or retail mercantile establishment without first providing the identity of the premises of the store or
retail mercantile establishment and its phone number. Said identification shall be in the form of a tag,
sign, or plate located conspicuously on the shopping cart. Further, the merchant providing the
shopping cart shall at all times hereafter maintain accurate records reflecting the date, time and name
of any person who is authorized or who has given consent to remove the shopping cart from the
premises of the store or retail mercantile establishment.
§ 6-403. Unlawful to Remove Shopping Carts From Premises of
Store Without Authorization.
[Ord. No. 593, 9/8/1982, § 3]
It shall be unlawful for a person without the expressed written consent of a merchant or other person
authorized to give such consent, to remove a shopping cart from the premises of a store or retail
mercantile establishment. It shall not be a defense to prosecution under this section that such person
reasonably believed that the merchant or his agent would have consented to the removal of the
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 84/505
1.
shopping cart. Further, the absence of any record maintained by the merchant as required by § 6-1002
hereof shall raise a rebuttable presumption that no such consent was given.
§ 6-404. Unlawful to Store or Allow Storage of Shopping Carts on
Private Property; Notice to Owner and Police Regarding
Abandoned Shopping Carts.
[Ord. No. 593, 9/8/1982, § 4; as amended by Ord. No. 784, 4/5/2000, § 2]
It shall be unlawful for a person who owns, leases, or occupies real property in the Borough of
Stroudsburg to permit a shopping cart to remain on any private real property within the Borough for a
period of more than 24 hours. Any person who owns, leases or occupies real property in the Borough
of Stroudsburg and who is not responsible for the removal of a shopping cart from the premises of a
store or retail mercantile establishment shall notify the merchant identified on the shopping cart and the
Stroud Area Regional Police Department of the location of the shopping cart.
§ 6-405. Actions of Police and Owner Upon Notification.
[Ord. No. 593, 9/8/1982, § 5; as amended Ord. No. 784, 4/5/2000, § 2]
Whenever the Stroud Area Regional Police Department finds or is notified that a shopping cart has
been stored or permitted to remain on any real property within the Borough, the Chief of Police or his
agent shall personally, by mail, or by telephonic communication, notify the merchant or owner of the
shopping cart, if such merchant or owner can be ascertained by the exercise of reasonable diligence of
the location of the shopping cart. The merchant or owner of the shopping cart shall remove the
shopping cart within one hour thereof to an authorized location or return the shopping cart to the
premises of the store or retail mercantile establishment.
§ 6-406. Penalties.
[Ord. No. 593, 9/8/1982; as amended by Ord. No. 599, 12/19/1983]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part 4 shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $300, together with costs of prosecution, or to
imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days.
Part 5. LITTERING
§ 6-501. Littering Prohibited.
[Ord. No. 599, 12/19/1983]
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation or any agent thereof to place, throw, store,
accumulate or maintain, or cause to be placed, thrown, stored, accumulated or maintained any used
cans, papers, paper boxes, used lumber, rubbish, debris, animal matter, garbage, empty bottles or
other containers upon any property within the Borough of Stroudsburg or on or near any alley, highway
or stream located in said Borough.
§ 6-502. Penalties.
[Ord. No. 599, 12/19/1983]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part 5 shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $300, together with costs of prosecution, or,
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 85/505
2.
3.
to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days.
Notice and Payment of Violation. Upon the discovery of any violation under the terms of this Part,
the municipality shall, through its authorized agents, give notice to the owner of a violation
hereunder, either by personal delivery to such owner, by United States mail directed to the lastknown
address of such person or persons, as shown in the real estate registry records of the
municipality, or by leaving the same on the premises where such violation occurs.
[Added by Ord. 1034, 7/18/2017]
If such person shall, within seven days after the delivery, mailing or leaving of such notice, pay to
the Treasurer of the municipality the sum of $25 for the violation, the same will constitute full
satisfaction for the violation noted in said notice. If two or more violations are issued for the same
property during a calendar year, the second and subsequent violations' payment shall increase an
additional $25 per subsequent violation to a maximum of $300. The failure of such person to make
payment, as aforesaid, within seven days shall render such owner subject to the penalties as
provided hereinabove.
[Added by Ord. 1034, 7/18/2017]
Part 6. PROTECTION OF PUBLIC PROPERTY
§ 6-601. Definition and Interpretation.
[Ord. No. 599, 12/19/1983]
As used in this Part 6, the term PERSON shall include any individual, corporation, partnership,
association, firm, or other legal entity. The singular shall include the plural; the plural shall include the
singular; and the masculine shall include the feminine and the neuter.
§ 6-602. Tampering With Public Property on Streets, Alleys or
Public Ground Prohibited.
[Ord. No. 599, 12/19/1983]
No person shall destroy, injure, tamper with or deface any public property of the Borough, or any grass,
walk, lamp, ornamental work, building or street light on or in any of the streets, alleys, sidewalks, or
public grounds in the Borough.
§ 6-603. Tampering With Stakes, Posts and Monuments
Prohibited.
[Ord. No. 599, 12/19/1983]
No person shall in any manner interfere or meddle with, or pull, drive, change, alter, or destroy any
stake, post, monument, or other marking, made, placed or set, or hereafter made, placed or set, or
caused to be done by the authorities of the Borough, to evidence the location, elevation, line, grade,
corner, or angle of any public street, alley, sidewalk, curb, gutter, drain, or other public work, or thing.
§ 6-604. Tampering With Warning Lamps, Signs or Barricades
Prohibited.
[Ord. No. 599, 12/19/1983]
No person shall destroy, remove, deface, obliterate or cover up any lamp, sign or barricade erected as
a warning of danger by the authorities of the Borough or by any person doing work by permission of
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 86/505
the authorities of the Borough on any of the streets, alleys, sidewalks, or bridges in the Borough or on
any public grounds of the Borough, within or without the Borough.
§ 6-605. Removal of Material From Streets, Alleys or Public
Grounds Prohibited.
[Ord. No. 599, 12/19/1983]
No person shall take any earth, stone, or other material from any street, alley, or public grounds in the
Borough.
§ 6-606. Deposit of Harmful Substances on Streets, Alleys,
Sidewalks or Public Grounds Prohibited.
[Ord. No. 599, 12/19/1983]
No person shall pour, throw or deposit any harmful or destructive substance or matter on any street,
alley, sidewalk or public grounds in the Borough.
§ 6-607. Exceptions.
[Ord. No. 599, 12/19/1983]
This Part 6 shall not apply to normal activities in connection with construction, maintenance and repair
of streets, alleys, sidewalks, and public grounds and the structures and fixtures located thereon or
therein, or to incidental results of work done thereon or therein upon permit from or by authority of the
Borough.
§ 6-608. Penalties.
[Ord. No. 599, 12/19/1983]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this Part 6 shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced
to pay a fine of not more than $300, together with costs of prosecution, or, to imprisonment for a term
not to exceed 30 days. Every day that a violation of this Part 6 continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
Part 7. THROWING OF OBJECTS ON STREETS
§ 6-701. Prohibited Acts.
[Ord. No. 599, 12/19/1983]
The throwing of snowballs, stones or any other missile upon or into any of the public streets, alleys,
sidewalks or any other public property, in the Borough is hereby prohibited.
§ 6-702. Penalties.
[Ord. No. 599, 12/19/1983]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this Part 7 shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced
to pay a fine of not more than $300, together with costs of prosecution, or, to imprisonment for a term
not to exceed 30 days.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 87/505
1.
2.
3.
Part 8. FIREARMS
§ 6-801. Discharge of Firearms Prohibited.
[Ord. No. 599, 12/19/1983]
Except in necessary defense of person and property and except as provided in § 6-803 of this Part 8, it
shall be unlawful for any person to use, fire, or discharge any gun or other firearm within the Borough.
§ 6-802. Use of Air Rifles, Bow and Arrows, or Similar Devices
Restricted.
[Ord. No. 599, 12/19/1983]
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any air rifle, air pistol, spring gun, spring pistol, B-B
gun, bow and arrow, or similar device, or any implement that is not a firearm but which impels a pellet
of any kind with a force that can reasonably be expected to cause bodily harm, at any place within the
Borough, except on a properly constructed target range and except as provided in § 6-803.
§ 6-803. Exceptions.
[Ord. No. 599, 12/19/1983]
This Part 8 shall not apply to:
Persons licensed to hunt in this Commonwealth while actually engaged in hunting where permitted
under the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania;
Members of any organization incorporated under laws of this Commonwealth engaged in target
shooting upon the grounds or property belonging to or under the control of such organization; and
Any law enforcement officers when used in the discharge of their official duties.
§ 6-804. Penalties for Violation.
[Ord. No. 599, 12/19/1983]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this Part 8 shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced
to pay a fine of not more than $300 together with costs of prosecution, or, to imprisonment for a term
not to exceed 30 days. Every day that a violation of this Part 8 continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
Part 9. PUBLIC GATHERINGS
§ 6-901. Public Gatherings Regulated; Permit Required.
[Ord. No. 448, 8/1/1962, § 1]
No person, association, firm or corporation shall conduct any street parade, street meeting or public
gathering of any nature upon any street or public ground in the Borough of Stroudsburg, Monroe
County, Pennsylvania, without first having obtained a permit from the Mayor of said Borough. Such
permit shall be issued without payment of any fee. The application for such permit shall be made to the
Mayor, in writing at least seven days in advance of the date of such parade, street meeting or other
gathering.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 88/505
§ 6-902. Exceptions.
[Ord. No. 448, 8/1/1962, § 2]
The provisions of this Part 9 shall not apply to the Military and Naval Forces of the United States, State
Militia, or funeral processions.
§ 6-903. Penalties.
[Ord. No. 448, 8/1/1962, § 3; as amended by Ord. No. 599, 12/19/1983]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part 9 shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $300, together with costs of prosecution, or to
imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days.
Chapter 7. Fire Prevention and Fire Protection
Fire Prevention Code, see Chapter 5, Code Enforcement
Part 1. OUTDOOR BURNING
§ 7-101. Definitions.
[Ord. 813, 12/19/2001, § 1]
As used in this Part, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated unless a different meaning
clearly appears from the context.
BOROUGH
Borough of Stroudsburg, Monroe County, Pennsylvania.
DECORATIVE BURNING RECEPTACLE
Any receptacle, such as a patio hearth, chiminea or stone fireplace that is used for the purpose of
cooking or personal warmth.
OPEN FIRE
A fire outside of any building in which any material is burned for disposal purposes in the open or
in a receptacle other than in a grill or similar decorative receptacle used for the purpose of outside
barbecues or warmth.
OUTSIDE BARBECUES
Any fire maintained in a commercially constructed grill or masonry constructed grill for the
purposes of heating, cooking and preparing food for the purpose of consumption.
PERSON
Any individual, partnership, association, corporation, department, bureau, agency or other legal
entity.
§ 7-102. Regulations.
[Ord. 813, 12/19/2001, § 2]
Within the Borough limits, no person shall: ignite, feed, cause, allow, permit or maintain on any
property any open fire outside of any building for any purpose of disposal of trash, rubbish or garbage
other than that specifically allowed for in § 7-103 below.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 89/505
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
C.
D.
1.
§ 7-103. Exceptions.
[Ord. 813, 12/19/2001, § 3]
The activities prohibited in the Part are subject to the following exceptions:
Open fires may be set in the performance of an official duty of any public officer if the fire is
necessary for:
The prevention of a fire hazard that cannot be abated by other means.
The protection of public health.
Open fires shall be permitted at any time when the same is conducted during an official act or
exercise, preapproved by the Borough Council or the Stroudsburg Volunteer Fire Department.
Open fires shall be permitted at any time when the same is preapproved by Borough Council
or the Stroudsburg Fire Department for the following purposes:
Conducted by any person during an officially scheduled training exercise in
firefighting/fire protection and control.
Utilized as a ceremonial bonfire by any person during an officially scheduled public event
such as a school- or university-sponsored pep rally, etc.
It shall be lawful at any time to burn charcoal or wood fires kindled for the purpose of outside
barbecues, providing the fire is confined to the structures as defined in this Part and is for the
heating, cooking and preparing of food or for personal warmth.
§ 7-104. Authority to Extinguish.
[Ord. 813, 12/19/2001, § 4]
Authority is hereby granted to the Stroudsburg Fire Department to extinguish any fire within the
Borough of Stroudsburg when the Fire Chief of said Department deems that conditions warrant such
action.
§ 7-105. All Other Burning Is Strictly Prohibited.
[Ord. 813, 12/19/2001, § 5]
§ 7-106. Enforcement.
[Ord. 813, 12/19/2001, § 6]
The Borough Council of the Borough of Stroudsburg hereby designates the Code Enforcement Officer,
in addition to the Borough police officers, who shall have the power to enforce the provisions of this
Part.
§ 7-107. Penalties.
[Ord. 813, 12/19/2001, § 7]
Any person who shall violate any provisions of this Part shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to
pay a fine of not more than $300, and, in default of payment, to imprisonment for a term not to exceed
30 days. Each day the violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 90/505
1.
2.
Part 2. FIRE PROTECTION
§ 7-201. Composition of Borough Fire Department.
[Ord. 86, 12/7/1910, § 1; as amended by Ord. 599, 12/19/1983; and by Ord. 839, 6/2/2004]
The several fire companies of the Borough of Stroudsburg, together with the Fire Chief and two
Assistant Fire Chiefs, shall constitute the Fire Department of the said Borough. New companies may
be added thereto from time to time as the Town Council may deem necessary.
§ 7-202. Officers of Member Companies.
[Ord. 86, 12/7/1910, § 2; as amended by Ord. 599, 12/19/1983]
The several companies composing the Fire Department of the Borough shall each and every of them
elect annually, the following officers, to wit: one Captain, and one first lieutenant, one second
lieutenant, one engineer, and one assistant engineer, who shall hold their respective offices for 12
successive months and shall also elect or appoint such other officers whose duties shall not conflict
with the duties of the officers hereinbefore named, as they from time to time may desire.
§ 7-203. Nomination of Department Officers.
[Ord. 86, 12/7/1910, § 3; as amended by Ord. 227, 4/20/1938§ 1; by Ord. 599, 12/19/1983; and by
Ord. 839, 6/2/2004]
The several corporations composing the Fire Department of the Borough shall each, in 1938, and
triennially thereafter, at the time of their annual election of officers and at such other times as Borough
Council shall appoint, select delegates to meet the delegates of other corporations composing said
Fire Department, in convention, for the nomination of one Fire Chief, and two Assistant Fire Chiefs of
said Department, who shall hold their respective offices until the first Thursday in April, in the third
calendar year after the year of their confirmation, or until their successors are nominated and
confirmed by Borough Council.
§ 7-204. Election of Department Officers by Convention;
Confirmation by Council.
[Ord. 86, 12/7/1910, § 4; as amended by Ord. 227, 4/20/1938 § 2; and by Ord. 839, 6/2/2004]
Each Company shall be entitled to five delegates in such convention. The President of Borough
Council shall preside at such convention, but shall have no vote, and the Borough Secretary shall
act as clerk thereof and make report to the Borough Council at the stated or adjourned meeting
next succeeding the meeting of such convention, of the person nominated thereat for Fire Chief
and the number of votes cast for him at such convention, and the persons nominated for Assistant
Fire Chief and the number of votes cast for such officers, and the total number of delegates in
such convention. A majority of all delegates in such convention shall be necessary to a
nomination.
Upon such report being made by the Borough Secretary, the Borough Council shall vote in
confirmation of or in rejection of such nomination, and if a nomination is confirmed by a majority of
Borough Council, such officer shall be sworn to perform the duties of the office to which he has
been elected. If a nomination is rejected by the Borough Council, the Council President thereof
shall then fix a time for the reassembling of such convention, when another nomination shall be
had in which no vote cast in favor of a nomination of such person rejected by the Council shall be
counted. In the event of a failure to make a nomination at such conventions, or a re-nomination
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 91/505
after a rejection, the Borough Council shall be at liberty to direct the convention to reassemble at a
time to be fixed by the Council for the purpose of making a nomination, or to themselves elect
such officers. The nomination shall be held triennially on the third Tuesday in March of the years
hereinbefore designated for the selection of delegates and at such other times as the Council of
the Borough shall by vote or motion appoint.
§ 7-205. Power of Borough Council to Remove Department
Officers.
[Ord. 86, 12/7/1910, § 5; as amended by Ord. 839, 6/2/2004]
The Borough Council shall have the right and power at any and all times to remove from office the Fire
Chief or Assistant Fire Chiefs of the Fire Department for cause shown, and should a vacancy happen
in such offices or either of them by death, resignation, removal from Borough or otherwise, the
Borough Council shall immediately order a convention of delegates of the several corporations to
nominate a successor to such official to fill his unexpired term.
§ 7-206. Replacement of Company Officers in Case of Vacancy.
[Ord. 86, 12/7/1910, § 6]
Should any vacancy happen in the office of any Line Officer of any company, the same shall be filled
for the unexpired term by an election by the company wherein the vacancy exists.
§ 7-207. Power of Borough Council to Suspend or Expel Member
Companies.
[Ord. 86, 12/7/1910, § 7]
The Borough Council shall have the right and power at any and all times to suspend or expel any
company from the department, and upon such action being taken the company suspended or expelled
shall deliver up to the Fire Committee of Borough Council or such officer of the Fire Department as the
Borough Council shall designate all apparatus and property of the Borough in the custody of such
company.
§ 7-208. Powers of Fire Chief.
[Ord. 86, 12/7/1910, § 8; as amended by Ord. 599, 12/19/1983]
The Fire Chief shall in times of fire have full control of the fire apparatus of the Borough. He shall have
command of the general companies, and all orders given by him shall be obeyed by each and every
member of the Fire Department, and at all times he shall have general supervision of all property in the
department and shall at least once a month inspect the same and see that the same is kept in good
condition. He shall make report concerning the condition thereof to Borough Council at least yearly and
more often as occasion demands. When urgency requires he shall have power to order repairs made
to the same at the expense of the Borough, upon obtaining consent of the Borough Manager thereto.
§ 7-209. Duties of Assistant Fire Chiefs Upon Absence or
Removal of Fire Chief.
[Ord. 86, 12/7/1910, § 9; as amended by Ord. 599, 12/19/1983; and by Ord. 839, 6/2/2004]
In the absence of the Fire Chief, his duties shall be performed by the Assistant Fire Chiefs. Upon the
death, resignation or removal from the Borough of the Fire Chief, his duties shall devolve upon and be
performed by the Assistant Fire Chiefs until his successor is duly confirmed.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 92/505
§ 7-210. Duties and Powers of Company Captain.
[Ord. 86, 12/7/1910, § 10]
It shall be the duty of the Captain of any company to take command of the company to which he
belongs at every fire or alarm of fire, to obey every and all orders of the Fire Chief and Assistant Fire
Chief, to observe that each member of his company does his full duty, to grant leave of absence to a
member of his company at a fire when he may deem it proper and to see that all apparatus left in the
charge of his company is kept in good condition and ready for use. All orders given by him shall be
obeyed by each and every member of the company of which he is Captain.
§ 7-211. Duties of Lieutenant.
[Ord. 86, 12/7/1910, § 11]
It shall be the duty of the Lieutenant of every company to aid the Captain of his company in the
discharge of his duties, and in the absence of the Captain to act in his stead.
§ 7-212. Duties of Fire Company Personnel.
[Ord. 86, 12/7/1910, § 12; as amended by Ord. 839, 6/2/2004]
Upon an alarm of fire being given, it shall be the duty of each company to respond with their apparatus
forthwith, and it shall be the duty of each and every member of the Fire Department to repair to the
headquarters of the company of which he is a member and to assist in taking the apparatus to the fire,
and to remain under the control of and obey the orders of the Captain and the Lieutenant of his
company, and the Fire Chief and Assistant Fire Chiefs of the Department until the services of the
company shall, in the opinion of the Fire Chief, be no longer necessary. When the apparatus has been
returned to headquarters and cared for and roll is called they are at liberty to depart.
§ 7-213. Command Structure in Absence of Fire Chief and
Assistant Fire Chiefs.
[Ord. 86, 12/7/1910, § 13; as amended by Ord. 839, 6/2/2004]
In the absence of the Fire Chief and the Assistant Fire Chief of the Fire Department at any fire, the
Captain of the first company reaching the fire shall act as such Fire Chief, and his duty as Captain of
his company shall be performed by his highest subordinate officer present.
§ 7-214. Borough Fire Department Supervised by Fire Committee
of Borough Council.
[Ord. 86, 12/7/1910, § 14]
The Fire Committee of the Council shall have general supervision over the Fire Department of the
Borough, and of the fire apparatus, and shall make report to the Borough Council of the condition
thereof as the occasion requires. They and all other members of Borough Council shall have the right
at all times, except at fires, to inspect the apparatus.
§ 7-215. Response to Fires Outside Borough.
[Ord. 86, 12/7/1910, § 15; as amended by Ord. 599, 12/19/1983]
Under no circumstances shall any of the fire apparatus be removed from the Borough in case of fire in
the neighborhood, or neighboring towns, without first obtaining the consent of either the Manager or
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 93/505
the Chairman of the Fire Committee, and in the event of the absence from town of both the Manager
and the Chairman of the Fire Committee, then the consent of the Fire Chief or his Assistant, and on all
other occasions without first obtaining the consent of the Borough Council. Excepting therefrom those
municipalities covered by a mutual aid agreement with the Borough in case of an appeal for aid from
such municipalities, then and in such case the Fire Chief or the Assistant Fire Chief shall have power
and authority to order and direct one or more of the companies of the department to respond to such
appeal, with their apparatus.
§ 7-216. Power of Member Companies to Make By-Laws.
[Ord. 86, 12/7/1910, § 16]
The several companies formed under this Part 2 shall each have the right and power to make such bylaws
not inconsistent with this Part and such regulations as the Borough Council shall from time to time
make as they shall deem proper, and to enforce obedience to the same by suspension or expulsion.
Any company shall also have the right to suspend or expel any member for disobedience of orders,
neglect of duty or conduct unbecoming a gentleman or fireman.
§ 7-217. Fire Patrol/Fire Police.
[Ord. 86, 12/7/1910, § 17; as amended by Ord. 599, 12/19/1983]
Ten members of the Fire Department shall constitute the Fire Patrol, whose duty it shall be to preserve
order at and around fires in the Borough. Three members of each company shall be appointed by the
Fire Chief of the Fire Department, subject to the approval of the Borough Council, and they shall be
sworn into office as Fire Police officers of the Borough, and they shall have like powers for the
preservation of peace and order in the Borough. One or more of the Fire Patrol shall be appointed by
the Fire Chief to conserve the injured property after a fire whenever and as long as the same shall be
necessary.
§ 7-218. Duties of Department in Case of Fire.
[Ord. 86, 12/7/1910, § 18]
Whenever any building in the Borough shall be on fire and in danger of being destroyed by fire, or
when any building within the limits of the said Borough shall be on fire and there shall be danger of the
same being communicated to one or more other buildings, the Fire Chief or other highest officer of the
Fire Department at such fire shall take such measures and give such orders as in the opinion of the
said official are or may be necessary for the purpose of controlling the said fire and of extinguishing the
same, and all members of the Fire Department of the Borough present at said fire shall obey such
orders.
§ 7-219. Interference With Fire Department Prohibited.
[Ord. 86, 12/7/1910, § 19; as amended by Ord. 599, 12/19/1983]
No person or persons shall interfere with any member of the Fire Department at or in the immediate
neighborhood of any fire or at or in the immediate neighborhood of any building on fire in the Borough,
or in the performance of his duty.
§ 7-220. Authority of Fire Chief or Assistant Fire Chief to Call Out
Companies for Fire Duty.
[Ord. 86, 12/7/1910, § 20]
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 94/505
The Fire Chief or Assistant Fire Chief shall have the right and authority to call one or more of the
companies of the department for a fire.
§ 7-221. Fire Companies to Have Right-of-Way on Borough
Streets.
[Ord. 86, 12/7/1910, § 21; as amended by Ord. 599, 12/19/1983]
After an alarm of fire or a call for a drill has been given, the Fire Department shall have the right of way
upon the streets of the Borough, in preference to any person, team, street car, vehicle or animal of any
kind and all persons and corporations using the streets aforesaid are hereby required to yield the right
of way to the Fire Department or any part thereof in the performance of its duty.
§ 7-222. Authority to Close Streets During Fire Emergency.
[Ord. 86, 12/7/1910, § 22; as amended by Ord. 599, 12/19/1983]
The Fire Chief or Assistant Fire Chief or any other officers of the Fire Department provided in § 7-213,
shall have authority to close any street or streets in the immediate neighborhood of any burning
building either in part or wholly during the continuance of a fire, and no person not a member of the
said department shall go within such closed portion.
§ 7-223. Responsibility for Equipment Belonging to Another
Company.
[Ord. 86, 12/7/1910, § 23]
Any company returning from a fire, finding that they have hose or other property which does not belong
to them, shall immediately return the same to the company to which it belongs.
§ 7-224. Alcohol Not Permitted in or on Company Property or
Equipment.
[Ord. 86, 12/7/1910, § 24; as amended by Ord. 599, 12/19/1983]
No intoxicating liquors of any kind shall be allowed or consumed on the apparatus floor used by a
company or on apparatus working under this department; or at any fire alarms, and any company
permitting the storing or drinking of any intoxicants on the apparatus floors of their different premises,
shall be liable to immediate expulsion from the department.
§ 7-225. Prohibited Acts.
[Ord. 86, 12/7/1910, § 25; as amended by Ord. 599, 12/19/1983]
It shall be unlawful for any carts or wagons, vehicles or street cars, to cross any line of fire hose,
except by permission of the officer having charge of such line of hose.
§ 7-226. Penalties.
[Ord. 86, 12/7/1910, as amended by Ord. 599, 12/19/1983]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of § 7-219, 7-221, 7-222 or 7-225 of this
Part 2 shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $300, together with
costs of prosecution, or to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 95/505
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
1.
1.
2.
Chapter 8. Floodplains
Part 1. STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION
§ 8-101. Statutory Authorization.
[Ord. 966, 3/6/2013, Art. I]
The Legislature of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania has, by the passage of the Pennsylvania Flood
Plain Management Act of 1978, delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt
floodplain management regulations to promote public health, safety, and the general welfare of its
citizenry. Therefore, the Council of Stroudsburg Borough does hereby order as follows.
Part 2. GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 8-201. Intent.
[Ord. 966, 3/6/2013, Art. II, § 2.01]
The intent of this chapter is to:
Promote the general health, welfare, and safety of the community.
Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in order to prevent or minimize
flood damage in the future.
Minimize danger to public health by protecting water supply and natural drainage.
Reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its governmental units, and its
residents, by preventing excessive development in areas subject to flooding.
Comply with federal and state floodplain management requirements.
§ 8-202. Applicability.
[Ord. 966, 3/6/2013, Art. II, § 2.02]
It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, business or corporation to undertake, or cause to
be undertaken, any construction or development within the identification floodplain area in the
Borough unless a permit has been obtained from the Floodplain Administrator.
A permit shall not be required for minor repairs to existing buildings or structures.
§ 8-203. Abrogation and Greater Restrictions.
[Ord. 966, 3/6/2013, Art. II, § 2.03]
This chapter supersedes any other conflicting provisions which may be in effect in identified floodplain
areas. However, any other ordinance provisions shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that
those provisions are more restrictive. If there is any conflict between any of the provisions of this
chapter, the more restrictive shall apply.
§ 8-204. Warning and Disclaimer of Liability.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 96/505
1.
2.
1.
2.
1.
2.
[Ord. 966, 3/6/2013, Art. II, § 2.05]
The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this chapter is considered reasonable
for regulatory purposes and is based on accepted engineering methods of study. Larger floods
may occur or flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such as ice jams
and bridge openings restricted by debris. This chapter does not imply that areas outside any
identified floodplain areas, or that land uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding
or flood damages.
This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Borough or any officer or employee thereof
for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision
lawfully made thereunder.
Part 3. ADMINISTRATION
§ 8-301. Designation of the Floodplain Administrator.
[Ord. 966, 3/6/2013, Art. III, § 3.01]
The Zoning Officer is hereby appointed to administer and enforce this chapter and is referred to
herein as the "Floodplain Administrator." The Floodplain Administrator may: (A) fulfill the duties
and responsibilities set forth in these regulations, (B) delegate duties and responsibilities set forth
in these regulations to qualified technical personnel, plan examiners, inspectors, and other
employees, or (C) enter into a written agreement or written contract with another agency or private
sector entity to administer specific provisions of these regulations. Administration of any part of
these regulations by another entity shall not relieve the community of its responsibilities pursuant
to the participation requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program as set forth in the Code
of Federal Regulations at 44 CFR 59.22.
In the absence of a designated Floodplain Administrator, the Floodplain Administrator duties are to
be fulfilled by the Stroudsburg Borough Manager.
§ 8-302. Permits Required.
[Ord. 966, 3/6/2013, Art. III, § 3.02]
A permit shall be required before any construction or development is undertaken within any area of
Stroudsburg Borough.
§ 8-303. Duties and Responsibilities of the Floodplain
Administrator.
[Ord. 966, 3/6/2013, Art. III, § 3.03]
The Floodplain Administrator shall issue a permit only after it has been determined that the
proposed work to be undertaken will be in conformance with the requirements of this and all other
applicable codes and ordinances.
Prior to the issuance of any permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall review the application for the
permit to determine if all other necessary government permits required by state and federal laws
have been obtained, such as those required by the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (Act 1966-
537, as amended); the Pennsylvania Dam Safety and Encroachments Act (Act 1978-325, as
amended); the Pennsylvania Clean Streams Act (Act 1937-394, as amended); and the U.S. Clean
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 97/505
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
1.
Water Act, § 404, 33 U.S.C. § 1344. No permit shall be issued until this determination has been
made.
In the case of existing structures, prior to the issuance of any development/permit, the Floodplain
Administrator shall review the history of repairs to the subject building, so that any repetitive loss
issues can be addressed before the permit is issued.
During the construction period, the Floodplain Administrator or other authorized official shall
inspect the premises to determine that the work is progressing in compliance with the information
provided on the permit application and with all applicable municipal laws and ordinances. He/she
shall make as many inspections during and upon completion of the work as are necessary.
In the discharge of his/her duties, the Floodplain Administrator shall have the authority to enter
any building, structure, premises or development in the identified floodplain area, upon
presentation of proper credentials, at any reasonable hour to enforce the provisions of this
chapter.
In the event the Floodplain Administrator discovers that the work does not comply with the permit
application or any applicable laws and ordinances, or that there has been a false statement or
misrepresentation by any applicant, the Floodplain Administrator shall revoke the permit and
report such fact to the Council for whatever action it considers necessary.
The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain all records associated with the requirements of this
chapter including, but not limited to, finished construction elevation data, permitting, inspection
and enforcement.
The Floodplain Administrator is the official responsible for submitting a biennial report to the FEMA
concerning community participation in the National Flood Insurance Program.
The responsibility, authority and means to implement the commitments of the Floodplain
Administrator can be delegated from the person identified. However, the ultimate responsibility lies
with the person identified in the floodplain ordinance as the Floodplain Administrator/Manager.
The Floodplain Administrator shall consider the requirements of the 34 Pa. Code and the 2009
IBC and the 2009 IRC or latest revisions thereof.
§ 8-304. Application Procedures and Requirements.
[Ord. 966, 3/6/2013, Art. III, § 3.04]
Application for such a permit shall be made, in writing, to the Floodplain Administrator on forms
supplied by Stroudsburg Borough. Such application shall contain the following:
Name and address of applicant.
Name and address of owner of land on which proposed construction is to occur.
Name and address of contractor.
Site location including address.
Listing of other permits required.
Brief description of proposed work and estimated cost, including a breakout of flood-related
cost and the market value of the building before the flood damage occurred where
appropriate.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 98/505
G.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
2.
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
C.
(1)
D.
3.
A plan of the site showing the exact size and location of the proposed construction as well as
any existing buildings or structures.
If any proposed construction or development is located entirely or partially within any identified
floodplain area, applicants for permits shall provide all the necessary information in sufficient detail
and clarity to enable the Floodplain Administrator to determine that:
All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and conform with
the requirements of this and all other applicable codes and ordinances.
All utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems are located and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
Structures will be anchored to prevent floatation, collapse, or lateral movement.
Building materials are flood-resistant.
Appropriate practices that minimize flood damage have been used.
Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment, and other service
facilities have been designed and located to prevent water entry or accumulation.
Applicants shall file the following minimum information plus any other pertinent information as may
be required by the Floodplain Administrator to make the above determination:
A completed permit application form.
A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one inch being equal to 100
feet or less, showing the following:
North arrow, scale, and date.
Topographic contour lines, if available.
The location of all existing and proposed buildings, structures, and other improvements,
including the location of any existing or proposed subdivision and development.
The location of all existing streets, drives, and other access ways.
The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses, identified floodplain areas,
and, if available, information pertaining to the floodway, and the flow of water including
direction and velocities.
Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other improvements, drawn at suitable scale
showing the following:
The proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed building based upon North
American Vertical Datum of 1988.
The elevation of the base flood.
Supplemental information as may be necessary under 34 Pa. Code, the 2009 IBC or the
2009 IRC.
The following data and documentation:
If available, information concerning flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact and uplift
forces and other factors associated with a base flood.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 99/505
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(a)
(b)
(6)
(7)
(8)
4.
Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing measures and
corresponding elevations.
Documentation, certified by a registered professional engineer or architect, to show that
the cumulative effect of any proposed development within an AE Area/District with
floodway (see § 8-402, Subsection 1A) when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, will not increase the base flood elevation at any point.
Documentation, certified by a registered professional engineer or architect, to show that
the cumulative effect of any proposed development within an AE Area/District without
floodway (see § 8-402, Subsection 1B) when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, will not increase the base flood elevation more than 0.5 foot at
any point within the community.
A document, certified by a registered professional engineer or architect, which states that
the proposed construction or development has been adequately designed to withstand
the pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces associated with the base flood.
Such statement shall include a description of the type and extent of flood proofing
measures which have been incorporated into the design of the structure and/or the
development.
Detailed information needed to determine compliance with § 8-503, Subsection 1F,
"Storage," and § 8-504, "Development Which May Endanger Human Life," including:
The amount, location and purpose of any materials or substances referred to in § 8-
503, Subsection 1F, and § 8-504 which are intended to be used, produced, stored or
otherwise maintained on site.
A description of the safeguards incorporated into the design of the proposed
structure to prevent leaks or spills of the dangerous materials or substances listed in
§ 8-504 during a base flood.
The appropriate component of the Department of Environmental Protection's "Planning
Module for Land Development."
Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting the requirements of the
Department of Environmental Protection, to implement and maintain erosion and
sedimentation control.
Applications for permits shall be accompanied by a fee, payable to the municipality based upon
the estimated cost of the proposed construction as determined by the Floodplain Administrator.
§ 8-305. Review by County Conservation District.
[Ord. 966, 3/6/2013, Art. III, § 3.05]
A copy of all applications and plans for any proposed construction or development in any identified
floodplain area to be considered for approval shall be submitted by the applicant to the County
Conservation District for review and comment prior to the issuance of a permit. The recommendations
of the Conservation District shall be considered by the Floodplain Administrator for possible
incorporation into the proposed plan.
§ 8-306. Review of Application by Others.
[Ord. 966, 3/6/2013, Art. III, § 3.06]
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 100/505
1.
2.
A.
1.
A copy of all plans and applications for any proposed construction or development in any identified
floodplain area to be considered for approval may be submitted by the Floodplain Administrator to any
other appropriate agencies and/or individuals (e.g., planning commission, municipal engineer, etc.) for
review and comment.
§ 8-307. Changes.
[Ord. 966, 3/6/2013, Art. III, § 3.07]
After the issuance of a permit by the Floodplain Administrator, no changes of any kind shall be made to
the application, permit or any of the plans, specifications or other documents submitted with the
application without the written consent or approval of the Floodplain Administrator. Requests for any
such change shall be in writing, and shall be submitted by the applicant to Floodplain Administrator for
consideration.
§ 8-308. Placards.
[Ord. 966, 3/6/2013, Art. III, § 3.08]
In addition to the permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall issue a placard which shall be displayed on
the premises during the time construction is in progress. This placard shall show the number of the
permit, the date of its issuance, and be signed by the Floodplain Administrator.
§ 8-309. Start of Construction.
[Ord. 966, 3/6/2013, Art. III, § 3.09]
Work on the proposed construction or development shall begin within 180 days after the date of
issuance and shall be completed within 12 months after the date of issuance of the permit or the
permit shall expire unless a time extension is granted, in writing, by the Floodplain Administrator.
The actual start of construction means either the first placement of permanent construction of a
structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured
home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as
clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor
does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of
temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such
as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first, alteration of any wall,
ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the building.
Time extensions shall be granted only if a written request is submitted by the applicant, which sets
forth sufficient and reasonable cause for the Floodplain Administrator to approve such a request.
§ 8-310. Enforcement.
[Ord. 966, 3/6/2013, Art. III, § 3.10]
Notices. Whenever the Floodplain Administrator or other authorized municipal representative
determines that there are reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any
provisions of this chapter, or of any regulations adopted pursuant thereto, the Floodplain
Administrator shall give notice of such alleged violation as hereinafter provided. Such notice shall:
Be in writing.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 101/505
B.
C.
D.
E.
2.
1.
2.
3.
A.
1.
Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance.
Allow a reasonable time not to exceed a period of 30 days for the performance of any act it
requires.
Be served upon the property owner or his agent as the case may require; provided, however,
that such notice or order shall be deemed to have been properly served upon such owner or
agent when a copy thereof has been served with such notice by any other method authorized
or required by the laws of this state.
Contain an outline of remedial actions which, if taken, will effect compliance with the
provisions of this chapter.
Penalties. Any person who fails to comply with any or all of the requirements or provisions of this
chapter or who fails or refuses to comply with any notice, order of direction of the Floodplain
Administrator or any other authorized employee of the municipality shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction shall pay a fine to Stroudsburg Borough, of not less than $25
nor more than $600 plus costs of prosecution. In addition to the above penalties all other actions
are hereby reserved including an action in equity for the proper enforcement of this chapter. The
imposition of a fine or penalty for any violation of, or noncompliance with this chapter shall not
excuse the violation or noncompliance or permit it to continue. All such persons shall be required
to correct or remedy such violations and noncompliance within a reasonable time. Any
development initiated or any structure or building constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, altered, or
relocated, in noncompliance with this chapter may be declared by the Council to be a public
nuisance and abatable as such.
§ 8-311. Appeals.
[Ord. 966, 3/6/2013, Art. III, § 3.11]
Any person aggrieved by any action or decision of the Floodplain Administrator concerning the
administration of the provisions of this chapter, may appeal to the Council. Such appeal must be
filed, in writing, within 30 days after the decision, determination or action of the Floodplain
Administrator.
Upon receipt of such appeal the Council shall set a time and place, within not less than 10 or not
more than 30 days, for the purpose of considering the appeal. Notice of the time and place at
which the appeal will be considered shall be given to all parties.
Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Board may seek relief therefrom by appeal to court,
as provided by the laws of this state including the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act.
Part 4. IDENTIFICATION OF FLOODPLAIN AREAS
§ 8-401. Identification.
[Ord. 966, 3/6/2013, Art. IV, § 4.01]
The identified floodplain area shall be:
Any areas of Stroudsburg Borough, classified as special flood hazard areas (SFHAs) in the
Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs)
dated May 2, 2013, and issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) or
the most recent revision thereof, including all digital data developed as part of the Flood
Insurance Study.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 102/505
2.
(1)
(2)
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
C.
1.
2.
The above-referenced FIS and FIRMs, and any subsequent revisions and amendments, are
hereby adopted by Stroudsburg Borough and declared to be a part of this chapter.
§ 8-402. Description and Special Requirements of Identified
Floodplain Areas.
[Ord. 966, 3/6/2013, Art. IV, § 4.02]
The identified floodplain area shall consist of the following specific areas:
The Floodway Area/District identified as floodway in the FIS which represents the channel of
a watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the
base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation by more than one foot
at any point. This term shall also include floodway areas which have been identified in other
available studies or sources of information for those special flood hazard areas where no
floodway has been identified in the FIS.
Within any floodway area, no encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, or other development shall be permitted unless it has been demonstrated
through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis performed in accordance with standard
engineering practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in
flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
No new construction or development shall be allowed, unless a permit is obtained from
the Department of Environmental Protection Regional Office.
The AE Area/District without floodway shall be those areas identified as an AE Zone on the
FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA and for which base flood elevations have been
provided in the FIS but no floodway has been delineated.
No permit shall be granted for any construction, development, use, or activity within any
AE Area/District without floodway unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of
the proposed development would not, together with all other existing and anticipated
development, increase the BFE more than 0.5 foot at any point.
No new construction or development shall be located within the area measured 50 feet
landward from the top-of-bank of any watercourse, unless a permit is obtained from the
Department of Environmental Protection Regional Office.
The A Area/District shall be those areas identified as an A Zone on the FIRM included in the
FIS prepared by FEMA and for which no 1% annual chance flood elevations have been
provided. For these areas, elevation and floodway information from other federal, state, or
other acceptable sources shall be used when available.
In lieu of the above, the municipality may require the applicant to determine the elevation with
hydrologic and hydraulic engineering techniques. Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be
undertaken only by professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications, who shall
certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently accepted technical concepts.
Studies, analyses, computations, etc., shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough
technical review by the municipality.
§ 8-403. Changes in Identification of Area.
[Ord. 966, 3/6/2013, Art. IV, § 4.03]
The identified floodplain area may be revised or modified by the Council where studies or information
provided by a qualified agency or person documents the need for such revision. However, prior to any
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 103/505
A.
B.
C.
1.
A.
B.
C.
2.
such change to the special flood hazard area, approval must be obtained from FEMA. Additionally, as
soon as practicable, but not later than six months after the date such information becomes available, a
community shall notify FEMA of the changes to the special flood hazard area by submitting technical or
scientific data.
§ 8-404. Boundary Disputes.
[Ord. 966, 3/6/2013, Art. IV, § 4.04]
Should a dispute concerning any identified floodplain boundary arise, an initial determination shall be
made by the Stroudsburg Borough Planning Commission and any party aggrieved by this decision or
determination may appeal to Council. The burden of proof shall be on the appellant.
§ 8-405. Jurisdictional Boundary Changes.
[Ord. 966, 3/6/2013, Art. IV, § 4.05]
Prior to development occurring in areas where annexation or other corporate boundary changes are
proposed or have occurred, the community shall review flood hazard data affecting the lands subject to
boundary changes. The community shall adopt and enforce floodplain regulations in areas subject to
annexation or corporate boundary changes which meet or exceed those in 44 CFR 60.3.
Part 5. TECHNICAL PROVISIONS
§ 8-501. General.
[Ord. 966, 3/6/2013, Art. V, § 5.01]
Alteration or Relocation of Watercourse.
No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be made to any watercourse
until all adjacent municipalities which may be affected by such action have been notified by
the municipality, and until all required permits or approvals have first been obtained from the
Department of Environmental Protection Regional Office.
No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be made to any watercourse
unless it can be shown that the activity will not reduce or impede the flood carrying capacity of
the watercourse in any way.
In addition, FEMA and the Pennsylvania Department of Community and Economic
Development, shall be notified prior to any alteration or relocation of any watercourse.
Technical or scientific data shall be submitted by applicant to FEMA for a letter of map revision
(LOMR) as soon as practicable but within six months of any new construction, development, or
other activity resulting in changes in the BFE. The situations when a LOMR or a conditional letter
of map revision (CLOMR) are required are:
Any development that causes a rise in the base flood elevations within the floodway.
Any development occurring in Zone AE without a designated floodway, which will cause a rise
of more than 0.5 foot in the base flood elevation.
Alteration or relocation of a stream (including, but not limited to, installing culverts and
bridges).
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 104/505
3.
4.
A.
B.
C.
1.
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
C.
D.
2.
Any new construction, development, uses or activities allowed within any identified floodplain area
shall be undertaken in strict compliance with the provisions contained in this chapter and any other
applicable codes, ordinances and regulations.
Within any identified floodplain area (see § 8-402), no new construction or development shall be
located within the area measured 50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of any watercourse,
unless a permit is obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection Regional Office.
§ 8-502. Elevation and Floodproofing Requirements.
[Ord. 966, 3/6/2013, Art. V, § 5.02]
Residential Structures.
In AE Zones, any new construction or substantial improvement shall have the lowest floor
(including basement) elevated up to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation.
In A Zones, where there are no base flood elevations specified on the FIRM, any new
construction or substantial improvement shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated up to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation determined in accordance with § 8-
402, Subsection 1C, of this chapter.
The design and construction standards and specifications contained in the 2009 International
Building Code (IBC) and in the 2009 International Residential Code (IRC) or the most recent
revisions thereof and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code, Chapters 401 — 405, as amended, shall be
utilized.
Nonresidential Structures.
In AE Zones, any new construction or substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated up to, or above, the regulatory flood
elevation, or be designed and constructed so that the space enclosed below the regulatory
flood elevation:
Is floodproofed so that the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to
the passage of water.
Has structural components with the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
loads and effects of buoyancy.
In A Zones, where no base flood elevations are specified on the FIRM, any new construction
or substantial improvement shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or
completely floodproofed up to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation determined in
accordance with § 8-402, Subsection 1C, of this chapter.
Any nonresidential structure, or part thereof, made watertight below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be floodproofed in accordance with the W1 or W2 space classification
standards contained in the publication entitled "Flood-Proofing Regulations" published by the
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (June 1972, as amended March 1992) or with some other
equivalent standard. All plans and specifications for such floodproofing shall be accompanied
by a statement certified by a registered professional engineer or architect which states that
the proposed design and methods of construction are in conformance with the above
referenced standards.
The design and construction standards and specifications contained in the 2009 International
Building Code (IBC) and in the 2009 International Residential Code (IRC) or the most recent
revisions thereof and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code, Chapters 401 — 405, as amended, shall be
utilized.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 105/505
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
3.
4.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(1)
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
C.
1.
Space below the Lowest Floor.
Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor (excluding basements) which will be used solely
for the parking of a vehicle, building access, or incidental storage in an area other than a
basement, shall be designed and constructed to allow for the automatic entry and exit of flood
waters for the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces on exterior walls. The term "fully
enclosed space" also includes crawl spaces.
Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect, or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less than one square inch for
every square foot of enclosed space.
The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade.
Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or devices provided
that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
Historic Structures. See § 8-902 for requirements for the substantial improvement of any historic
structures.
§ 8-503. Design and Construction Standards.
[Ord. 966, 3/6/2013, Art. V, § 5.03]
The following minimum standards shall apply for all construction and development proposed within
any identified floodplain area:
Fill.
If fill is used, it shall:
Extend laterally at least 15 feet beyond the building line from all points.
Consist of soil or small rock materials only. Sanitary landfills shall not be permitted.
Be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and resistance to erosion,
scouring, or settling.
Be no steeper than one vertical to two horizontal feet unless substantiated data
justifying steeper slopes are submitted to, and approved by, the Floodplain
Administrator.
Be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect adjacent properties.
Drainage Facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to convey the flow of
stormwater runoff in a safe and efficient manner. The system shall ensure proper drainage
along streets, and provide positive drainage away from buildings. The system shall also be
designed to prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent properties.
Water and Sanitary Sewer Facilities and Systems.
All new or replacement water supply and sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be
located, designed and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damages and the
infiltration of flood waters.
Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to prevent the discharge of
untreated sewage into flood waters.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 106/505
(3)
(4)
D.
E.
F.
G.
(1)
(2)
H.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
I.
(1)
(2)
(3)
J.
No part of any on-site sewage system shall be located within any identified floodplain
area except in strict compliance with all state and local regulations for such systems. If
any such system is permitted, it shall be located so as to avoid impairment to it, or
contamination from it, during a flood.
The design and construction provisions of the UCC and FEMA #348, "Protecting Building
Utilities from Flood Damages" and the International Private Sewage Disposal Code shall
be utilized.
Other Utilities. All other utilities such as gas lines, electrical and telephone systems shall be
located, elevated (where possible) and constructed to minimize the chance of impairment
during a flood.
Streets. The finished elevation of all new streets and parking areas shall be no more than one
foot below the regulatory flood elevation.
Storage. All materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or in times of flooding, could be
injurious to human, animal, or plant life, and not listed in § 8-504, "Development Which May
Endanger Human Life," shall be stored at or above the regulatory flood elevation or flood
proofed to the maximum extent possible.
Placement of Buildings and Structures. All buildings and structures shall be designed,
located, and constructed so as to offer the minimum obstruction to the flow of water and shall
be designed to have a minimum effect upon the flow and height of flood water.
Anchoring.
All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance with accepted
engineering practices to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.
All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks, and other similar objects or components located
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be securely anchored or affixed to prevent
flotation.
Floors, Walls and Ceilings.
Wood flooring used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be installed to
accommodate a lateral expansion of the flooring, perpendicular to the flooring grain,
without causing structural damage to the building.
Plywood used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of a "marine" or "waterresistant"
variety.
Walls and ceilings at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be designed and
constructed of materials that are "water-resistant" and will withstand inundation.
Windows, doors, and other components at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be made of metal or other "water-resistant" material.
Paints and Adhesives.
Paints and other finishes used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of
"marine" or "water-resistant" quality.
Adhesives used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of a "marine" or
"water-resistant" variety.
All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) used at or below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be finished with a "marine" or "water-resistant" paint or other finishing
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 107/505
(1)
(2)
K.
L.
M.
(1)
(2)
N.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
1.
material.
Electrical Components.
Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three feet above the base flood elevation.
Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be dropped from above.
Equipment. Water heaters, furnaces, air conditioning and ventilating units, and other
electrical, mechanical or utility equipment or apparatus shall not be located below the
regulatory flood elevation.
Fuel Supply Systems. All gas and oil supply systems shall be designed to prevent the
infiltration of flood waters into the system and discharges from the system into flood waters.
Additional provisions shall be made for the drainage of these systems in the event that flood
water infiltration occurs.
Uniform Construction Code Coordination. The standards and specifications contained 34 Pa.
Code, Chapters 401 — 405, as amended, and not limited to the following provisions shall
apply to the above and other sections and subsections of this chapter, to the extent that they
are more restrictive and supplement the requirements of this chapter.
International Building Code (IBC) 2009 or the latest edition thereof: §§ 801, 1202, 1403,
1603, 1605, 1612, 3402, and Appendix G.
International Residential Building Code (IRC) 2009 or the latest edition thereof: §§ R104,
R105, R109, R323, Appendix AE101, Appendix E and Appendix J.
§ 8-504. Development Which May Endanger Human Life.
[Ord. 966, 3/6/2013, Art. V, § 5.04]
In accordance with the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act, and the regulations adopted
by the Department of Community and Economic Development as required by the Act, any new or
substantially improved structure which: will be used for the production or storage of any of the
following dangerous materials or substances; will be used for any activity requiring the
maintenance of a supply of more than 550 gallons, or other comparable volume, of any of the
following dangerous materials or substances on the premises; will involve the production, storage,
or use of any amount of radioactive substances, shall be subject to the provisions of this section,
in addition to all other applicable provisions. The following list of materials and substances are
considered dangerous to human life:
Acetone.
Ammonia.
Benzene.
Calcium carbide.
Carbon disulfide.
Celluloid.
Chlorine.
Hydrochloric acid.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 108/505
I.
J.
K.
L.
M.
N.
O.
P.
Q.
R.
2.
3.
4.
A.
B.
5.
Hydrocyanic acid.
Magnesium.
Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen.
Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.).
Phosphorus.
Potassium.
Sodium.
Sulphur and sulphur products.
Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides, and rodenticides).
Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not otherwise regulated.
Within any floodway area, any structure of the kind described in Subsection 1 above, shall be
prohibited.
Within any identified floodplain area, any new or substantially improved structure of the kind
described in Subsection 1 above, shall be prohibited within the area measured 50 feet landward
from the top-of-bank of any watercourse.
Where permitted within any identified floodplain area, any new or substantially improved
residential structure of the kind described in Subsection 1 above, shall be elevated to remain
completely dry up to at least 1 1/2 above base flood elevation.
Where permitted within any identified floodplain area, any new or substantially improved
nonresidential structure of the kind described in Subsection 1 above, shall be:
Elevated, or designed and constructed to remain completely dry up to at least 1 1/2 above
base flood elevation.
Designed to prevent pollution from the structure or activity during the course of a base flood.
Any such structure, or part thereof, that will be built below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
designed and constructed in accordance with the standards for completely dry floodproofing
contained in the publication "Flood-Proofing Regulations (U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, June 1972
as amended March 1992), or with some other equivalent watertight standard.
§ 8-505. Special Requirements for Subdivisions.
[Ord. 966, 3/6/2013, Art. V, § 5.05]
All subdivision proposals and development, in identified floodplain areas where base flood elevation
data are not available, shall be supported by hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses that
determine base flood elevations and floodway information. The analyses shall be prepared by a
licensed professional engineer in a format required by FEMA for a conditional letter of map revision or
letter of map revision. Submittal requirements and processing fees shall be the responsibility of the
applicant.
§ 8-506. Special Requirements for Manufactured Homes.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 109/505
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
C.
1.
1.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
2.
A.
1.
[Ord. 966, 3/6/2013, Art. V, § 5.06]
Within any identified floodplain area manufactured homes shall be prohibited. If a variance is
obtained in accordance with the criteria in Part 8, then the following provisions apply:
If proposed, all manufactured homes, and any improvements thereto, shall be:
Placed on a permanent foundation.
Elevated so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at least 1 1/2 feet above
base flood elevation.
Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.
Installation of manufactured homes shall be done in accordance with the manufacturers'
installation instructions as provided by the manufacturer. Where the applicant cannot provide
the above information, the requirements of Appendix E of the 2009 "International Residential
Building Code" or the "U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development's Permanent
Foundations for Manufactured Housing," 1984 Edition, draft or latest revision thereto and 34
Pa. Code, Chapters 401 — 405, shall apply.
Consideration shall be given to the installation requirements of the 2009 IBC, and the 2009
IRC or the most recent revisions thereto and 34 Pa. Code, as amended where appropriate
and/or applicable to units where the manufacturers' standards for anchoring cannot be
provided or were not established for the proposed unit(s) installation.
§ 8-507. Special Requirements for Recreational Vehicles.
[Ord. 966, 3/6/2013, Art. V, § 5.07]
Within any identified floodplain area recreational vehicles shall be prohibited.
If a variance is obtained in accordance with the criteria in Part 8, then the following provisions
apply:
Recreational vehicles in Zones A and AE must either:
Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days.
Be fully licensed and ready for highway use.
Meet the permit requirements for manufactured homes in § 8-506.
Part 6. ACTIVITIES REQUIRING SPECIAL PERMITS
§ 8-601. General.
[Ord. 966, 3/6/2013, Art. VI, § 6.01]
In accordance with the administrative regulations promulgated by the Department of Community
and Economic Development to implement the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act, the
following activities shall be prohibited within any Identified Floodplain Area unless a special permit
has been issued by Stroudsburg Borough.
The commencement of any of the following activities; or the construction, enlargement, or
expansion of any structure used, or intended to be used, for any of the following activities:
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 110/505
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
C.
(1)
(2)
D.
1.
Hospitals.
Nursing homes.
Jails or prisons.
The commencement of, or any construction of, a new manufactured home park or
manufactured home subdivision, or substantial improvement to an existing manufactured
home park or manufactured home subdivision.
§ 8-602. Application Requirements for Special Permits.
[Ord. 966, 3/6/2013, Art. VI, § 6.02]
Applicants for special permits shall provide five copies of the following items:
A written request including a completed permit application form.
A small scale map showing the vicinity in which the proposed site is located.
A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one inch being equal to 100
feet or less, showing the following:
North arrow, scale and date.
Topography based upon the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, showing
existing and proposed contours at intervals of two feet.
All property and lot lines including dimensions, and the size of the site expressed in acres
or square feet.
The location of all existing streets, drives, other access ways, and parking areas, with
information concerning widths, pavement types and construction, and elevations.
The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses, buildings, structures and
other public or private facilities, including railroad tracks and facilities, and any other
natural and man-made features affecting, or affected by, the proposed activity or
development.
The location of the floodplain boundary line, information and spot elevations concerning
the base flood elevation, and information concerning the flow of water including direction
and velocities.
The location of all proposed buildings, structures, utilities, and any other improvements.
Any other information which the municipality considers necessary for adequate review of
the application.
Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other improvements, clearly and legibly drawn
at suitable scale showing the following:
Sufficiently detailed architectural or engineering drawings, including floor plans, sections,
and exterior building elevations, as appropriate.
For any proposed building, the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) and, as
required, the elevation of any other floor.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 111/505
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
E.
Complete information concerning flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact and uplift
forces, and other factors associated with the base flood.
Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing measures.
Cross section drawings for all proposed streets, drives, other accessways, and parking
areas, showing all rights-of-way and pavement widths.
Profile drawings for all proposed streets, drives, and vehicular accessways including
existing and proposed grades.
Plans and profiles of all proposed sanitary and storm sewer systems, water supply
systems, and any other utilities and facilities.
The following data and documentation:
Certification from the applicant that the site upon which the activity or development is
proposed is an existing separate and single parcel, owned by the applicant or the client
he represents.
Certification from a registered professional engineer, architect, or landscape architect that
the proposed construction has been adequately designed to protect against damage from
the base flood.
A statement, certified by a registered professional engineer, architect, landscape
architect, or other qualified person which contains a complete and accurate description of
the nature and extent of pollution that might possibly occur from the development during
the course of a base flood, including a statement concerning the effects such pollution
may have on human life.
A statement certified by a registered professional engineer, architect, or landscape
architect, which contains a complete and accurate description of the effects the proposed
development will have on base flood elevation and flows.
A statement, certified by a registered professional engineer, architect, or landscape
architect, which contains a complete and accurate description of the kinds and amounts
of any loose buoyant materials or debris that may possibly exist or be located on the site
below the base flood elevation and the effects such materials and debris may have on
base flood elevation and flows.
The appropriate component of the Department of Environmental Protection's "Planning
Module for Land Development."
Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting the requirements of the
Department of Environmental Protection to implement and maintain erosion and
sedimentation control.
Any other applicable permits such as, but not limited to, a permit for any activity regulated
by the Department of Environmental Protection under § 302 of Act 1978-166.
An evacuation plan which fully explains the manner in which the site will be safely
evacuated before or during the course of a base flood.
§ 8-603. Application Review Procedures.
[Ord. 966, 3/6/2013, Art. VI, § 6.03]
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 112/505
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
1.
1.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
2.
Upon receipt of an application for a special permit by Stroudsburg Borough the following
procedures shall apply in addition to those of Part 3:
Within three working days following receipt of the application, a complete copy of the
application and all accompanying documentation shall be forwarded to the County Planning
Commission by registered or certified mail for its review and recommendations. Copies of the
application shall also be forwarded to Stroudsburg Borough Planning Commission and
Stroudsburg Borough Engineer for review and comment.
If an application is received that is incomplete, Stroudsburg Borough shall notify the applicant
in writing, stating in what respect the application is deficient.
If Stroudsburg Borough decides to disapprove an application, it shall notify the applicant, in
writing, of the reasons for the disapproval.
If Stroudsburg Borough approves an application, it shall file written notification, together with
the application and all pertinent information, with the Department of Community and
Economic Development, by registered or certified mail, within five working days after the date
of approval.
Before issuing the special permit, Stroudsburg Borough shall allow the Department of
Community and Economic Development 30 days, after receipt of the notification by the
Department, to review the application and decision made by Stroudsburg Borough.
If Stroudsburg Borough does not receive any communication from the Department of
Community and Economic Development during the thirty-day review period, it may issue a
special permit to the applicant.
If the Department of Community and Economic Development should decide to disapprove an
application, it shall notify Stroudsburg Borough and the applicant, in writing, of the reasons for
the disapproval, and Stroudsburg Borough shall not issue the special permit.
§ 8-604. Special Technical Requirements.
[Ord. 966, 3/6/2013, Art. VI, § 6.04]
In addition to the requirements of Part 5 of this chapter, the following minimum requirements shall
also apply to any proposed development requiring a special permit. If there is any conflict between
any of the following requirements and those in Part 5 of this chapter or in any other code,
ordinance, or regulation, the more restrictive provision shall apply.
No application for a special permit shall be approved unless it can be determined that the structure
or activity will be located, constructed and maintained in a manner which will:
Fully protect the health and safety of the general public and any occupants of the structure. At
a minimum, all new structures shall be designed, located, and constructed so that:
The structure will survive inundation by waters of the base flood without any lateral
movement or damage to either the structure itself, or to any of its equipment or contents
below the BFE.
The lowest floor (including basement) will be elevated to at least 1 1/2 feet above base
flood elevation.
The occupants of the structure can remain inside for an indefinite period of time and be
safely evacuated at any time during the base flood.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 113/505
B.
3.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
1.
Prevent any significant possibility of pollution, increased flood levels or flows, or debris
endangering life and property.
All hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by professional engineers or others
of demonstrated qualifications, who shall certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect
currently accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc., shall be submitted in
sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical review by Stroudsburg Borough and the Department
of Community and Economic Development.
Part 7. EXISTING STRUCTURES IN IDENTIFIED
FLOODPLAIN AREAS
§ 8-701. Existing Structures.
[Ord. 966, 3/6/2013, Art. VII, § 7.01]
The provisions of this chapter do not require any changes or improvements to be made to lawfully
existing structures. However, when an improvement is made to any existing structure, the provisions of
§ 8-702 shall apply.
§ 8-702. Improvements.
[Ord. 966, 3/6/2013, Art. VII, § 7.02]
The following provisions shall apply whenever any improvement is made to an existing structure
located within any identified floodplain area:
No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed within any Floodway
Area/District that would cause any increase in BFE.
No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed within AE Area/District
without floodway that would, together with all other existing and anticipated development,
increase the BFE more than 0.5 foot at any point.
Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any kind to an existing
structure to an extent or amount of 50% or more of its market value, shall constitute a
substantial improvement and shall be undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of
this chapter.
The above activity shall also address the requirements of the 34 Pa. Code, as amended, and
the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC.
Within any Floodway Area/District (see § 8-402, Subsection 1A), no new construction or
development shall be allowed, unless a permit is obtained from the Department of
Environmental Protection Regional Office.
Within any AE Area/District without Floodway (see § 8-402, Subsection 1B), no new
construction or development shall be located within the area measured 50 feet landward from
the top-of-bank of any watercourse, unless a permit is obtained from the Department of
Environmental Protection Regional Office.
Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any kind to an existing
structure, to an extent or amount of less than 50% of its market value, shall be elevated
and/or floodproofed to the greatest extent possible.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 114/505
H.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
(1)
(2)
F.
(1)
(2)
(a)
(3)
G.
1.
Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any kind that meets the
definition of "repetitive loss" shall be undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of
this chapter.
Part 8. VARIANCES
§ 8-801. General.
[Ord. 966, 3/6/2013, Art. VIII, § 8.01]
If compliance with any of the requirements of this chapter would result in an exceptional hardship to a
prospective builder, developer or landowner, Stroudsburg Borough may, upon request, grant relief from
the strict application of the requirements.
§ 8-802. Variance Procedures and Conditions.
[Ord. 966, 3/6/2013, Art. VIII, § 8.02]
Requests for variances shall be considered by Stroudsburg Borough in accordance with the
procedures contained in § 8-311 and the following:
No variance shall be granted for any construction, development, use, or activity within any
Floodway Area/District that would cause any increase in the BFE.
No variance shall be granted for any construction, development, use, or activity within any AE
Area/District without floodway that would, together with all other existing and anticipated
development, increase the BFE more than 0.5 foot at any point.
Except for a possible modification of the regulatory flood elevation requirement involved, no
variance shall be granted for any of the other requirements pertaining specifically to
development regulated by special permit (Part 6) or to development which may endanger
human life (§ 8-504).
If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification necessary to provide relief.
In granting any variance, Stroudsburg Borough shall attach whatever reasonable conditions
and safeguards it considers necessary in order to protect the public health, safety, and
welfare, and to achieve the objectives of this chapter.
Whenever a variance is granted, Stroudsburg Borough shall notify the applicant in writing
that:
The granting of the variance may result in increased premium rates for flood insurance.
Such variances may increase the risks to life and property.
In reviewing any request for a variance, Stroudsburg Borough shall consider, at a minimum,
the following:
That there is good and sufficient cause.
That failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant.
That the granting of the variance will:
Neither result in an unacceptable or prohibited increase in flood heights, additional
threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 115/505
(b)
H.
2.
Nor create nuisances, cause fraud on, or victimize the public, or conflict with any
other applicable state or local ordinances and regulations.
A complete record of all variance requests and related actions shall be maintained by
Stroudsburg Borough. In addition, a report of all variances granted during the year shall be
included in the annual report to the FEMA.
Notwithstanding any of the above, however, all structures shall be designed and constructed so as
to have the capability of resisting the 1% annual chance flood.
Part 9. DEFINITIONS
§ 8-901. General.
[Ord. 966, 3/6/2013, Art. IX, § 9.01]
Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to
give this chapter its most reasonable application.
§ 8-902. Specific Definitions.
[Ord. 966, 3/6/2013, Art. IX, § 9.02]
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE
A use or structure on the same lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to,
the principal use or structure.
BASE FLOOD
A flood which has a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the
"one-hundred-year flood" or one-percent annual chance flood).
BASE FLOOD DISCHARGE
The volume of water resulting from a base flood as it passes a given location within a given time,
usually expressed in cubic feet per second (cfs).
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE)
The elevation shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for Zones AE, AH, A1-30 that
indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a 1% or greater chance of
being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT
Any area of the building having its floor below ground level on all sides.
BOROUGH
The Borough of Stroudsburg.
BUILDING
A combination of materials to form a permanent structure having walls and a roof. Included shall
be all manufactured homes and trailers to be used for human habitation.
DEVELOPMENT
Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate including, but not limited to, the
construction, reconstruction, renovation, repair, expansion, or alteration of buildings or other
structures; the placement of manufactured homes; streets, and other paving; utilities; filling,
grading and excavation; mining; dredging; drilling operations; storage of equipment or materials;
and the subdivision of land.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 116/505
A.
B.
C.
D.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION
A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the
lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation
of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads)
is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a
community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION
The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which
the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FLOOD
A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM)
The official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the
areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS)
The official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency that includes flood
profiles, the Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the water
surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOODPLAIN AREA
A relatively flat or low land area which is subject to partial or complete inundation from an
adjoining or nearby stream, river or watercourse; and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid
accumulation of surface waters from any source.
FLOODPROOFING
Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures
which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and
sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY
The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in
order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more
than one foot.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE
The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls
of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURES
Any structure that is:
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the
Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting
the requirements for individual listing on the National Register.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the
historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by
the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states which have been approved
by the Secretary of the Interior.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic
preservation that have been certified either:
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 117/505
(1)
(2)
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior.
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
LOWEST FLOOR
The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished, flood
resistant partially enclosed area, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, and
incidental storage, in an area other than a basement area is not considered the lowest floor of a
building, provided that such space is not designed and built so that the structure is in violation of
the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME
A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis, and is
designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities.
The term includes park trailers, travel trailers, recreational and other similar vehicles which are
placed on a site for more than 180 consecutive days.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION
A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent
or sale.
MINOR REPAIR
The replacement of existing work with equivalent materials for the purpose of its routine
maintenance and upkeep, but not including the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion
thereof, the removal or cutting of any structural beam or bearing support, or the removal or change
of any required means of egress, or rearrangement of parts of a structure affecting the exitway
requirements; nor shall minor repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of
any standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, oil, waste, vent, or similar piping,
electric wiring, mechanical or other work affecting public health or general safety.
NEW CONSTRUCTION
Structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after March 11, 2013, and includes
any subsequent improvements to such structures. Any construction started after December 31,
1976, and before March 11, 2013, is subject to the ordinance in effect at the time the permit was
issued, provided the start of construction was within 180 days of permit issuance.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION
A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the
lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of
utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a
community.
PERSON
An individual, partnership, public or private association or corporation, firm, trust, estate,
municipality, governmental unit, public utility or any other legal entity whatsoever, which is
recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
POST-FIRM STRUCTURE
A structure for which construction or substantial improvement occurred after December 31, 1974,
or on or after the community's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated December 31, 1976,
whichever is later, and, as such, would be required to be compliant with the regulations of the
National Flood Insurance Program.
PRE-FIRM STRUCTURE
A structure for which construction or substantial improvement occurred on or before December 31,
1974, or before the community's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated December 31,
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 118/505
A.
B.
C.
D.
1976, whichever is later, and, as such, would not be required to be compliant with the regulations
of the National Flood Insurance Program.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE
A vehicle which is:
Built on a single chassis.
Not more than 400 square feet, measured at the largest horizontal projections.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck.
Not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for
recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION
The base flood elevation (BFE) or estimated flood height as determined using simplified methods
plus a freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet.
REPETITIVE LOSS
Flood related damages sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a ten-year
period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on average, equals or
exceeds 25% of the market value of the structure before the damages occurred.
SPECIAL PERMIT
A special approval which is required for hospitals, nursing homes, jails, and new manufactured
home parks and subdivisions and substantial improvements to such existing parks, when such
development is located in all, or a designated portion of a floodplain.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA)
An area in the floodplain subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
It is shown on the FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, or, AH.
START OF CONSTRUCTION
Includes substantial improvement and other proposed new development and means the date the
permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days after the date of the permit and
shall be completed within 12 months after the date of issuance of the permit unless a time
extension is granted, in writing, by the Floodplain Administrator. The actual start means either the
first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or
footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of
excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction
does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the
installation of streets and walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers,
or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not
part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means
the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that
alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE
A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above
ground, as well as a manufactured home.
SUBDIVISION
The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of land by any means into two or more lots,
tracts, parcels or other divisions of land including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs, or devisees,
transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided, however, that the subdivision by
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 119/505
lease of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new
street or easement of access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE
Damage from any cause sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its
before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50% or more of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT
Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, of which the cost
equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the
improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage" or
"repetitive loss" regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however,
include any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local
health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code
enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions.
Historic structures undergoing repair or rehabilitation that would constitute a substantial
improvement as defined in this chapter, must comply with all ordinance requirements that do not
preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. Documentation that a
specific ordinance requirement will cause removal of the structure from the National Register of
Historic Places or the state inventory of historic places must be obtained from the Secretary of the
Interior or the State Historic Preservation Officer. Any exemption from ordinance requirements will
be the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE (UCC)
The statewide building code adopted by the Pennsylvania General Assembly in 1999 applicable to
new construction in all municipalities whether administered by the municipality, a third party or the
Department of Labor and Industry. Applicable to residential and commercial buildings, the Code
adopted the International Residential Code (IRC) and the International Building Code (IBC), by
reference, as the construction standard applicable with the state floodplain construction. For
coordination purposes, references to the above are made specifically to various sections of the
IRC and the IBC.
VIOLATION
The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's
floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation
certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR 60.3(b)(5), (c)
(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
Chapter 9. (Reserved)
Chapter 10. Health and Safety
Part 1. STORAGE OF MOTOR VEHICLES,
ACCESSORIES AND JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLES
§ 10-101. Definitions.
[Ord. 592, 9/8/1982, § 1; as amended by Ord. 973, 7/3/2013]
For the purpose of this Part 1, the following definitions shall be applicable:
JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLE
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 120/505
A vehicle which cannot be driven upon the public streets for any reason including, but not limited
to, being unlicensed, wrecked, abandoned, in a state of disrepair, incapable of being moved under
its own power, or is not legally operable.
MOTOR VEHICLE
Any self-propelled land vehicle which can be used for towing or transporting people or materials,
including but not limited to automobiles, trucks, buses, motor homes, motorized campers,
motorcycles, motor scooters, tractors, snowmobiles, dune buggies, and other off-the-road
vehicles.
MOTOR VEHICLE ACCESSORIES
Any part or parts of any motor vehicle.
PERSON
Includes any individual, firm, partnership or corporation.
PRIVATE PROPERTY
Any real property not owned by the federal government, state, county, city school board or other
public subdivisions.
REMOVAL
The physical relocation of a motor vehicle to an authorized location.
§ 10-102. Prohibited Storage.
[Ord. 592, 9/8/1982, § 2; as amended by Ord. 670, 5/10/1989, § 1]
It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having custody of any junked motor vehicle or motor
vehicle accessories to store or permit any such vehicle or accessories to remain on any private
property within the Borough for a period of more than 20 days following receipt of a notice requiring
such removal, and it shall be further unlawful for any person owning any private property in the
Borough to store or permit to remain any such vehicles or accessories on his property for more than a
like period. Such storage is declared to be a public nuisance and may be abated or removed and
penalties imposed as provided in this Part 1.
It shall be unlawful for any person, after notification to remove any junked motor vehicles or motor
vehicle accessories from any private property upon which such storage is not permitted or onto any
public highway or other public property for purposes of storage.
§ 10-103. Permitted Storage.
[Ord. 592, 9/8/1982, § 3]
This section shall not apply to any motor vehicle or motor vehicle accessories stored within an
enclosed building, or on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful place and manner
when necessary to the operation of such business enterprise, in a storage place of depository
maintained in a lawful place and manner, or seasonal-use vehicles such as snowmobiles, motorcycles,
motor scooters and nonmotorized campers. Such business enterprises shall not include automobile
service stations or tire, battery and accessory sales stores. Such business enterprises shall include
auto junkyards and auto repair and auto body shops; provided, however, that, with respect to auto
repair and auto body shops, the permitted storage as provided by this section shall not apply to any
motor vehicle or motor vehicle accessories stored on the premises of such businesses for a period in
excess of 90 days. Junked motor vehicles stored or maintained on the premises of an auto repair or
auto body shop for a period beyond 90 days shall constitute prohibited storage under § 10-102 hereof.
§ 10-104. Investigation of Premises.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 121/505
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
1.
A.
[Ord. 1005, 9/8/1982, § 4]
The Zoning and Building Codes Officer or the Chief of Police, on routine inspection or upon receipt of a
complaint, may investigate a suspected junked motor vehicle or motor vehicle accessories and record
the make, model, style and identification numbers and its situation.
§ 10-105. Notice of Removal.
[Ord. 592, 9/8/1982, § 5; as amended by Ord. 670, 5/10/1989, § 2]
Whenever the Zoning and Building Codes Officer or the Chief of Police or any member of their
departments finds or is notified that any junked motor vehicle or motor vehicle accessories have
been stored or permitted to remain on any private property within the Borough, the Zoning and
Building Codes Officer or the Chief of Police shall send by certified mail a notice to the owner of
record of such motor vehicle or accessories, if such owner can be ascertained by the exercise of
reasonable diligence, and also to the owner of the private property, as shown on the tax
assessment records of the city, on which the same is located to remove the junked motor vehicle
or motor vehicle accessories within 20 days. Such notice shall also contain the following additional
information:
Nature of complaint;
Description and location of the motor vehicle and/or motor vehicle accessories;
Statement that the motor vehicle or motor vehicle accessories will be removed from the
premises no later than 20 days from date of notification;
Statement that removal from the location specified in the notification to another location upon
which such storage is not permitted is prohibited and shall subject the person to additional
penalties;
Statement that if removal is made within the time limits specified, notification shall be given in
writing to the Zoning and Building Codes Officer or the Chief of Police; and
Statement of the penalties provided for noncompliance with such notice.
§ 10-106. Penalties.
[Ord. 592, 9/8/1982, § 6; as amended by Ord. 599, 12/19/1983]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part 1 shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $300, together with costs of prosecution, or to
imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days. Every day that a violation of this Part 1 continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
Part 2. STORAGE AND USE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY
§ 10-201. Nuisances; Prohibited Use or Storage.
[Ord. 556, 9/1/1976; as amended by Ord. 887, 7/2/2008]
Unsheltered Storage of Unused or Unusable Personal Property a Nuisance. Unsheltered storage
of any machinery, implements, and/or equipment and personal property of any kind which is no
longer safely usable for the purpose for which it was manufactured, which hereinafter is
collectively described as "said personality," for a period of 20 days or more (except in licensed
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 122/505
B.
1.
2.
3.
junkyards) within the corporate limits of this Borough, is hereby declared to be a nuisance and
dangerous to the public safety.
Use or Storage of Indoor Furniture. The use, keeping of storage of any upholstered furniture,
including mattresses, manufactured primarily for indoor user shall be prohibited in any yard or any
unenclosed porch.
§ 10-202. Abatement of Nuisance by Owner.
[Ord. 556, 9/1/1976; as amended by Ord. 887, 7/2/2008]
The owner, owners, tenants, lessees and/or occupants of any lot within the corporate limits of this
Borough upon which such storage is made, and also the owner, owners, and/or lessees of said
personalty involved in such storage (all of whom are hereinafter referred to collectively as "owners"),
shall jointly and severally abate said nuisance by the prompt removal of said personalty into completely
enclosed buildings authorized to be used for such storage purposes if within the corporate limits of the
Borough, or otherwise to remove it to a location without said corporate limits.
§ 10-203. Penalties.
[Ord. 556, 9/1/1976; as amended by Ord. 599, 12/19/1983; and by Ord. 887, 7/2/2008]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part 1 shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $300, together with costs of prosecution, or to
imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days.
Notice and Payment of Violation. Upon the discovery of any violation under the terms of this Part,
the municipality shall, through its authorized agents, give notice to the owner of a violation
hereunder, either by personal delivery to such owner, by United States mail directed to the lastknown
address of such person or persons, as shown in the real estate registry records of the
municipality, or by leaving the same on the premises where such violation occurs.
[Added by Ord. 1032, 8/15/2017]
If such person shall, within seven days after the delivery, mailing or leaving of such notice, pay to
the Treasurer of the municipality the sum of $25 for the violation, the same will constitute full
satisfaction for the violation noted in said notice. If two or more violations are issued for the same
property during a calendar year, the second and subsequent violations' payment shall increase an
additional $25 per subsequent violation to a maximum of $300. The failure of such person to make
payment, as aforesaid, within seven days shall render such owner subject to the penalties as
provided hereinabove.
[Added by Ord. 1032, 8/15/2017]
§ 10-204. Abatement of Nuisance by Borough.
[Ord. 556, 9/1/1976; as amended by Ord. 887, 7/2/2008]
Whenever said owners fail to abate said nuisance, then the Borough shall remove the said personalty
to a location of its selection, the expenses therefor to be billed to said owners, jointly and severally,
said bill to be recoverable in a suit at law.
When said personalty has been removed and placed in storage by the Borough, as provided for
herein, said personalty shall be sold by the Borough after the lapse of such time as is provided by law.
If the proceeds of such sale are insufficient to pay the costs of abatement, said owners shall be liable
to the Borough for the balance of the costs, jointly and severally, to be recoverable in a suit at law. If
the proceeds are in excess of costs the balance shall be paid to the said owners, or deposited in the
Borough Treasury for their use.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 123/505
§ 10-205. Enforcement.
[Added by Ord. 599, 12/19/1983; as amended by Ord. 887, 7/2/2008]
The Code Enforcement Officer or the Chief of Police are hereby empowered to enforce the provisions
of this Part.
Part 3. WEEDS AND OTHER VEGETATION
§ 10-301. Vegetative Growth a Nuisance Under Certain
Conditions.
[Ord. 599, 12/19/1983]
No person, firm or corporation, owning or occupying any property within the Borough of Stroudsburg
shall permit any grass or weeds or any vegetation whatsoever, not edible or planted for some useful or
ornamental purpose, to grow or remain upon such premises so as to exceed a height of 10 inches, or
to throw off any unpleasant or noxious odor, or to conceal any filthy deposit, or to create or produce
pollen. Any grass, weeds or other vegetation growing upon any premises in the Borough of
Stroudsburg in violation of any of the provisions of this section is hereby declared to be a nuisance and
detrimental to the health, safety, cleanliness and comfort of the inhabitants of the Borough.
§ 10-302. Responsibility for Removing, Cutting or Trimming.
[Ord. 599, 12/19/1983]
The owner of any premises, or the occupant of premises occupied by other than the owner, shall
remove, trim or cut all grass, weeds or other vegetation growing or remaining upon such premises in
violation of the provisions of § 10-301.
§ 10-303. Notice to Remove, Trim or Cut; Municipality May Do
Work and Collect Cost and Additional Amount.
[Ord. 599, 12/19/1983; as amended by Ord. 671, 5/10/1989, § 1]
The Borough Council, or any officer or employee of the Borough of Stroudsburg designated thereby for
this purpose, is hereby authorized to give notice, by personal service or by United States mail, to the
owner or occupant, as the case may be, of any premises whereon grass, weeds or other vegetation is
growing or remaining in violation of the provisions of § 10-301 of this Part, directing and requiring such
occupant to remove, trim or cut such grass, weeds or vegetation, and to continually maintain the
premises so as to conform to the requirements of this Part, within five days after issuance of such
notice. The service of one notice shall be considered sufficient notice for the remaining growing
season. Whenever, in the judgment of the Enforcement Officer/Inspector it shall appear to be
impracticable to give notice as above provided, either because the owner or occupant cannot readily
be found or because a search for the owner or occupant would entail unreasonable delay, the Borough
Council or any officer or employee of the Borough designated thereby for that purpose, may give
notice by posting conspicuously on the property where such nuisance exists, a notice or order directing
and requiring that such nuisance be abated within five days. In case any person, firm or corporation
shall neglect, fail or refuse to comply with such notice within the period of time stated therein, the
Borough Council may order the removal, trimming or cutting of such grass, weeds or vegetation, and
the cost thereof, together with a penalty of 10% of the cost thereof, shall be collected by the Borough
from such person, firm or corporation, in the manner provided by law.
§ 10-304. Penalties for Violation.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 124/505
1.
2.
3.
[Ord. 599, 12/19/1983]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $300, and/or to undergo imprisonment for a
term not to exceed 90 days. Each day that a violation of this Part continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
Notice and Payment of Violation. Upon the discovery of any violation under the terms of this Part,
the municipality shall, through its authorized agents, give notice to the owner of a violation
hereunder, either by personal delivery to such owner, by United States mail directed to the lastknown
address of such person or persons, as shown in the real estate registry records of the
municipality, or by leaving the same on the premises where such violation occurs.
[Added by Ord. 1032, 8/15/2017]
If such person shall, within seven days after the delivery, mailing or leaving of such notice, pay to
the Treasurer of the municipality the sum of $25 for the violation, the same will constitute full
satisfaction for the violation noted in said notice. If two or more violations are issued for the same
property during a calendar year, the second and subsequent violations' payment shall increase an
additional $25 per subsequent violation to a maximum of $300. The failure of such person to make
payment, as aforesaid, within seven days shall render such owner subject to the penalties as
provided hereinabove.
[Added by Ord. 1032, 8/15/2017]
Part 4. REIMBURSEMENT FOR SERVICES AND
EXPENSES FOR OCCURRENCES THAT AFFECT
HEALTH, SAFETY OR ORDERLY BUSINESS
§ 10-401. Definitions.
[Ord. 778, 6/16/1999, § 1]
EXPENSES, COSTS AND FEES
Those expenses, costs and fees that are incurred by the Borough, or charged to the Borough by
any local agency, state, or federal department or agency, emergency services organization and
from any contractor employed by the Borough for actual costs or charges for labor, materials, or
damaged or destroyed equipment or property in responding to an occurrence and associated with
the implementation of a protective action (i.e., detour, evacuation) to protect the public health,
safety and welfare. The cost of labor shall include the actual rates, including fringe benefits, paid
by the Borough of Stroudsburg to its employees, the Borough Local Emergency Management
Coordinator and Deputy Coordinator.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS OR SUBSTANCES
Petroleum and its derivatives, explosives, flammables, acids, oxidizing chemicals, poison gases,
defoliants, and any materials or substances regarded and defined as hazardous by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection or its successor agency.
NONHAZARDOUS MATERIALS OR SUBSTANCES
Any materials or substances in any shape, form, or composition, including but not limited to
garbage, trash, vegetation, construction and demolition, equipment, machinery, vehicles or similar
items that require a halting or detouring of traffic for the removal or cleaning and repair of the
roadway or area damaged or causes the evacuation of persons, animals or property to insure the
safety, health and welfare of persons, animals or property.
OCCURRENCE
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 125/505
A.
B.
C.
1.
An occurrence involving hazardous or nonhazardous material or a hazardous or nonhazardous
substance that is or may result in Borough employees, volunteers or Borough equipment being
called to the scene; released into the air, ground or water or the threat of any potential release into
the air, ground or water or the threat of any potential release; or a situation that requires a halting
or detouring of traffic or an evacuation of persons or animals from an area to insure the health,
safety and welfare of persons or their property.
PROTECTIVE ACTION
An action, such as traffic control, detours, covering, cleanup, removal or evacuation, taken by the
Borough or by other officials or agencies in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
SERVICES
A service performed by the Borough departments or employees or any public or private sector
organization, agency or company directly associated with traffic control and monitoring or
otherwise mitigating the occurrence or involved in providing service to implement a protective
action. These services may include but are not limited to the abatement and disposition of
hazardous and nonhazardous materials, spills, releases or the threat of spills or releases of
hazardous and nonhazardous materials, utility line breaks or leakages and other imminent or
perceived or potential threats to the health, safety and welfare of the public that may be detailed or
contemplated in the definition of "expenses, costs and fees" above.
§ 10-402. Administration.
[Ord. 778, 6/16/1999, § 2]
The Borough of Stroudsburg shall impose and collect from the person, partnership, corporation or
other entity responsible for an occurrence the following costs, expenses and fees incurred:
Fees and costs (including overhead costs) shall encompass all personnel, equipment, fuel,
materials and maintenance expenses in such a form as to insure for full reimbursement for
charges from both the public and private sectors for services actually rendered.
Within 30 days of the date of the occurrence giving rise to the service, the affected public
agencies, departments, or private companies shall submit their service-related costs, fees,
charges and expenses to the Borough for review. At such time as all costs, fees, charges and
expenses related to the services have been collected and reviewed, but in any case not later
than 60 days from the date of determining the combined cost of rendering services, the
Borough of Stroudsburg shall submit a bill for all costs, fees, charges and expenses to the
owner, agent, or manager of the vehicle or fixed facility that caused the occurrence requiring
services, with a demand that a full remittance be made within 30 days of receipt.
All monies received under the provisions of this chapter shall be placed into the general fund
and reimbursement shall be made to all public and private sector departments or agencies
that had submitted related costs, fees, charges and expenses for providing an extraordinary
service as outlined herein, either in full or pro rata as the funds recovered allow.
§ 10-403. Emergency Conditions.
[Ord. 778, 6/16/1999, § 3]
In the event of a spill, leak or fire involving petroleum, chemicals, and/or hazardous or nonhazardous
materials if the shipper, carrier, or owner of said products does not have a contract with a professional
hazardous materials cleanup crew (DEP-EPA approved) and/or if conditions warrant, the Borough of
Stroudsburg Emergency Services Coordinator shall have the authority to contact a private firm for
cleanup, control, containment or extinguishment and shall not be limited to the disposal of said
hazardous or nonhazardous products or substances.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 126/505
1.
2.
3.
4.
§ 10-404. Enforcement.
[Ord. 778, 6/16/1999, § 4]
The Borough of Stroudsburg may enforce the provisions of this Part by civil action in a court of
competent jurisdiction for the collection of any amounts due hereunder plus attorney's fees and costs
or for any other relief that may be appropriate.
§ 10-405. Emergency Services Not to Be Delayed or Denied.
[Ord. 778, 6/16/1999, § 5]
Nothing in this Part shall authorize any Borough of Stroudsburg department or staff members to refuse
or delay an emergency service to any person, firm, organization or corporation that has not reimbursed
the Borough of Stroudsburg for services. Furthermore, nothing in this section shall be construed to
require reimbursement to the Borough of Stroudsburg for those municipal services normally provided
to the Borough of Stroudsburg residents and others as a matter of the Borough of Stroudsburg's
general operating procedure and for which the levying of taxes or for which the demand for
reimbursement is normally made under the provisions of other Borough ordinances.
Part 5. PROPERTY DEFACEMENT; GRAFFITI
§ 10-501. Purpose and Intent.
[Ord. 763, 5/6/1998, § 501]
The purpose of this Part is to help prevent the spread of graffiti and to establish a program for its
removal from Borough-owned property and non-Borough-owned property within the Borough.
The Borough Code, 53 P.S. § 46202, authorizes the Borough to prohibit and remove any
nuisance, to require the removal of any nuisance, to make such regulations as may be necessary
for the health, safety, general welfare, cleanliness, beauty, convenience and comfort of the
Borough and to make and adopt all such ordinances, bylaws, rules and regulations as may be
expedient or necessary for those purposes.
The Borough Council finds and determines that graffiti is obnoxious and a pubic nuisance and
unless the Borough causes it to be removed from Borough-owned and non-Borough owned
property within the Borough, it tends to remain. Other properties then become the target of graffiti
with the result that entire neighborhoods are affected and become less desirable places in which
to be, all to the detriment of the Borough.
It is the purpose of the Borough Council of the Borough of Stroudsburg, through the adoption of
this Part, to provide additional enforcement tools to protect public and private property from acts of
vandalism and defacement, including the application of graffiti on walls, natural objects and
structures. Such acts are destructive of the rights and values of property owners as well as the
entire community.
§ 10-502. Definitions.
[Ord. 763, 5/6/1998, § 502]
For the purposes of this Part, the following words shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to
them in this section:
AEROSOL PAINT CONTAINER
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 127/505
1.
2.
3.
Any aerosol container which is adapted or made for the purpose of applying spray painting, or
other substance capable of defacing property.
FELT-TIP MARKER
Any indelible marker or similar implement with a tip which, at its broadest width, is greater than 1/8
of an inch, containing ink or other pigmented liquid which is not water-soluble.
GRAFFITI
Any unauthorized inscription, word, figure, painting or other defacement that is written, marked,
etched, scratched, sprayed, drawn, painted or engraved on or otherwise affixed to or on any
surface of Borough-owned property or non-Borough-owned property within the Borough by or with,
but not limited to, any of the following: felt-tip marker, paint stick or graffiti stick, or graffiti
implement, to the extent that the same was not authorized in advance by the owner or occupant
thereof or, despite advance authorization, is otherwise deemed by the Board to be a public
nuisance.
GRAFFITI IMPLEMENT
An aerosol paint container, a felt-tip marker, gum label, paint stick or graffiti stick, etching tool, or
any other device capable of scarring or leaving a visible mark on glass, metal, concrete or wood or
any other surface.
PAINT STICK OR GRAFFITI STICK
Any device containing a solid form of paint, chalk, wax, epoxy, or other similar substance capable
of being applied to a surface by pressure, and upon application, of leaving a mark at least 1/8 of
an inch in width.
§ 10-503. Unlawful to Apply Graffiti; Prohibition of Defacement.
[Ord. 763, 5/6/1998, § 503]
It is unlawful for any person to apply graffiti to any trees, other natural features, or structures including
but not limited to buildings, walls, fences, poles and signs (hereinafter "structures") on any Boroughowned
property or, without the permission of the owner or occupant, on any non-Borough-owned
property within the Borough.
§ 10-504. Graffiti Declared Public Nuisance.
[Ord. 763, 5/6/1998, § 504]
The existence of graffiti on any Borough-owned property, or without the permission of the owner or
occupant, or on any non-Borough-owned property within the unincorporated areas of the Borough
is expressly declared to be a public nuisance.
The Borough Council of the Borough of Stroudsburg hereby declares and finds graffiti to be a
nuisance subject to abatement according to the provisions and procedures herein contained.
It is the duty of both the owner of the property which the graffiti has been applied, and any person
who may be in possession or who has the right to possess such property, to at all times keep such
property clear and free of graffiti.
§ 10-505. Removal of Graffiti by Perpetrator.
[Ord. 763, 5/6/1998, § 505]
Any person applying graffiti on property within the Borough shall have the duty to remove same within
24 hours after notice by the Borough or private owner of the property involved. Such removal shall be
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 128/505
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
(1)
C.
1.
done in a manner prescribed by the Borough, as authorized by the Borough Council, and may be
deemed by the Borough to satisfy any payment or penalty that might otherwise be imposed. Any
person applying graffiti shall be responsible for such removal or for the payment therefor. Failure of any
person to so remove graffiti or pay for its removal shall constitute an additional violation of this Part.
Where graffiti is applied by an unemancipated minor, the parent(s) or legal guardian(s) shall also be
responsible for such removal or for the payment therefor. Such payments shall be in addition to any
other penalties imposed.
§ 10-506. Removal by the Owner, the Occupant or the Borough.
[Ord. 763, 5/6/1998, § 506]
Graffiti may be removed by any of the following methods:
It is unlawful for any person who is the owner, or who has primary responsibility for control of
property or who has primary responsibility for repair or maintenance or property in the
Borough, hereinafter referred to in this section as the "responsible party," to permit said
property which is defaced with graffiti to remain so defaced for a period of 10 days after
service by first-class mail of notice of same, unless (1) said person shall demonstrate by a
preponderance of the evidence that he or she does not have the financial ability to remove
the defacing graffiti, or (2) it can be demonstrated by the responsible party that the
responsible party has an active program for the removal of graffiti and has scheduled the
removal of the graffiti as part of that program, in which case it shall be unlawful to permit such
property to remain defaced with graffiti for a period of 15 days after service by first-class mail
of notice of same.
Right of Borough to Remove.
Whenever the Borough becomes aware or is notified and determines that graffiti is
located on Borough-owned property or non-Borough-owned property within the Borough,
that is viewable by persons utilizing any public right of way in the Borough, the Borough
shall secure the consent of the property owner and the Borough shall be authorized to
use public funds to provide for the painting or repairing of same, but shall not authorize or
undertake to provide for the painting or repair of any more extensive area than that where
the graffiti is located, unless the Borough, as authorized by the Borough Council,
determines in writing that a more extensive area is required to be repainted or repaired in
order to avoid aesthetic disfigurement to the neighborhood or community, or unless the
responsible party agrees to pay for the costs of repainting or repairing the more extensive
area.
Right of Entry on Private Property. Prior to entering upon private property or property
owned by a public entity other than the Borough, for purposes of removal of graffiti, the
Borough shall secure the consent of the responsible party, and a release of the Borough
from any liability.
If a responsible party fails to remove the offending graffiti within the time herein specified, or if
the Borough shall have requested consent to remove or paint over the offending graffiti and
the responsible party has refused to grant consent for entry on terms acceptable to the
Borough consistent with the terms of this section, the Borough may commence abatement
and cost recovery proceedings for the removal of the graffiti pursuant to the provisions of this
Part, which procedures authorize the recovery of all costs incurred by the Borough in abating
graffiti including the recordation of a lien as to the affected property. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, owner-occupied single-family residences are excluded from such cost recovery
proceedings including the recordation of a lien on the property.
Whenever the Borough, as authorized by the Borough Council, determines that graffiti
has been applied to non-Borough-owned property within the Borough and that it is in the
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 129/505
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
interest of the Borough to remove such graffiti through the use of Borough resources,
then the Borough, as authorized by the Borough Council, may use Borough resources to
remove the graffiti, provided that the Borough obtains the consent of the private property
owner and release of the Borough from liability.
Whenever the Borough, as authorized by the Borough Council, determines that graffiti is
being maintained upon any non-Borough-owned property within the Borough in violation
of this Part, the Borough, as authorized by the Borough Council, may issue a written
notice and order to abate the graffiti. The notice shall be issued to the owner of the
property and shall inform the owner that the owner is maintaining graffiti which
constitutes a public nuisance and that maintenance of the graffiti is a violation of this
Part. The notice shall state that the graffiti must be removed within 10 days from the date
of the notice and that if the graffiti is not removed within that time, then the Borough
proposes to remove the graffiti and the cost of such removal, if not paid by the owner,
shall be made a lien upon the property. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a notice of graffiti
nuisance shall not be issued to the owner of a single-family residence which is owner
occupied.
The notice shall also inform the property owner that if the graffiti is not removed within the
specified ten-day period, then a hearing shall be held before the Borough Codes Hearing
Board to hear any protest of the property owner. The notice shall specify the time and
place at which the Borough Codes Hearing Board shall hold such hearing. Such hearing
shall be scheduled not less than 10 days after the date of the notice.
The notice issued pursuant to Subsection C(2) above shall be addressed to the owner of
the property as shown on the latest tax assessment roll at the owner's last known
address and shall be delivered by depositing a copy of the notice in the United States
mail, postage paid, or personally delivering a copy of the notice to the owner. Notice shall
also be posted in a conspicuous place on the subject property. No such notice shall be
either mailed to or posted on an owner-occupied single-family residence. The failure of
any person to receive notice shall not affect the validity of any proceeding under this Part.
Before any abatement of any graffiti, the Borough Codes Hearing Board, as authorized
by the Borough Council, shall hold a hearing regarding the proposed abatement to
determine whether the graffiti constitutes a public nuisance and whether abatement is
appropriate. The Borough Codes Hearing Board shall receive and consider all relevant
evidence presented at the hearing. Any interested person shall be given an opportunity to
be heard.
The Borough Codes Hearing Board shall provide notice of the their decision and shall
provide an order to abate the graffiti, if appropriate, to the owner of the subject property
as shown in the latest tax assessment.
The Borough Codes Hearing Board may order that the Borough abate any graffiti that
has been determined to be a public nuisance and that remains unabated at least seven
days after the Hearing Board gives notice of their decision and issues an order to abate.
The Borough shall keep an account of the costs, including incidental expenses, of
abating such graffiti on each separate property where the work is done and shall render
an itemized report in writing to the Council showing the cost of abatement of the graffiti.
The term incidental expenses shall include but is not limited to the actual expenses and
costs of the Borough in the preparation of notices, title searches, specifications and
contracts, inspection of the work, the cost of posting and mailing required under this Part,
any attorney's fees expended in the abatement of the nuisance, all costs and expenses
for which the Borough may be liable under state law arising from or related to the
nuisance abatement action, and all costs or expenses to which the Borough may be
entitled under state law. Costs and expenses for which the Borough may be reimbursed
begin to accrue at the time the Borough first receives a complaint regarding the graffiti.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 130/505
(8)
(9)
Costs and expenses may be recovered once it has become necessary for the Borough to
conduct an abatement hearing. Notwithstanding the foregoing, costs and expenses of
abatement may not be recovered from owners of single-family residences that are owneroccupied.
If the total cost of the abatement of the graffiti by the Borough is not paid to the Borough
within 10 days after the date of the notice of the cost of the abatement, the Borough shall
record, in the office of the County Recorder, a statement of the total balance due to the
Borough, a legal description of the property, and the name of the owner concerned. From
the date of such recording, the balance due will constitute a lien on the property. The lien
will continue in full force and effect until the entire amount due, together with interest as
the maximum legal rate accruing from the date of the completion of the abatement, is
paid in full. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no lien shall be placed on a single-family
residence which is owner-occupied.
The Borough may bring appropriate actions, in a court of competent jurisdiction, to collect
any amounts due by reason of the abatement of graffiti by the Borough and to foreclose
any existing liens for such amounts. Notwithstanding the provisions of this Part, the
Borough may bring the appropriate civil and criminal action in a court of competent
jurisdiction for abatement of any nuisance within the Borough pursuant to any other
provision of the law.
§ 10-507. Fines and Penalties.
[Ord. 763, 5/6/1998, § 507]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $300, together with the cost of prosecution, the
cost of removal by the Borough, or to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days. Every day that a
violation of the Part continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 11. Housing
Part 1. FAIR HOUSING
§ 11-101. Definitions.
[Ord. 595, 12/29/1982, § I]
As used in this Part, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the content, the following terms
shall have the following meanings:
BOARD
The Stroudsburg Hearing Board which in addition to zoning hearings shall also have human
relations hearing functions.
DISCRIMINATE OR DISCRIMINATION
Any difference in treatment in the sale, lease, rental or financing of housing units or housing
accommodations because of race, color, religion, creed, ancestry, age, national origin, or use of a
guide dog because of the blindness of the user.
HEARING BOARD
The Stroudsburg Zoning Hearing Board.
HOUSING UNIT
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 131/505
1.
2.
A single room or suite of rooms, or an apartment or dwelling, occupied or intended for occupancy
as separate living quarters by an individual or a family, or a parcel of real property or a lot
available for the construction of a housing unit.
LENDING INSTITUTION
Any person, as defined in this Part regularly engaged in the business of lending money or
guaranteeing loans.
OWNER
The lessee, sub-lessee, assignee, managing agent, or person having the right of ownership or
possession or the right to sell, or lease any housing unit which is part of a housing accommodation
or to furnish services in connection therewith.
PERSON
An association, partnership or corporation, as well as a natural person. When applied to
partnerships or other associations, it includes their members, and as applied to corporations, it
includes the officers of the corporations.
REAL ESTATE BROKER
Any natural person, partnership, association or corporation who, for a fee of other valuable
consideration, or other purposes, sales, purchases, exchanges or rents, or negotiates or offers or
attempts to negotiate, the sale, purchase, exchange or rental of the real property of another or
holds himself/herself out as engaged in the business of selling, purchasing, exchanging or renting
the real property of another, or collects rental for the use of the real property of another or
attempts to secure the listing for sale or rental of a housing unit by representing that a change has
occurred or will or may occur with respect to the racial, religious or ethnic composition of the
street, block, neighborhood or area in which said housing accommodation is located.
REAL ESTATE SALESPERSON OR AGENT
Any person employed by real estate broker to perform, or to assist in the performance of, any or
all of the functions of a real estate broker, or providing any services in connection therewith.
§ 11-102. Scope.
[Ord. 595, 12/29/1982, § II]
This Part applies to discriminatory housing units located within territorial limits of the Borough.
§ 11-103. Prohibited Acts.
[Ord. 595, 12/29/1982, § III]
No real estate broker or real estate salesperson or agent, or owner or other person shall refuse to
sell, lease, sublease, rent, assign or otherwise transfer or refuse to negotiate for the sale, lease,
sublease, rental, assignment or other transfer of the title, leasehold or other interest in any
housing unit to any person, or represent that a housing unit is not available for inspection, sale,
lease, sublease, rental, assignment or other transfer when in fact it is so available, or otherwise
deny or withhold any housing unit from any person because of race, color, religion, creed,
ancestry, age, sex, national origin, or use of a guide dog because of the blindness of the user.
No owner shall refuse to sell, lease, sublease, rent, assign or otherwise transfer the title, leasehold
or other interest in any housing unit, which is part of a housing unit to any person, or otherwise
deny or withhold such housing unit or deny or withhold the furnishing of services in connection
therewith from any person because of race, color, religion, creed, ancestry, age, sex, national
origin or use of a guide dog because of the blindness of the user.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 132/505
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
No real estate broker or real estate salesperson or agent shall include in the terms, conditions, or
privileges, or services in connection therewith of any sale, lease, sublease, rental, assignment or
other transfer of any housing unit, any clause, condition or restriction discriminating against any
person in the use or occupancy of such housing unit because of race, color, religion, creed,
ancestry, age, sex, national origin, or use of a guide dog because of the blindness of the user.
No person shall include in the terms, conditions, or privileges of the sale, lease, sublease, rental
assignment or transfer of a housing unit, which is part of a housing accommodation, any clause,
condition or restriction [which will] discriminate against any person in the use or occupancy of such
housing unit because of race, color, religion, creed, ancestry, age, sex, national origin, or use of a
guide dog because of the blindness of the user.
No person shall discriminate in the furnishing of any facilities or services for a housing unit, which
is part of a housing accommodation, because of race, color, religion, creed, ancestry, age, sex,
national origin, or use of a guide dog because of the blindness of the user.
No real estate broker, real estate salesperson or agent, owner or any other person or any lending
institution shall publish or circulate, or cause to be published or circulated, any form of application
for the purchase, lease, rental or financing of housing, or make any record or inquiry in connection
with the prospective purchase, rental or lease of housing, which expresses directly or indirectly
any limitation, specification or discrimination as to race, color, religion, creed, ancestry, age, sex,
national origin, or use of a guide dog because of the blindness of the user, or any intent to make
any such limitation, specification, or discrimination.
No person, whether or not a real estate broker, real estate salesperson or agent, owner or lending
institution, shall aid, incite, compel, coerce or participate in the doing of any act declared to be
unlawful housing practice under this Part or obstruct or prevent enforcement or compliance with
the provisions of this Part of any rule, regulation or order of the Commission, or attempt directly or
indirectly to commit any act declared by this Part to be an unlawful housing practice.
§ 11-104. Exemptions.
[Ord. 595, 12/29/1982, § IV]
Nothing in this Part shall bar any religious or denominational institution or religious or denominational
organization which is operated, supervised or controlled by or in connection with a religious
organization, from limiting admission to or giving preference to persons of the same religion or
denomination, or from making such selection as is calculated by such organization to promote the
religious principles for which it is established or maintained, as long as such selection or preference is
not on the basis of race, color, creed, ancestry, age, sex, national origin, or use of a guide dog because
of the blindness of the user.
§ 11-105. Hearings.
[Ord. 595, 12/29/1982, § V]
The Stroudsburg Hearing Board shall hear complaints that a person within the Borough of Stroudsburg
has violated this Part. The Hearing Board shall hear the complaint, make a decision and take action
pursuant to procedure and regulations which they shall establish.
Chapter 12. (Reserved)
Chapter 13. Licenses, Permits and General Business
Regulations
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 133/505
1.
2.
1.
2.
Part 1. LAWN, YARD AND GARAGE SALES
§ 13-101. Definitions.
[Ord. 576, 9/10/1980, § 1; as amended by Ord. 1041, 9/19/2017]
As used in this Part 1, the following words shall have the meanings indicated:
MULTIFAMILY PERMIT
Four but no more than eight families or householders may participate in the sale by furnishing
goods, wares or merchandise for sale and/or by engaging in the sale of the goods, wares and
merchandise.
ORGANIZATIONAL PERMIT
Is required for nine or more families or households, nonprofit organizations and private
organizations holding the sale by furnishing goods, wares or merchandise for sale and/or by
engaging in the sale of the goods, wares and merchandise.
PERSON
A natural person or individual.
SALE or GARAGE SALE
A sale, open to the public, of new or used or previously owned goods, wares and
merchandise, held on vacant property or in the garage, or on the lawn, yard, porch or patio of
the residence of the person who obtains a permit for the sale as provided by this Part.
UNDER-THREE-FAMILY PERMIT
No more than three families or householders may participate in the sale by furnishing goods,
wares or merchandise for sale and/or by engaging in the sale of the goods, wares and
merchandise.
The singular shall include the plural, the plural shall include the singular, and the masculine shall
include the feminine.
§ 13-102. Permit Required; Application.
[Ord. 576, 9/10/1980,§ 2; as amended by Ord. 599, 12/19/1983; and amended by Ord. 1041,
9/19/2017]
From and after the effective date of this Part 1, a permit shall be required for any garage sale held
within the Borough of Stroudsburg. Any person, multifamily or organization holding such a garage
sale without first obtaining a permit shall be in violation of this Part 1 and subject to the penalty
hereinafter prescribed.
Application for the permit for a sale shall be made to the Borough Manager by the person at
whose residence the sale is to be held and shall state: the name of the applicant; the location of
the proposed sale; and the day or days on which the sale is to be held (as well as the names and
resident addresses of all other persons who are to contribute goods, wares, or merchandise or
service the sale). The Manager or his designee shall issue the permit to the applicant, after the
applicant shall have paid to the Borough Manager the permit fee as set by resolution, which shall
be for the use of the Borough; provided, in any calendar year, no more than two permits shall be
issued under this Part 1 to the same person, multifamily or organization and no more than two
sales shall be held from any one location in any calendar year.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 134/505
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
10.
A.
11.
§ 13-103. Issuance of Permit; Conditions.
[Ord. 576, 9/10/1980, § 3; and as amended by Ord. 1041, 9/19/2017]
Every permit shall be issued under the following conditions, and any failure to comply with any
condition shall comprise a violation of this Part 1 and shall entitle the Borough Manager to declare the
permit revoked without refund of any part of the permit fee to the holder:
The sale shall be held at the location stated in the permit.
The permit shall be valid for the two consecutive days stated on the permit, except that the permit
may specify one or two alternate "rain dates" in case of inclement weather on one or two, as the
case may be, of the dates first specified on the permit.
On an under-three-family permit, no more than three families or householders may participate in
the sale by furnishing goods, wares or merchandise for sale and/or by engaging in the sale of the
goods, wares and merchandise.
On a multifamily permit, no more than eight families or householders may participate in the sale by
furnishing goods, wares or merchandise for sale and/or by engaging in the sale of the goods,
wares and merchandise.
An organizational permit will be required for nine or more families or households and private
organizations holding the sale by furnishing goods, wares or merchandise for sale and/or by
engaging in the sale of the goods, wares and merchandise.
No sale shall commence before 9:00 a.m. or end after 7:00 p.m. on any day.
No refreshments may be served or sold at the sale; no music, games or other entertainment or
activities may be conducted at the time when and place where the sale is held; and there shall be
no unnecessary or excessive noise.
Since the sale is temporary in nature and permissible in residence districts where commercial
activities are not permitted, the sale shall be limited to possessions of the holder of the permit (and
the other families and householders referred to in § 13-103, Subsections 3, 4 and 5, above). It
shall be unlawful to engage or employ any individual, organization or other entity to plan, arrange,
conduct, promote or supervise the sale.
The applicant must exhibit the permit at the time of the sale in full view of the public at all times.
Notices, advertisements and signs.
No notice, advertisement or directional sign pertaining to a sale may be placed or posted:
On any utility pole or any post or pole used for traffic or parking signs, signals or meters;
On the surface of any street, curb or sidewalk; or
Without the permission of the owner or occupant of the property, anywhere on private
property.
Upon conclusion of the time stated in the permit for the holding of a sale, the holder of the
permit shall remove and take away all such notices, advertisements and directional signs.
None of the following may be sold or offered for sale:
Food or edible items;
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 135/505
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
Anything for which a separate license is required by law or by any federal, state or municipal
regulations; or
Anything of an explosive, poisonous or dangerous nature.
§ 13-104. Exceptions.
[Ord. 576, 9/10/1980, § 4]
Special sales such as "Sidewalk Sale Days" sponsored or conducted by the merchants of the Borough
of Stroudsburg shall be excluded from the provisions of this Part 1.
§ 13-105. Penalties.
[Ord. 576, 9/10/1980, § 5; as amended by Ord. 599, 12/19/1983]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part 1 shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $300, together with costs of prosecution, or to
imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days.
Part 2. TRANSIENT RETAIL MERCHANTS
§ 13-201. Definitions.
[Ord. 603, 8/8/1984, § 1]
EXEMPTIONS
No license shall be required or fee charged to any of the following:
To farmers selling their own produce;
For the sale of goods, wares and merchandise donated by owners thereof, the total net
proceeds whereof are to be applied to any charitable or philanthropic purpose; or
To any manufacturer or producer in the sale of bread and bakery products, meat and meat
products or milk or milk products, but the ordinance [this Part 2] may require any person,
partnership, firm or corporation in any or all of these excepted categories to register with the
borough, and be subject to all other provisions of the ordinance except those pertaining to the
payment of license fees: Provided, the term "milk or milk products" shall not include or apply
to ice cream or other frozen deserts: And provided further, that any transient retail business
dealing on one or more of the excepted categories and selling other goods, wares and
merchandise not excepted shall be subject to the license fee fixed by the ordinance for its
activities in connection with the sale of goods, wares and merchandise not in any of the
excepted categories.
PEDDLER
A peddler is any person, whether a resident of the Borough of Stroudsburg, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, or not, traveling by foot, wagon, automotive vehicle or any other type of
conveyance, from place to place, from house to house or from street to street, carrying, conveying
or transporting goods, wares, merchandise, meat, fish, vegetables, fruits, truck garden or farm
products or provisions, offering and exposing them for sale, or making sales and delivering articles
to purchasers, or who, without traveling from place to place, sells or offers the same for sale from
a wagon, automotive vehicle, railroad car or other vehicle or conveyance. The word "peddler" shall
include the words "hawker" and "huckster".
SOLICITOR
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 136/505
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
1.
2.
1.
2.
A solicitor is any person, whether a resident of the Borough of Stroudsburg, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, or not, traveling either by foot, wagon, automobile, motor truck or any type of
conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, taking or
attempting to take orders for sale of goods, wares and merchandise, personal property of any
nature whatsoever, for future delivery, or for services, whether or not such individual has, carries
or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such sale, or whether he is collecting advance
payment of such sales or not.
§ 13-202. Application.
[Ord. 603, 8/8/1984, § 2]
Applications for licenses by solicitors and peddlers shall be made to the Chief of Police, shall be
sworn and in writing and shall contain the following information:
Name and physical description of applicant;
Address;
A brief description of the nature of the business to be conducted and the goods to be sold,
and, if the goods are farm or orchard products, a statement whether they are produced or
grown by the applicant;
If applicant is employed, the name and address of the employer, together with credentials
establishing exact relationship;
The length of time for which the right to do business is desired;
If a vehicle is to be used, a description of the same, together with Pennsylvania State vehicle
license number or other means of identification;
A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any crime,
misdemeanor or violation of any municipal ordinance, and if so, the nature of the offense, and
the punishment or penalty assessed therefor;
Such other information as the Chief of Police may deem necessary for the proper police
protection of the borough.
An applicant for a solicitor's or peddler's permit shall be fingerprinted and shall supply the Chief of
Police with two photographs of the applicant within five days prior to the date of the filing of the
application, which photographs shall be 1 1/4 inches by 1 1/4 inches showing the head and
shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner.
§ 13-203. License Fees for Solicitors and Peddlers.
[Ord. 603, 8/8/1984, § 3; as amended by Ord. 955, 2/15/2012]
The fee for solicitors and peddlers shall be:
Twenty-five dollars per day, $75 per quarter, for all peddlers and solicitors having an established
place of business within the Borough.
Two hundred dollars per day, $350 per quarter, for all other peddlers and solicitors.
§ 13-204. Regulations.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 137/505
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
[Ord. 603, 8/8/1984, § 4; as amended by Ord. 955, 2/15/2012]
A peddler or solicitor, or any person on his behalf, shall not:
Shout, make an outcry, blow a horn, ring a bell or use any sound device or musical instrument,
including any loud speaking radio or sound amplifying system, on any of the streets, alleys, parks
or other public places of the borough or on any private premises in the borough where sound of
sufficient volume is emitted or produced therefrom to be capable of being plainly heard on the
streets, avenues, alleys, parks or other public places, for the purpose of attracting attention to any
goods, wares or merchandise which such license proposes to sell;
Except as permitted below, have any exclusive right to any location in the public streets, shall not
be permitted a stationary location and shall not be permitted to operate in any congested area
where his operations might impede or inconvenience the public. For the purpose of this ordinance
[this Part 2], the judgment of a police officer, exercised in good faith, shall be deemed conclusive
as to whether the area is congested or the public impeded or inconvenienced. Peddlers with a
license for a specific event may be assigned a permanent location for that event by the Borough
upon issuance of the license. When a permanent location is assigned, the peddler shall not be
permitted to sell except from the designated area. The number of licenses issued shall be
determined by the Borough for each specific event.
Sell or offer for sale goods, wares or merchandise from vehicles on any of the public streets of the
borough, provided, however, that the prohibition herein contained shall not include the peddling
from door to door or from vehicles, of fresh food products of farm and garden, nor bona fide
deliveries of goods, wares, merchandise or food made on a regular route to regular customers;
Solicit or peddle from 6:00 p.m. to 10:00 a.m., or at any time when a sign has been posted on a
building stating "No solicitors or peddlers", or words to that affect, except that a licensed solicitor
or peddler may call upon the occupant of a residence at other times when he has received
express prior permission from such occupant to do so;
Solicit within the borough for a contribution of funds for a charitable, religious, educational
community, recreational or similar nonprofit purpose by means of calling upon places of residence
or by means of direct personal contact in public places or upon public property without obtaining a
permit as provided by this ordinance. Any peddling or soliciting as defined in this ordinance by
means of representation that all or a portion of the proceeds thereof are to be used for a
charitable, or similar non-profit purpose, or are to be transmitted to any person, firm or corporation
for any such purpose, is unlawful unless a permit is first obtained as provided by this ordinance;
Cast, throw, distribute, deposit, scatter, pass out, give away, circulate or deliver any commercial or
business handbill, dodger, circular or other advertising material or device to any residence or
business, or leave the same on any porch, doorstep or vestibule thereof, or in any yard or public
hallway thereof, or on any vacant lot or other private property in the borough, without first having
obtained the express consent or without the express request of an adult resident or occupant
thereof;
Cast, throw, deposit, leave upon, distribute, scatter, pass out, give away, circulate or deliver to any
premises any commercial advertising sample or device or other merchandise of any kind, except
into the hands of an adult person who resides upon or occupies such premises.
§ 13-205. Penalties.
[Ord. 603, 8/8/1984, § 5; as amended by Ord. 955, 2/15/2012]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this ordinance [this Part 2] shall,
upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $500, together with costs of
prosecution, or to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days. Every day that a violation of any part
of this ordinance continues shall constitute a separate offense.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 138/505
Part 3. PUBLIC EXHIBITIONS, AMUSEMENTS AND
ENTERTAINMENT
§ 13-301. Permit Required.
[Ord. 599, 12/19/1983; as amended by Ord. 925, 7/7/2010]
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons, firm or firms to be engaged or concerned in the business
of theatrical exhibitions, amusements, dances, or any other form of public exhibition or amusement
within the limits of the Borough of Stroudsburg without first having taken out a permit. Permits will only
be issued in conjunction with special events specifically authorized by Borough Council.
§ 13-302. Permit Application.
[Ord. 599, 12/19/1983; as amended by Ord. 925, 7/7/2010]
Any person or persons, firm or firms who have been approved by Borough Council to operate or
conduct theatrical exhibitions, amusements, dances or any other kind of entertainment, shall file
application in writing with the Manager, and pay the required fee of $100, whereupon the Manager
shall issue a permit permitting the exhibition, amusement, or dance. Nonprofit organizations are
exempted from said fee but must still apply for a permit.
§ 13-303. Zoning Classification Not Affected by Permit.
[Ord. 599, 12/19/1983]
Where an application is made for the conducting of an amusement, temporary or seasonal in its
nature, and the said permit is granted by the Manager, the said granting shall not be construed in any
way to change the zoning classification of the property involved, which shall still remain and be of the
same classification as it was prior to the issuing of the permit.
§ 13-304. Authority of the Borough Council.
[Ord. 599, 12/19/1983; as amended by Ord. 925, 7/7/2010]
The Borough Council shall have the right to prohibit entirely, or regulate by resolution, the character
and kind of amusement that shall be permitted in the Borough or any part thereof, the time of opening
and closing of the amusement, and shall in all respects have complete control of the said operation,
and shall prohibit the same if they deem such amusement, dance or public exhibition to be detrimental
to the interests of the Borough.
§ 13-305. Expiration or Revocation of Permit.
[Ord. 599, 12/19/1983; as amended by Ord. 925, 7/7/2010]
Permits may be issued for a specifically determined period of time. Any permit may be revoked by the
Manager at any time upon failure of the permittee to follow the regulations set forth by the Borough
Council.
§ 13-306. Penalties.
[Ord. 599, 12/19/1983; as amended by Ord. 925, 7/7/2010]
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 139/505
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part 3 shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 together with costs of prosecution, or to
undergo imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of this Part 3
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Part 4. OFF-PREMISES SIGN LICENSE
§ 13-401. Definitions.
[Ord. 706, 8/7/1991, § 1]
BUSINESS SIGN
A sign that directs attention to a business, profession, activity, commodity, service, product price,
or entertainment conducted, sold, or offered upon the premises where such sign is located or
within the building to which such sign is affixed.
CONSTRUCTION SIGN
A sign identifying individuals or companies involved in design, construction, wrecking, financing, or
development when placed upon the premises where work is under construction but only for the
duration of construction or wrecking.
DIRECTORY SIGN
A sign which indicates the name and/or address of the occupant, the address of the premises,
and/or identification of any legal business or occupation which may exist at the premises.
GROSS SURFACE AREA
The entire area within a single continuous perimeter composed of a single face enclosing the
extreme limits of characters, lettering, illustrations, ornamentations, or other figures, together with
a material or color forming an integral part of the display or to differentiate the sign from the
background to which it is placed. Structural supports bearing no sign copy shall not be included in
gross surface area; however, if any portion of the required structural supports become enclosed
for decorative or architectural purposes, that portion will be included in the total gross surface area
of the sign.
LOT
A designated parcel, tract, or area of land established by plot, subdivision, or otherwise permitted
by law to be used, developed, or built upon as a single unit under single ownership or control.
OFF-PREMISES SIGNS
A sign visible from a public way that directs attention to a business, commodity, service,
entertainment, attraction, or subject sold, offered, or existing elsewhere that upon the same lot
where such sign is displayed. The term off-premises sign shall include an outdoor advertising sign
(billboard) on which space is leased or rented by the owner thereof to others for the purpose of
conveying a commercial or noncommercial message.
REAL ESTATE SIGN
A sign which is used to offer for sale, lease, or rent that premises upon which such sign is placed.
§ 13-402. License Required.
[Ord. 706, 8/7/1991, § 1]
The owner of every lot upon which an off-premises sign is located within the Borough of Stroudsburg
shall be responsible to obtain an annual off-premises sign license for every off-premises sign located
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 140/505
thereon. The term for the off-premises sign license shall be October 1 to September 30. Every owner
shall be responsible to obtain the necessary license(s) by October 1 of every year.
§ 13-403. License Application.
[Ord. 706, 8/7/1991, § 1]
Application for an off-premises sign license shall be made upon a form provided by the Borough of
Stroudsburg. The application form shall require the following information: (1) the name and address of
the owner of the lot upon which the off-premise sign is located; (2) when there is more than one sign
on a lot, a description of the off-premises sign; (3) the gross surface area of the sign; (4) the name and
address of the sign operator if any; (5) the address of or description of the location of the lot where the
off-premises sign is located. The Borough of Stroudsburg shall make the application form available to
lot owners, but responsibility for acquiring the application form and obtaining an off-premises sign
license by October 1 remains with the lot owner. A separate application form must be submitted for
every off-premises sign.
§ 13-404. Payment of Tax.
[Ord. 706, 8/7/1991, § 1]
With the annual application for an off-premises sign license, the owner shall pay the full amount of the
off-premises sign tax, which shall be calculated by multiplying by $2 the gross surface area, measured
in square feet, of the off-premises sign. The term of the annual license shall commence on October 1
and end on September 30 of the following year. If a new off-premises sign is erected between October
1 and February 28, inclusive, the full amount of the tax for the year shall be paid. If a new off-premises
sign is erected between March 1 and September 30, inclusive, 1/2 of the tax shall be paid.
§ 13-405. Exemptions.
[Ord. 706, 8/7/1991, § 1]
Business signs, construction signs, directory signs, real estate signs, and political signs, as defined in
Part 8 of the Stroudsburg Zoning Ordinance, are exempt from the provisions of this Part 4.
§ 13-406. Enforcement, Notification, and Penalties.
[Ord. 706, 8/7/1991, § 1]
The Codes Officer of the Borough of Stroudsburg shall enforce the provisions of this ordinance (Part
4). When an owner fails to properly submit an application by October 1 or within 14 days of erecting a
new off-premises sign, the Codes Officer shall notify the owner by certified mail that the license
application must be submitted within 30 days. If the application is not submitted within 30 days, a
summary citation shall be filed with the district justice. Upon conviction thereof, the owner shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600, together with costs of prosecution. Every off-premises
sign for which a proper application has not been submitted shall be considered a separate offense.
§ 13-407. Effective Date.
[Ord. 706, 8/7/1991, § 1]
This ordinance shall be effective 30 days after adoption.
Part 5. ALARM SYSTEMS
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 141/505
A.
B.
C.
D.
1.
§ 13-501. Definitions.
[Ord. 720, 9/9/1992, § 1; as amended by Ord. 795, 1/17/2001; and by Ord. 988, 3/18/2014]
ALARM SYSTEMS
Any device designed or used for detection of intrusion into a building, structure, or facility or for
alerting persons in the attempt or commission of a crime or any emergency situation involving
potential death or serious injury and which is directly connected to an audible, panic and
supervision alarm, or the transmission of a related signal or message which is used to evoke an
emergency response to any address or separate component of any system.
ALARM TIMING MECHANISMS
On the effective date of this Part, all audible alarms shall have a timing mechanism that will
disengage the alarm after a maximum of 15 minutes when installed.
AUTOMATIC ALARMS
Upon activation of any type of automatic emergency alarm, that being an alarm which is intended
to summon emergency police, fire or emergency medical assistance, the owner/residents "central
station/monitoring center" shall be directed to report said alarm(s) to the Monroe County Control
Center, the 9-1-1 center for the Borough and Monroe County. Reporting shall be made by the
central station calling the Monroe County Control Center at (570) 992-9911 and providing the
correct, updated information necessary to expedite the public safety providers to get on-the-scene.
At no time shall alarms be directed to the Monroe County Control Center on any other telephone
number including "9-1-1." No alarms shall be programmed to "dial-in" or "auto-dial" the Monroe
County Control Center.
FALSE ALARMS
A false alarm is an alarm activated in the absence of an emergency, whether willfully or by
inadvertence, negligence, or unintentional act, including the malfunction of the alarm system
whenever said "activation" causes the dispatch of any police, fire or emergency medical service
agency. This includes testing of an alarm without prior notification.
Exception: An exception to the above shall be granted if activation is caused through acts of God,
weather-related or testing with prior notification, including the repairing of telephone lines outside
the protected premises.
If doubt exists as to the cause of the false alarm, the Chief of Police, or his/her designee shall
investigate the full circumstances of the activation and if negligent, file a full report (citation) with
the local district magistrate (court).
§ 13-502. Applications.
[Ord. 720, 9/9/1992, § 2; as amended by Ord. 795, 1/17/2001; and by Ord. 988, 3/18/2014]
Every property owner wishing to install an alarm on premises they own situated in the Borough of
Stroudsburg shall file with the Borough Manager's Office, on forms provided by the Borough:
A written application stating the name, address and telephone number of the property
owner/applicant;
Address and telephone number of at least two persons who can be contacted other than the
property owner/applicant;
A description of the property or properties where the proposed alarm system shall be
installed;
The location and street address of the property; a description of the type or types of alarm
systems to be used, including the alarm model number and name of the manufacturer;
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 142/505
E.
F.
2.
1.
2.
1.
2.
3.
4.
1.
The name of the person or company who will install the alarm system at the location; and,
The name, address and telephone number of any person or company who will be available to
be contacted in the event of an alarm activation.
In the case of more than one building site in which the alarm systems shall be installed, the
applicant must provide the Borough with information concerning how the alarm for each building
shall be distinguishable from the other alarms in said buildings. In the event the name, mailing
address, or telephone number of the person to be contacted changes, the applicant shall supply
corrected information to the central monitoring station and the Borough Manager's Office within
five days of the change. Failure to comply with this section shall be deemed a violation and
subject to applicable penalties. The property owner or his designee, upon the request of the
Borough Manager's Office, shall be required to be present at the alarm location within a
reasonable length of time after being advised that the police or other emergency departments
have received any signal or message of an alarm activation.
§ 13-503. Transfers of Permits.
[Ord. 720, 9/9/1992, § 3; as amended by Ord. 795, 1/17/2001]
Alarm permits shall not be transferable from one individual to another, or from one location to
another, without the express written authorization from the Borough Manager's Office. In the event
that the premises in which the alarm system has been installed is to be conveyed or transferred to
another individual, it shall be the responsibility of the permittee to notify the Borough Manager's
Office of the name and telephone number of the other person to be contacted in the case of the
alarm activation.
Any individual who obtains title to premises in which an alarm system has been installed and a
permit issued by the Borough Manager's Office shall notify the Borough Manager's Office and
make application for registration specifying all information necessary for the Borough Manager's
Office or other emergency departments to respond to the alarm activation.
§ 13-504. Alarm Permit Fees.
[Ord. 720, 9/9/1992, § 4]
Every person applying for an alarm permit under the provisions of this Part shall pay a fee of $25
to obtain an alarm permit prior to the installation of the new alarm system on the premises.
Any individual who presently owns or obtains title to premises in which an alarm system has
already been installed shall pay a fee of $10 to register their name, address, telephone number,
and individual to be contacted in case of the activation of the alarm system. A resident retiree shall
pay a $5 fee.
An alarm user shall obtain a $5 user permit fee each calendar year.
All fees shall be made payable to the Borough of Stroudsburg.
§ 13-505. Notification of Impending Violation.
[Ord. 720, 9/9/1992, § 5]
Upon receipt by the Borough of the third nuisance alarm, which had occurred on the premises
within 90 days, the permittee shall have 30 days to give proof that the alarm system has been
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 143/505
2.
1.
2.
properly repaired so that the cause or causes of the previous nuisance alarms have been
eliminated.
During the period commencing at the receiving [of] notification by the permittee and finishing 30
days after the notice of repair has been provided, the permittee will be subject to penalties listed in
§ 506(1), for any future nuisance alarms.
§ 13-506. Penalties.
[Ord. 720, 9/9/1992, § 6; as amended by Ord. 795, 1/17/2001]
Any person who, after receiving written notice from the Borough Manager's Office that an
emergency department has responded to three nuisance alarms as defined in this Part during the
term of 90 days, upon conviction by a district magistrate, shall pay a fine of up to $100 per
nuisance alarm thereafter, together with costs of prosecution.
Any person who shall violate or fail to meet any of the provisions of this Part, after proper
notification and upon conviction before a district magistrate, will be sentenced to pay a fine of up
to $300 together with the cost of prosecution.
§ 13-507. Confidentiality.
[Ord. 720, 9/9/1992, § 7]
The information furnished and secured pursuant to this Part shall be confidential in character and shall
be so kept in order that the contents thereof shall not be known except to persons charged with the
administration of this Part.
Part 6. COMMUNITY ANTENNA TELEVISION
FRANCHISE FEE
§ 13-601. Short Title.
[Ord. 724, 5/19/1993, § 1]
This Part shall be known and may be cited as the "Borough of Stroudsburg Community Antenna
Television Franchise Fee Ordinance."
§ 13-602. Definitions.
[Ord. 724, 5/19/1993, § 2]
BOROUGH
The Borough of Stroudsburg, Monroe County, Pennsylvania.
BOROUGH COUNCIL
The governing body of the Borough of Stroudsburg, Monroe County, Pennsylvania.
COMMUNITY ANTENNA TELEVISION (CATV)
An arrangement or combination of apparatus whereby television signals broadcast over the air are
received at one or more towers, antennas, satellites or other devices from television stations
licensed by the Federal Communications Commission and other information sources and which,
for a consideration, are transmitted by means of a coaxial cable, fiber optic cable or other suitable
device to television receiving sets or subscribers to such service.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 144/505
1.
(1)
A.
2.
COMPANY
The governing body of the Borough of Stroudsburg, Monroe County, Pennsylvania.
§ 13-603. Levy of the Fee.
[Ord. 724, 5/19/1993, § 3]
It is hereby levied and imposed upon the cable company a franchise fee of 5% of the cable company
gross revenues derived from connections within the Borough of Stroudsburg.
§ 13-604. Payment to the Borough.
[Ord. 724, 5/19/1993, § 4]
The company shall annually pay a fee to the Borough during the life of this Part. Said fee to be 5% of
the gross annual receipts of the company arising within the Borough from monthly subscriber service
charges; said fee being for the regulation and privilege of using the streets and alleys of the Borough
for the operation of its system. The franchise fee shall be due and payable on the first day of each and
every year thereafter.
§ 13-605. First Year Operations.
[Ord. 724, 5/19/1993, § 5]
First year of enactment, 1993, Blue Ridge Cable Television shall pay a fee equal to 1/2 of collected
revenues prior to December 31, 1993. In April of 1994, the company shall pay the remainder of that
collected. For each and every year thereafter the company shall pay 100% of the collected revenues
by April of the following year.
Chapter 14. (Reserved)
Chapter 15. Motor Vehicles and Traffic
Part 1. GENERAL REGULATIONS
§ 15-101. Definitions and Interpretation.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
Words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed in the Vehicle
Code, 75 P.S. §§ 101-9701 (1977), as hereafter amended, supplemented, modified or reenacted
by the General Assembly of Pennsylvania, unless the context clearly indicates a different
meaning.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ABANDONED VEHICLE
[Amended by Ord. 1018, 5/17/2016]
Any motor vehicle that is left unattended on or along any highway, street, alley or other
public property in the Borough of Stroudsburg for more than 48 hours and does not meet
any two of the following conditions:
A valid registration plate.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 145/505
(2)
(3)
B.
C.
3.
A.
B.
1.
2.
A valid inspection.
An ascertainable vehicle identification number.
Any motor vehicle that is left unattended on or along any highway, street, alley or other
public property in the Borough of Stroudsburg for more than seven consecutive days.
Vehicles that are fully or partially dismantled, wrecked or inoperable.
LEGAL HOLIDAYS
New Year's Day, Martin Luther King, Jr.'s Birthday, Presidents' Day, Memorial Day,
Independence Day, Labor Day, Columbus Day, Veterans Day, Thanksgiving Day, and
Christmas.
In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall include the singular, and the
masculine shall include the feminine.
§ 15-102. Manner of Adopting Permanent Traffic and Parking
Regulations.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
All traffic and parking regulations of a permanent nature shall be enacted as ordinances, as parts of
ordinances, as amendments to ordinances, or as amendments to this chapter.
§ 15-103. Continuation of Prior Regulations.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
The provisions of this chapter, so far as they are the same as those of ordinances in force immediately
prior to the adoption of this Chapter 15, are intended as a continuation of such ordinances and
regulations and not as new enactments. The provisions of this chapter shall not affect any act done or
liability incurred, nor shall they affect any suit or prosecution pending or to be instituted to enforce any
right or penalty or to punish any offense under any such ordinances or regulations as aforesaid.
§ 15-104. Temporary and Emergency Regulations.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
The Mayor or Manager shall have the following powers to regulate traffic and parking temporarily
and in time of emergency:
In the case of flood, storm or other emergency, to establish temporary traffic and/or parking
regulations.
In the case of emergency or to facilitate public works, or in the conduct of parades,
processions or public events, to restrict or prohibit traffic and/or parking in limited areas for
periods of not more than 72 hours.
Such temporary and emergency regulations shall be enforced by the Police Department in the
same manner as permanent regulations. Any person who shall operate or park a vehicle or tractor
in violation of any such regulations, or who shall move, remove, destroy, injure or deface any sign
or marking erected, posted or made to give notice of any such regulation, shall, upon conviction
thereof, be liable to the penalty set forth in the law or elsewhere in this Chapter 15 for a violation of
such nature, and, in case of a violation for which no specific penalty is set forth in the law or
elsewhere in this chapter, to a fine of not more than $25 together with costs of prosecution.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 146/505
1.
2.
§ 15-105. Experimental Regulations.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
The Borough Council may, from time to time, designate places upon and along the highways in the
Borough where, for a period of not more than 90 days, specific traffic and/or parking regulations,
prohibitions and restrictions shall be in force and effect and shall designate such locations by proper
signs and markings. Such regulations, prohibitions and restrictions shall be effective just as if they had
been specified in this chapter. No person shall operate or park a vehicle or tractor in violation of any
such regulation, prohibition or restriction, and no person shall move, remove, destroy or deface any
sign or marking erected, posted or made by authority of this section. Any person who shall violate any
provision of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty set forth in the law or
elsewhere in this chapter for a violation of such nature, and in case of a violation for which no specific
penalty is set forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter, to a fine of not more than $25 together with
costs of prosecution; provided the purpose of this section is to allow for the test and experimental
determination of the feasibility and desirability of permanent changes in the ordinances of the Borough
relative to traffic and parking.
§ 15-106. Authority of Police Officers.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
The police officers of the Stroud Area Regional Police Department are hereby given authority to direct
traffic on the highways of the Borough and at intersections thereof.
§ 15-107. Authorization for Use of Speed-Timing Devices.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
The Stroud Area Regional Police Department is hereby authorized to use all mechanical or
electrical speed-timing devices for the determination of speed of a motor vehicle as are approved
or will be approved by the Department of Transportation of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
including but not limited to E.S.P. and Vascar systems.
This section authorizes the use of said devices upon all highways within the Borough, be they
Borough, county or state highways, and does also hereby elect to exercise all powers granted to
"local authorities" under the Vehicle Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, 75 P.S. §§ 101-
9701 (1977), as hereafter amended, supplemented, modified or reenacted by the General
Assembly of Pennsylvania.
Part 2. TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
§ 15-201. Motor Vehicles Not to Be Driven on Sidewalks.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
No person shall drive any vehicle except a human-powered vehicle upon a sidewalk or sidewalk area
except upon a permanent or duly authorized temporary driveway. Any person who shall violate any
provision of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25, together with
costs of prosecution.
§ 15-202. Speed Limits Established.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 147/505
1. The following speed limits are hereby established:
Street Between
Speed Limit
(mph)
Ann Street Broad Street and South 10th Street 25
Bank Alley South 6th Street and South 8th Street 15
Barry Street Broad Street and Park Avenue 25
Beers Street West Main Street to end 15
Bell Terrace Scott Street to end 25
Borough Road 10th Street to end 15
Broad Street Main Street and Park Avenue 30
Brown Street North 5th Street to end 25
Bryant Street Houston Avenue to Park Avenue 25
Bryant Street Park Avenue to Laurelwood Cemetery 15
Clermont Avenue Huston Avenue west to end 15
Clermont Avenue Park Avenue to Huston Avenue 25
Club Court Bryant Street to Highland Drive 25
Colbert Street Broad Street to Huston Avenue 25
Collins Street Broad Street west to end 25
Dreher Avenue West Main Street to Borough limit 35
8th Street (north and
south)
Phillips Street south to end 25
Elizabeth Street West Main Street north to end 25
Elm Street West Main Street north then east to end 25
Fetherman Street West Main Street and Dreher Avenue 15
5th Street Main Street north to Borough limit 25
1st Street North 1st Street to end 25
North 1st Street 1st Street and 2nd Street 25
Foundry Street Dreher Avenue south to end 25
Fourth Street Main Street north to end 25
Foxtown Road South Borough limit to Park Avenue 35
Fulmer Avenue 5th Street and 8th Street 25
Fulmer Avenue 3rd Street west to end 25
Garden Street Dreher Avenue and Greenway Avenue 25
Garden Street Main Street and Greenway Avenue 25
Garfield Street 1st Street and 2nd Street 25
Glenview Avenue Dreher Avenue south to Borough limit 25
Grant Street 1st Street and 2nd Street 25
Greenway Avenue Garden Street east to end 25
Grove Street 8th Street west, then north to Phillips
Street
25
Hamilton Street Elizabeth Street and Linden Street 25
Hemlock Road Rose Brier Lane and Honeysuckle Lane 25
Hood Alley East off 6th Street to end 15
Huston Avenue Colbert Street and Clermont Avenue 25
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 148/505
Street Between
Speed Limit
(mph)
Kane Street Main Street and McConnell Street 25
Katz Road Dreher Avenue south to end 25
Kautz Avenue Dreher Avenue north to end 25
King Street Brown Street and Oak Street 25
Kintner Alley Second Street and Third Street 15
Kitson Alley South from Main Street to end 15
Kraemer Avenue 2nd Street and 3rd Street 25
Lee Avenue Colbert Street and Clermont Street 25
Lenox Street Broad Street and Park Avenue 25
Lindbergh Avenue Brown Street and Phillips Street 25
Linden Street North from Main Street to end 25
Main Street 9th Street east to Borough limit 25
Main Street West Borough limit to 9th Street 35
Manor Drive South from Phillips Street to end 25
Maple Terrace South from Dreher Avenue to end 25
McConnell Street East Borough limits to 5th Street 25
Mill Alley 10th Street and William Street 15
Monroe Street 6th Street and 9th Street 25
Morningside Avenue Club Court and Park Avenue 25
9th Street Ann Street and Main Street 25
9th Street Borough limit south to Main Street 35
Oak Street Queen Street and North 5th Street 25
Park Avenue Foxtown Road and Ann Street 35
Phillips Street 5th Street and 9th Street 35
Quaker Alley 5th Street and 6th Street 15
Queen Street Brown Street north to Borough limit 25
Sarah Street McConnell Street and North 10th Street 25
Scott Street North 5th Street and North 8th Street 25
Scott Street North 5th Street and North 9th Street 15
Scott Street North 8th Street and North 9th Street 15
2nd Street Main Street and Grant Street 25
7th Street (north) Main Street and Scott Street 25
7th Street (south) Ann Street and Main Street 35
Sixth Street Ann Street and Scott Street 25
Spring Garden Street East from 8th Street, then north to
Phillips Street
25
Stone Street Thomas Street and Scott Street 25
Storm Street East from Broad Street to end 25
Sunset Lane West from Woodcliff Avenue to end 25
10th Street Ann Street and North 9th Street 25
3rd Street Main Street and 5th Street 25
Thomas Street 5th Street and North 9th Street 15
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 149/505
2.
1.
2.
1.
Street Between
Speed Limit
(mph)
Washington Street 1st Street and 2nd Street 25
William Street Ann Street and Main Street 25
Woodcliff Avenue Bryant Street and Club Court 25
Any person who shall operate a vehicle at a speed in excess of that established therefor, upon any
highway or portion thereof as specified in this section, shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced
to pay a fine of $35 and, for exceeding a maximum speed limit by more than five miles per hour,
shall pay an additional fine of $2 for each mile per hour in excess of five miles per hour over the
maximum speed limit.
§ 15-203. Traffic Signals at Certain Intersections.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
At the following intersections, official traffic signals shall be erected (or are hereby ratified if
heretofore erected), and traffic at such intersections shall be directed by such signals:
Intersection
Broad Street and Ann Street
Dreher Avenue and Main Street
North 8th Street and Main Street
North 5th Street and Main Street
North 5th Street and Sarah Street
North 4th Street and McConnell Street
North 9th Street and Main Street
North 7th Street and Main Street
South 7th Street and Ann Street
North 6th Street and Main Street
North 3rd Street and McConnell Street
Any driver of a vehicle who shall disobey the directions of any traffic signal shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25, together with costs of prosecution.
§ 15-204. Right Turn on Red Signal Prohibited at Certain
Intersections.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle traveling on the first-named street at any of the
following intersections, in the direction or directions hereby indicated in each case, to make a right
turn when his or her vehicle is facing a steady red traffic signal:
Street Intersecting Street Direction of Travel
Broad Street Main Street North
8th Street Main Street North and South
North 5th Street Main Street West
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 150/505
2.
1.
Street Intersecting Street Direction of Travel
Main Street North and South 8th Street North and South
Main Street North and South 9th Street North and South
Main Street North and South 7th Street North and South
Main Street North and South 6th Street North and South
South 9th Street Main Street East
7th Street Main Street North and South
South 6th Street Main Street North
Any person who shall violate any provision of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be
sentenced to pay a fine of $25, together with costs of prosecution.
§ 15-205. Stop Intersections.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
The following intersections are hereby established as stop intersections, and official stop signs
shall be erected (or are hereby ratified if heretofore erected) in such a position as to face traffic
approaching the second-named street upon the first-named street, in the direction or directions
hereby indicated. It shall be unlawful for all vehicles approaching any such intersection upon the
first-named street, in the direction or directions hereby indicated, to not come to a full stop, within
a reasonable distance, before entering any such intersection:
Stop Street Through Street Direction of Travel
Anna Court Dreher Avenue South
Ann Street South 8th Street West
Ann Street South 9th Street East
Bank Alley South 8th Street West
Bank Alley South 7th Street East
Bank Alley South 7th Street West
Bank Alley South 6th Street East
Barry Street (one way) Park Avenue West
Beers Street Main Street South
Bell Terrace Scott Street South
Borough Road 10th Street East
Broad Street Park Avenue South
Brown Street North 5th Street East
Brown Street Wallace Street East
Brown Street Wallace Street West
Bryant Street Broad Street East
Bryant Street Broad Street West
Bryant Street Huston Avenue East
Bryant Street Park Avenue East
Bryant Street Park Avenue West
Bryant Street Woodcliff Avenue East
Bryant Street Woodcliff Avenue West
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 151/505
Stop Street Through Street Direction of Travel
Clermont Avenue Broad Street East
Clermont Avenue Broad Street West
Clermont Avenue Park Avenue West
Clermont Avenue Stokes Avenue East
Clermont Avenue Stokes Avenue West
Clermont Avenue Woodcliff Avenue West
Club Court Park Avenue North
Colbert Street Broad Street West
Colbert Street Lee Avenue East
Colbert Street Lee Avenue West
Collins Street Broad Street West
Collins Street Huston Avenue East
Collins Street Huston Avenue West
Collins Street Lee Avenue East
Collins Street Lee Avenue West
Collins Street Stokes Avenue East
Collins Street Stokes Avenue West
Coolbaugh Street Glenview Avenue West
Coolbaugh Street
[Added by Ord. No. 1065,
2/5/2019]
Kautz Street East
8th Street Ann Street North
8th Street Ann Street South
8th Street Monroe Street North
8th Street Monroe Street South
8th Street Phillips Street North
8th Street Sarah Street North
8th Street Sarah Street South
8th Street Scott Street North
8th Street Scott Street South
8th Street Thomas Street North
8th Street Thomas Street South
Elizabeth Street Hamilton Street North
Elizabeth Street Hamilton Street South
Elm Street Main Street South
Elm Street 10th Street East
Fetherman Street Dreher Avenue South
Fetherman Street Main Street North
5th Street Quaker Alley South
1st Street 5th Street East
1st Street Garfield Street North
1st Street Garfield Street South
1st Street Grant Street North
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 152/505
Stop Street Through Street Direction of Travel
1st Street 3rd Street East
1st Street Washington Street North
1st Street Washington Street South
North 1st Street 2nd Street West
Garden Street Dreher Avenue South
Garden Street Main Street North
Garfield Street 1st Street East
Garfield Street 2nd Street West
Glenview Avenue Dreher Avenue North
Godfrey Ridge Road PA Route 191 East
Greenway Avenue Garden Street West
Grove Street Phillips Street North
Hamilton Street Elizabeth Street East
Hamilton Street Linden Street West
Highland Drive Club Court South
Hood Alley South 6th Street West
Huston Street Bryant Street North
Huston Street Bryant Street South
Huston Street Collins Street North
Huston Street Collins Street South
Kane Street Main Street South
Kane Street McConnell Street North
Katz Road Dreher Avenue North
Kautz Street
[Repealed by Ord. No.
1065, 2/5/2019]
Kautz Street Dreher Avenue North
Kautz Street Dreher Avenue South
King Street Brown Street and Wallace Street South
King Street Oak Street North
King Street Phillips Street North
King Street Phillips Street South
Kintner Alley 2nd Street East
Kintner Alley 3rd Street West
Kitson Street Main Street North
Kraemer Avenue 2nd Street East
Kraemer Avenue 3rd Street South
Lee Avenue Bryant Street North
Lee Avenue Bryant Street South
Lee Avenue Clermont Avenue South
Lee Avenue Colbert Street North
Lee Avenue Collins Street North
Lee Avenue Collins Street South
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 153/505
Stop Street Through Street Direction of Travel
Lenox Street Broad Street East
Lenox Street Park Avenue West
Lindbergh Avenue Brown Street South
Lindbergh Avenue Phillips Street North
Lindbergh Avenue Phillips Street South
Linden Street Hamilton Street North
Linden Street Hamilton Street South
Linden Street Main Street South
Manor Drive Phillips Street North
Mill Alley 9th Street East
Mill Alley 10th Street West
Mill Alley Williams Street East
Monroe Street 8th Street West
Monroe Street 9th Street West
Monroe Street 7th Street West
Morningside Avenue Club Court West
Morningside Avenue Park Avenue East
9th Street Ann Street South
Oak Street 5th Street East
Oak Street Queen Street West
Oak Street Wallace Street East
Oak Street Wallace Street West
Palmer Alley Ann Street North
Phillips Street 5th Street East
Phillips Street 9th Street West
Quaker Alley 5th Street East
Queen Street Brown Street South
Queen Street Phillips Street North
Queen Street Phillips Street South
Ramsey Street 8th Street East
Ramsey Street Stone Street West
Robeson Street Broad Street East
Robeson Street Park Avenue West
Sarah Street 8th Street East
Sarah Street 8th Street West
Sarah Street McConnell Street South
Sarah Street 9th Street East
Sarah Street 9th Street West
Sarah Street 7th Street East
Sarah Street 7th Street West
Sarah Street North 6th Street East
Sarah Street North 6th Street West
Sarah Street 10th Street West
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 154/505
Stop Street Through Street Direction of Travel
Scott Street
[Amended by Ord. No.
1050, 5/1/2018; and by
Ord. No. 1051, 6/19/2018]
Bell Terrace East
Scott Street
[Amended by Ord. No.
1050, 5/1/2018; and by
Ord. No. 1051, 6/19/2018]
Bell Terrace West
Scott Street 8th Street East
Scott Street 8th Street West
Scott Street 5th Street East
Scott Street 9th Street West
Scott Street 7th Street East
Scott Street 7th Street West
Scott Street 6th Street East
Scott Street 6th Street West
Scott Street
[Added by Ord. No. 1050,
5/1/2018]
Stone Street East
Scott Street
[Added by Ord. No. 1050,
5/1/2018]
Stone Street West
Scott Street Wallace Street East
Scott Street Wallace Street West
2nd Street
[Repealed by Ord. No.
1056, 8/7/2018]
2nd Street
[Added by Ord. No. 1056,
8/7/2018]
1st Street North
2nd Street
[Added by Ord. No. 1056,
8/7/2018]
1st Street South
2nd Street
[Added by Ord. No. 1056,
8/7/2018]
Garfield Street North
2nd Street Garfield Street South
2nd Street Main Street South
2nd Street McConnell Street North
2nd Street McConnell Street South
2nd Street
[Added by Ord. No. 1056,
8/7/2018]
Washington Street North
2nd Street
[Added by Ord. No. 1056,
8/7/2018]
Washington Street South
7th Street Monroe Street North
7th Street Monroe Street South
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 155/505
Stop Street Through Street Direction of Travel
7th Street Sarah Street North
7th Street Sarah Street South
7th Street Scott Street North
7th Street Thomas Street North and South
6th Street Ann Street South
6th Street Sarah Street North
6th Street Scott Street North
6th Street Thomas Street North
Snyder Drive Dreher Avenue North
Somers Lane 8th Street East
Spring Garden Street 8th Street West
Spring Garden Street Phillips Street North
Stokes Avenue Clermont Street South
Stokes Avenue Colbert Street North
Stone Street
[Added by Ord. No. 1050,
5/1/2018]
Scott Street South
Stone Street Thomas Street South
Storm Street Broad Street West
Sunset Lane Woodcliff Avenue East
10th Street Elm Street South
10th Street Main Street South
10th Street Sarah Street South
3rd Street Columbia Street East
3rd Street 5th Street North
3rd Street Main Street South
Thomas Street 8th Street East
Thomas Street 8th Street West
Thomas Street 5th Street East
Thomas Street 9th Street West
Thomas Street 7th Street East
Thomas Street 7th Street West
Thomas Street 6th Street East
Thomas Street 6th Street West
Thomas Street Stone Street East
Thomas Street Stone Street West
Thomas Street Wallace Street East
Thomas Street Wallace Street West
Wade Court East Anna Court West
Wade Court West Anna Court East
Wallace Street Fulmer Avenue North
Wallace Street Fulmer Avenue South
Wallace Street Oak Street North
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 156/505
2.
1.
Stop Street Through Street Direction of Travel
Wallace Street Oak Street South
Wallace Street Phillips Street North
Wallace Street Phillips Street South
Wallace Street Scott Street North
Wallace Street Scott Street South
Wallace Street Thomas Street South
Washington Street 1st Street East
Washington Street 1st Street West
Wayne Street Hamilton Street South
Williams Street Ann Street South
Woodcliff Avenue Bryant Street North
Woodcliff Avenue Club Court South
Any driver of a vehicle who shall violate any provision of this section shall, upon conviction thereof,
be sentenced to pay a fine of $25, together with costs of prosecution.
§ 15-206. One-Way Streets.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
The following are hereby established as one-way streets with operation of vehicles thereupon to
be in the direction hereby indicated:
Street From To Direction
Ann Street Broad Street 9th Street West
Barry Street
[Repealed by Ord. No.
1067, 3/5/2019]
Barry Street
[Added by Ord. No.
1067, 3/5/2019]
Park Avenue Broad Street East
5th Street McConnell Street Main Street South
4th Street Pearl Alley McConnell Street East
Main Street 5th Street Borough line East
McConnell Street Borough line 5th Street West
Monroe Street 6th Street 9th Street West
Pearl Alley 5th Street 4th Street North
Quaker Alley 7th Street 5th Street East
Sarah Street
[Added by Ord. No.
1067, 3/5/2019]
9th Street 10th Street West
7th Street Beginning of Court
House Square
Monroe Street North and South
6th Street Main Street Scott Street North
10th Street 9th Street Main Street South
Wallace Street Scott Street Thomas Street South
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 157/505
2.
1.
2.
Street From To Direction
Williams Street Main Street Ann Street South
Any person who shall violate a provision of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be
sentenced to pay a fine of $25, and costs of prosecution.
§ 15-207. Gross Weight Limits Established.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
The following weight limits are hereby established, and it shall be unlawful for any person to drive
any motor vehicle or other vehicle, trailer or tractor-trailer combination having a gross weight in
excess of three tons upon any of the following streets or portions thereof where such streets or
portions thereof have been posted with notice of such maximum weight:
Street Between
Ann Street Broad Street and South 10th Street
Barry Street
[Added by Ord. No. 1080,
7/16/2019; and by Ord. No.
1083, 11/19/2019]
Park Avenue and Broad Street
Bryant Street
[Added by Ord. No. 1083,
11/19/2019]
Park Avenue and Broad Street
Clermont Street
[Added by Ord. No. 1083,
11/19/2019]
Park Avenue and Broad Street
North 8th Street Main Street and Scott Street
Fetherman Street Main Street and Dreher Avenue
North 4th Street McConnell Street and Pearl Alley
Monroe Street North 9th Street and North 6th Street
Robeson Street
[Added by Ord. No. 1083,
11/19/2019]
Park Avenue and Broad Street
Sarah Street North 9th Street and North 5th Street
Sarah Street North 9th Street and McConnell Street
Scott Street North 9th Street and North 5th Street
North 7th Street Main Street and Scott Street
North 6th Street Main Street and Scott Street
North 10th Street North 9th Street and Main Street
Thomas Street North 9th Street and North 5th Street
Wallace Street Borough line and Thomas Street
Provided: the aforesaid weight limit shall not apply to any motor vehicle or other vehicle, trailer or
tractor-trailer combination making deliveries or picking up goods, wares, material or merchandise
at or on premises located in any such street or portion thereof, listed above, or any motor vehicle
or other vehicle or trailer or tractor-trailer combination of which a special permit to operate on any
such street or portion thereof shall have been issued by the Chief of Police. Provided, further: the
provisions of this section shall not apply to the driving of vehicles hauling food or household
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 158/505
3.
1.
2.
3.
1.
goods, public utility vehicles, firefighting equipment, garbage and rubbish vehicles, or school and
public transportation buses.
[Amended by Ord. No. 1059, 10/16/2018; and by Ord. No. 1084, 11/19/2019]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be
sentenced to pay a fine of $75 plus $75 for each 500 pounds, or part thereof, in excess of 3,000
pounds over the maximum allowable weight limit, together with costs of prosecution.
§ 15-208. Unlawful to Operate Motor Vehicles on Streets Closed
for Construction or Repair.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle upon any street that is under construction,
resurfacing or repair, in disregard of any official sign, barricade or notice that the same is closed to
vehicular traffic. Any person who shall violate any provision of this section shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25, together with costs of prosecution.
§ 15-209. Play Streets Authorized.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
The Mayor/Manager is hereby authorized to designate as play streets, whenever and for whatever
period of time he shall deem advisable, any portion of any street whereon sledding and coasting
shall be permitted. Such street shall be set apart for this purpose under the direction of the
Mayor/Manager.
No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon any play street at any time when such street shall
be so designated, except in case of emergency, with special permission of the police officer in
charge, who shall first clear such play street of all persons using such street for the purpose for
which it was set aside.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be
sentenced to pay a fine of $25, together with costs of prosecution.
§ 15-210. Restricted Turning Movements.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
The turning movements set forth below are hereby prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any driver of
any vehicle to make the turn from the first-named street to the second-named street as described
below:
Street
Direction of
Travel
Restricted Turning
Movement Intersecting Street
Ann Street West Right turn Williams Street
Borough Street East No cross traffic North 10th Street
Kane Street North No cross traffic McConnell Street
Sarah Street East Left turn North 9th Street
6th Street at PNC
Bank exit
East No cross traffic County Parking Deck
Williams Street South Left turn Ann Street
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 159/505
1.
2.
Part 3. GENERAL PARKING REGULATIONS
§ 15-301. Parking Without Lights Authorized.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
The boundary limits of the Borough of Stroudsburg are hereby established as a zone in which motor
vehicles may remain standing without lights, and all highways within such boundary limits are hereby
designated as highways where motor vehicles may remain standing without lights.
§ 15-302. Loading and Unloading.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
The loading and unloading of goods, wares and merchandise is hereby restricted to such length of
time as is absolutely necessary for the purpose of loading or unloading of such goods, wares and
merchandise. For the purpose of enforcement of this section, such loading or unloading of any vehicle
shall not be considered as parking; provided, without having first obtained permission from the
Borough Office to do so, no person shall load or unload a vehicle from any place upon any street or
alley in the Borough where parking is prohibited; or shall allow a vehicle to remain, for loading or
unloading, in any place upon any street or alley where parking is limited as to time, for longer than the
time for which parking is permitted; or shall load or unload upon any street or alley in such a way that
one lane for vehicular traffic shall not be kept open at all times. Where such permission is granted by
the Borough Office, the Borough may, at its discretion, block off the portion of the street or alley
affected by such loading or unloading.
§ 15-303. Angle Parking/Head-On Parking Required on Portions
of Certain Streets.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
Only angle parking shall be permitted on the following portions of streets:
Street Between Direction
Main Street 564 Main Street and 8th Street North side
7th Street 31 North 7th Street and 33
North 7th Street (3 spaces)
Vehicles shall be parked with the
rear of the vehicle nearest the
curb
On all streets or portions thereof and municipal lots where angle parking and also head-on parking
is now or shall hereafter be authorized, all vehicles parked thereon shall be parked with the front
of the vehicle nearest the curb.
Street Location Direction
7th Street 34 North 7th Street Head-on
Municipal Lot 1
[Repealed by Ord. No.
1074, 3/19/2019]
Municipal Lot 2
[Repealed by Ord. No.
1074, 3/19/2019]
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 160/505
1.
2.
3.
4.
1.
Street Location Direction
Municipal Lot 3
[Repealed by Ord. No.
1074, 3/19/2019]
Municipal Lot 5
[Repealed by Ord. No.
1074, 3/19/2019]
§ 15-304. Vehicles to Be Parked Within Spaces; Parking
Prohibited in Certain Areas.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
Wherever a particular parking space shall be lined or marked off on any street or alley or upon the
adjacent curb, every vehicle parked shall be parked within the lines marking such parking space.
All vehicles parked on streets or alleys, whether parking spaces are marked or not, shall be
parked only in the direction of the permitted traffic flow.
Parking shall be prohibited at all times by any vehicle which in any way will block the intersection
of any street or alley or the entrance or exit of any street or alley. Parking shall at all times be
prohibited within the painted line area adjacent to any fire hydrant; within the painted line area
marking the permissible distance to park from any intersection; in any area where erected signs or
painted lines indicate a no-parking area; and in any manner so as to block any private or public
driveway or accessway to a parking lot or parking facility or other facility of the Borough.
Parking shall be prohibited at all times on any Borough street on a sidewalk. For purposes of this
section, "sidewalk" shall be defined as that portion of a street between the curbline or the lateral
line of a roadway and the adjacent property lines intended for use by pedestrians and not intended
for use by vehicles. This sidewalk shall specifically include that area between the curbline and any
paved pedestrian cartway.
Except as otherwise hereafter provided, parking of any motor vehicles shall be prohibited at all
times in all areas of the Borough that are not otherwise approved for parking in other sections of
Chapter 15.
[Amended by Ord. 1017, 6/7/2016]
§ 15-305. Parking Prohibited on All Bridges.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
Parking is hereby prohibited on all bridges at any and all times.
§ 15-306. Parking Prohibited at All Times in Certain Locations.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
Parking shall be prohibited at all times in the following locations:
Street Side Between
Bank Alley Both South 6th Street and 8th Street
Borough Road Both North 10th Street to end
Broad Street Both Main Street and Park Avenue
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 161/505
Street Side Between
Club Court East Bryant Street and Morningside Avenue
Dreher Avenue Both Katz Road to Main Street
North 8th Street Both Phillips Street and Scott Street
North 8th Street East Scott Street and Thomas Street
North 8th Street West Sarah Street and Main Street
South 8th Street West Main Street south to the end
Elizabeth Street Both Main Street to end
Fetherman Street East Main Street and Dreher Avenue
5th Street Both Main Street to Borough limit
1st Street East North 1st Street and Washington Street
1st Street West Washington Street and Borough limit
Foundry Street West Dreher Avenue to 30 feet south
4th Street Both Main Street to end
Foxtown Road Both Broad Street to South Borough limit
Greenway Street South Garden Street to end
Hood Alley Both 6th Street to east end
Kane Street East Main Street and McConnell Street
Katz Road Both Dreher Avenue to Village Drive
Kitson Street Both Main Street to end
Lee Avenue East Bryant Street and Clermont Avenue
Main Street North The Pocono Creek to west Borough limit
Main Street
[Added by Ord. 1026,
4/4/2017]
North Third Street and 208 Main Street
Main Street South Kane Street to east Borough limit
Main Street South 1055 West Main Street to Borough limit
McConnell Street Both 2nd Street and 5th Street
Mill Alley Both 10th Street and Williams Street
Morningside Avenue Both Park Avenue and Club Court
North 9th Street East Main Street and Thomas Street
North 9th Street North 210 North 9th Street and 216 North 9th Street
North 9th Street West Scott Street and Phillips Street
South 9th Street Both Main Street and Mill Alley
Park Avenue Both Ann Street and Robeson Street
Park Avenue West Bryant Street to 140 feet south
Phillips Street Both 5th Street to Lindbergh Avenue
Phillips Street South Lindbergh Avenue to 9th Street
Quaker Alley Both 5th Street and 6th Street
Sarah Street Both 8th Street and 9th Street
Sarah Street North 9th Street and 10th Street
North 7th Street East Monroe Street and Thomas Street
North 6th Street East Main Street and Sarah Street
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 162/505
A.
B.
1.
Street Side Between
North 6th Street West Thomas Street and Scott Street
South 6th Street East Ann Street and Main Street
Stone Street East Scott Street and Thomas Street
Sunset Lane
[Added by Ord. 1015,
2/2/2016]
Both Entire length
10th Street Both Main Street and Ann Street
3rd Street Both 5th Street and 124-125 North 3rd Street
3rd Street Both Fulmer Avenue and Main Street
3rd Street East 124 North 3rd Street and Fulmer Avenue
§ 15-307. Alternate Parking Established on Certain Streets.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
On the following streets, the restrictions on parking stated in § 15-306 will be in effect except for
one day per week, which shall be posted as an alternate parking day.
The following streets shall be posted: "Parking This Side Except 6:00 p.m., Wednesday to
6:00 p.m., Thursday" on the side normally used for parking; and posted: "Parking This Side
Wednesday 6:00 p.m. to Thursday 6:00 p.m. Only" on the side where parking is normally
prohibited:
Name of Street Location
Bell Terrace Entire length
8th Street From Sarah Street to Scott Street
Fetherman Street Entire length
1st Street Entire length
Garden Street Entire length
Garfield Street Entire length
Hamilton Street Entire length
King Street Entire length
Linden Street Entire length
Oak Street Entire length
Park Avenue From Robeson Street to Bryant Street
Scott Street Entire length
2nd Street Entire length
North 7th Street From Scott Street to Thomas Street
Snyder Drive Entire length
10th Street Between 9th Street and 10th Street
Thomas Street Entire length
Wallace Street From Thomas Street to Oak Street
The following streets shall be posted: "Parking This Side Except 6:00 p.m. Thursday to 6:00
p.m. Friday" on the side normally used for parking; and posted: "Parking This Side 6:00 p.m.
Thursday to 6:00 p.m. Friday Only" on the side where parking is normally prohibited:
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 163/505
C.
A.
1.
Naamee off Sttrreeeett Loccaattiion
Barry Street Entire length
Bryant Street Entire length
Clermont Avenue Entire length
Collins Street Broad Street to Huston Street
Lenox Street Entire length
Robeson Street Entire length
Woodcliff Avenue
[Added by Ord. 1015, 2/2/2016]
Entire length
The following streets shall be posted: "Parking This Side Except 6:00 p.m. Sunday to 6:00
p.m. Monday" on the side normally used for parking; and posted "Parking This Side 6:00 p.m.
Sunday to 6:00 p.m. Monday Only" on the side where parking is normally prohibited.
Name of Street Location
Brown Street 5th Street to Wallace Street
North 6th Street Between Sarah Street and Thomas Street
§ 15-308. Parking Time Limited in Certain Locations, Certain
Days and Hours.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
No person shall park a vehicle or allow it to remain parked for longer than the time indicated in any
of the following locations at any time on the days and between the hours indicated:
Streets.
Street Side Between Days Hours Time Limit
Ann Street South East to west
boundary of
Post Office
Every day All hours 15 minutes
Ann Street South Entire street Monday 2:00 a.m. -
6:00 a.m.
No parking
Colbert Street North Entire street Thursday 8:00 a.m. -
12:00 p.m.
No parking
Colbert Street South Entire street Friday 8:00 a.m. -
12:00 p.m.
No parking
South 8th
Street
East Main Sstreet to
end of the
street
Every day 11:00 p.m. -
7:00 a.m.
No parking
Fourth Street
[Added by Ord.
No. 1044,
11/21/2017]
West From Main
Street to end
Every day
except
Tuesday
2:00 a.m. -
6:00 a.m.
Parking this
side only
Fulmer Avenue Both 5th Street and
Wallace Street
Tuesday 8:00 a.m. -
12:00 p.m.
No parking
Fulmer Avenue North Wallace Street
to 8th Street
Tuesday 8:00 a.m. -
12:00 p.m.
No parking
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 164/505
Street Side Between Days Hours Time Limit
Fulmer Avenue South Wallace Street
to 8th Street
Wednesday 8:00 a.m. -
12:00 p.m.
No parking
Lee Avenue East Entire street Thursday 8:00 a.m. -
12:00 p.m.
No parking
Lee Avenue West Entire street Friday 8:00 a.m. -
12:00 p.m.
No parking
Lindberg
Avenue
Both Brown Street to
Phillips Street
Tuesday 8:00 a.m. -
12:00 p.m.
No parking
Main Street
[Added by Ord.
1040,
9/19/2017]
1004 Main
Street
Every day All hours 15 minutes
Main Street
[Amended by
Ord. 1039,
9/5/2017]
Both 5th Street and
10th Street
Every day 3:00 a.m. -
6:00 a.m.
No parking
Main Street Both 5th Street east
to Borough line
Every day 2:00 a.m. -
7:00 a.m.
No parking
Main Street
[Amended by
Ord. 1039,
9/5/2017]
Both 10th Street and
Dreher Avenue
Every day 11:00 p.m. -
7:00 a.m.
No parking
Main Street South Dreher Avenue
and Waverly
Street
Every day 8:00 a.m. -
6:00 p.m.
30 minutes
Main Street South 1055 Main
Street,
Westgate
Apartments
Monday -
Friday
6:00 a.m. -
6:00 p.m.
2 hours
Main Street South 1055 Main
Street,
Westgate
Apartments
Tuesday -
Wednesday
11:00 p.m. -
7:00 a.m.
No parking
Monroe Street North 6th Street and
9th Street
Wednesday
- Monday
11:00 p.m. -
8:00 a.m.
No parking
Monroe Street South 6th Street and
9th Street
Tuesday -
Wednesday
11:00 p.m. -
8:00 a.m.
No parking
North 9th
Street
West 123 North 9th
Street
Monday -
Friday
8:00 a.m. -
6:00 p.m.
30 minutes
North 9th
Street
[Amended by
Ord. 1018,
5/17/2016]
West North 10th
Street and
Main Street
Monday -
Saturday
8:00 a.m. -
6:00 p.m.
3 hours
Park Avenue East Bryant Street
and Clermont
Avenue
Every day 9:00 p.m. -
8:00 a.m.
No parking
Park Avenue East 304 Park
Avenue
Every day 8:00 a.m. -
9:00 p.m.
1 hour
Park Avenue East 322 Park
Avenue
Every day 8:00 a.m. -
9:00 p.m.
1 hour
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 165/505
B.
Street Side Between Days Hours Time Limit
Park Avenue West Bryant Street
and
Morningside
Avenue
Every day 9:00 p.m. -
8:00 a.m.
No parking
Park Avenue West Bryant Street
and 214 Park
Avenue
Monday -
Friday
8:00 a.m. -
6:00 p.m.
5 hours
Sarah Street North 5th Street and
8th Street
Tuesday
and
Wednesday
11:00 p.m. -
8:00 a.m.
No parking
Sarah Street Both 9th Street and
10th Street
Wednesday 6:00 a.m. -
12:00 p.m.
No parking
Sarah Street South 5th Street and
8th Street
Wednesday
- Monday
11:00 p.m. -
8:00 a.m.
No parking
7th Street West Sarah Street
and Thomas
Street
Monday -
Friday
8:00 a.m. -
6:00 p.m.
2 hours
North 7th
Street
Both Monroe Street
and Main
Street
Every day 2:00 a.m. -
6:00 a.m.
No parking
South 7th
Street
Both Main Street
and Ann Street
Friday 2:00 a.m. -
6:00 a.m.
No parking
North 6th
Street
West Main Street
and Sarah
Street
Sunday -
Monday
11:00 p.m. -
7:00 a.m.
No parking
South 6th
Street
West Main Street
and Ann Street
Friday 2:00 a.m. -
6:00 a.m.
No parking
Snyder Drive Both Entire street Monday -
Friday
6:00 a.m. -
6:00 p.m.
2 hours
Stokes Avenue East Entire street Friday 8:00 a.m. -
12:00 p.m.
No parking
Stokes Avenue West Entire street Thursday 8:00 a.m. -
12:00 p.m.
No parking
Parking Lots.
Lot Side Between Days Hours Time Limit
All Borough
parks
N/A Entire parking
lot
Every day At all times No parking on
the grass
Bryant Street
Park
N/A Entire parking
lot
Every day Dusk to dawn No parking
Rotary Park N/A Entire parking
lot
Every day Dusk to dawn No parking
Skate Park N/A Entire parking
lot
Every day Dusk to dawn No parking
§ 15-309. Special Purpose Parking Zones Established; Parking
Otherwise Prohibited.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 166/505
A.
B.
1.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
The following are hereby established as special purpose parking zones, and it shall be unlawful for
any person to park any vehicle or tractor or to allow the same to remain parked in any such zone,
except as specifically provided for such zone:
Streets.
[Amended by Ord. 1025, 3/7/2017; and by Ord. No. 1082, 10/15/2019]
Street Side Location Authorized Use
Main Street North In front of 524 Main
Street
Loading and unloading
Main Street South In front of 745 Main
Street
Compact only
Sarah Street South In front of 701-705
Sarah Street
Stroudsburg Fire Chief
only
7th Street West Alongside the Municipal
Building
Municipal business
North 7th Street East Courthouse Square Compact only
North 6th Street West In front of 11 North 6th
Street
30 minutes
loading/unloading zone
North 6th Street West In front of 17 North 6th
Street
Compact only
North 6th Street West In front of 21 North 6th
Street
Compact only
Monroe Street North In front of 712 Monroe
Street
Compact only
Parking Lots.
Lot Side Locations Authorized Use
Municipal Lot 5 East Meters 9, 11 and 18 Compact car only
Bryant Street Park N/A Entire parking lot Parking for park patrons
only
§ 15-310. Parking for Repairs.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
The parking of any motor vehicle, tractor or trailer, or combination thereof, upon streets and highways
of the Borough of Stroudsburg for repairs, whether upon the traveled or untraveled portion thereof,
shall be temporary only and limited to times for emergency repairs. This section shall not be construed
to permit parking for repairs at locations where parking is otherwise prohibited.
§ 15-311. Trailer Parking Restricted.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
It shall be unlawful for any person to park a trailer (which shall mean a vehicle without motive power,
designed to carry property of passengers or designed and used exclusively for living quarters wholly
on its own structure, and to be drawn by a motor vehicle or tractor, and including, but not limited to,
house trailers, boat trailers, and rental handling trailers) upon any street or highway in the Borough of
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 167/505
1.
2.
3.
4.
1.
2.
3.
Stroudsburg without having attached to such trailer a means of mechanical traction constructed or
designed for the purpose of drawing such trailer.
§ 15-312. Penalties.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015; as amended by Ord. No. 1020, 9/20/2016; by Ord. No. 1058, 8/21/2018; and
by Ord. No. 1077, 4/16/2019]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this Part shall be assessed a fine of $15 if paid
within seven days, with the exception of a fire hydrant violation, in which case the fine will be $50;
a person who shall violate § 15-307 shall be assessed a fine of $30 if paid within seven days.
If not paid within seven days of the date on the ticket, the fine will be increased to $35, with the
exception of a fire hydrant violation, in which case the fine will be $100; a violation of § 15-307 that
remains unpaid after seven days of the date on the ticket will be increased to $50.
If payment is not made within 14 days of the date on the ticket, prosecution will be initiated, and
the fine will be increased to $60 plus the cost of prosecution, with the exception of a fire hydrant
violation, in which case the fine will be increased to $125 plus the cost of prosecution; a violation
of § 15-307 that remains unpaid after 14 days of the date on the ticket will cause prosecution to be
initiated, and the fine will be increased to $75 plus the cost of prosecution.
When any person or persons cause a vehicle to remain in violation of any provision of this Part, it
shall be declared an additional violation each additional 12 hours that such person or persons
permit such vehicle to remain in violation of any provision of this Part.
§ 15-313. Tow-Away Zones Established.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
The following tow-away zones are hereby established, and it shall be unlawful for any person to
park any vehicle or to allow the same to remain parked in any such zone during the times
indicated. Violators' vehicles will be towed away at the owner's expense.
Street Side Location Authorized Use
Main Street Both West from 5th Street to 9th
Street
2:00 a.m. - 6:00 a.m.
South 7th Street Both Intersection of Cherry/Bank
Alley
Always
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle or to allow the same to remain parked in a
temporary no-parking zone as described below. The Stroud Area Regional Police Department
shall have vehicles towed away at the owner's expense when vehicles are parked in violation of
any of said temporary no-parking zones, provided the temporary no-parking signs are posted five
hours before the beginning of the no-parking time period stated on the sign, or in the case of noparking
time periods beginning between 12:00 midnight and 8:00 a.m., at least 10 hours before
said no-parking time period begins; provided, further, that temporary no-parking signs stating the
hours during which parking is prohibited and that the violators' vehicles shall be towed away at the
owner's expense are posted in compliance with this subsection. Vehicles parked in violation of
temporary no-parking signs shall also receive citations as provided by this Chapter 15 and state
law.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle or to allow the same to remain in a noparking
zone. The Stroud Area Regional Police Department shall have vehicles towed away at the
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 168/505
1.
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
B.
1.
owner's expense when vehicles are parked in violation of any of said no-parking zones.
§ 15-314. Special Parking Provisions.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
The following special parking provisions are hereby established:
Street Side Location Authorized Use
Thomas Street North North 6th Street and
North 8th Street
Parking will be allowed on
Sundays from 7:00 a.m. - 1:00
p.m.
§ 15-315. Parking Prohibited by Type of Vehicle.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
It shall be unlawful for any person to park or the owner of any vehicle to allow a vehicle to remain
parked on any highway or street within Stroudsburg Borough which is a vehicle of the class or
type listed below:
Any commercial truck, truck-tractor, bus, or combination having a height of greater than nine
feet or a length of greater than 20 feet.
No dumpster, collection bin, or other nonmotorized vehicle shall be left upon any highway or
street within Stroudsburg Borough without a permit being obtained from the Borough and
adequate reflectors or safety devices being placed to prevent vehicles from colliding with the
dumpster, collection bin, or vehicle.
Permits will be given for a period of no longer than two weeks. A nonrefundable fee of
$25 will be charged for each permit period. Permits may be renewed for an additional two
weeks up to a period of 28 days from the date the permit was first issued. For periods
lasting longer than 28 days, the applicant must make a written request to the Borough
Manager or the Manager's designated representative for a longer period.
Dumpsters, collection bins or other nonmotorized vehicles shall first be parked on the
property where the work will take place. Any damage done to public property while
placing the dumpster, collection bin or other nonmotorized vehicle will be replaced or
repaired by the property owner where the permit is issued to the satisfaction of the
Borough of Stroudsburg. If not repaired within 30 days, the Borough may make the repair
and charge the cost to the property owner.
If the dumpster, collection bin or other nonmotorized vehicle is to be parked on public
property, any damage done to public property will be replaced or repaired by the property
owner where the permit is issued to the satisfaction of the Borough of Stroudsburg. If not
repaired within 30 days, the Borough may make the repair and charge the cost to the
property owner.
If located on public property, the owner must make every effort to include, but not limited
to, providing a collection chute, to protect pedestrians and property from damage. The
type of protection will be stated on the application.
All dumpsters on public property shall be covered with a securely fastened cover during
nonwork hours.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 169/505
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
A.
B.
C.
2.
3.
A.
1.
If located on a street where meter parking is enforced, the applicant must purchase
sufficient meter bags at the daily rate. The daily rate shall be established by the
Stroudsburg Borough Council through the adoption of a resolution. The applicant is
responsible for ensuring the meter bags are placed and removed. The bags must be paid
for prior to issuing the permit. Dumpsters, collection bins or other nonmotorized vehicles
will not normally be allowed on Main Street within the Borough limits.
[Amended by Ord. No. 1071, 3/5/2019]
Full dumpsters or collection bins will be replaced within 24 hours when the level of trash
is approximately one foot below the top of the dumpster or collection bin. The Borough of
Stroudsburg has the right to call to have any dumpster or collection bin removed
immediately at the property owner's expense when the level of trash exceeds the top of
the dumpster or collection bin.
Any violation of the above will result in revocation of the permit and any fines further
defined in this section.
Penalties. Any person who shall violate any provisions of this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of up to $50, together with costs of
prosecution.
Exceptions.
Moving vans for a period of not more than 24 hours, unless meeting the criteria in Subsection
2C.
Between sunrise and sunset, a vehicle of this type may be parked for the purpose of loading
or unloading property for a period not to exceed two hours if parking is not otherwise
prohibited.
Any vehicle of this type which is actively being loaded or unloaded.
Notice of Restriction. Notice of parking restrictions shall be provided by means of posted traffic
control devices, certified letter, personal service, or by placing a notice on the windshield or any
other readily visible location on the vehicle. In the absence of a posted traffic control device,
enforcement of this subsection shall not take place unless a notice of violation has been issued to
the owner of the vehicle at least 48 hours prior to the date and time of enforcement and the owner
has failed to cure the violation within this time period.
§ 15-316. Handicapped Parking Zones Established.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
The following are hereby established as handicapped parking zones, and it shall be unlawful for
any person to park any vehicle or tractor or allow the same to remain parked in any of the
following locations, unless the vehicle has a license plate for the physically disabled or a
handicapped placard hanging visibly from the rearview mirror:
Streets.
Street Side Location Authorized Used
Ann Street South In front of 728 Ann
Street
Handicapped parking
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 170/505
Street Side Location Authorized Used
Bryant Street
[Repealed by Ord.
No. 1052,
6/19/2018]
North 8th Street East In front of 14 North 8th
Street
Handicapped parking
South 8th Street East First meter on South
8th Street at the
corner of Main Street
Handicapped parking
Fetherman Street West On the side of 1112 —
1114 Dreher Avenue
Handicapped parking
1st Street North In front of 109 North
1st Street
Handicapped parking
1st Street North In front of 111 North
1st Street
Handicapped parking
North 1st Street
[Added by Ord.
1020, 9/20/2016]
West In front of 107 North
1st Street
Handicapped parking
4th Street
[Added by Ord.
1029, 6/20/2017]
West First space off of Main
Street
Handicapped parking
Fulmer Avenue
[Added by Ord.
1017, 6/7/2016]
South In front of 507 Fulmer
Avenue
Handicapped parking
Fulmer Avenue South At the corner of
Fulmer Avenue and
Wallace Street
alongside 312 Wallace
Street
Handicapped parking
Garden Street West In front of 23 Garden
Street
Handicapped parking
Garden Street West In front of 37 Garden
Street
Handicapped parking
Lenox Street North In front of 522 Lenox
Street
Handicapped parking
Linden Street
[Added by Ord. No.
1064, 1/2/2019]
East In front of 6 Linden
Street
Handicapped parking
Linden Street East In front of 10 and 12
Linden Street
Handicapped parking
Linden Street East In front of 14 Linden
Street
Handicapped parking
Linden Street East Alongside 1140 West
Main Street
Handicapped parking
Main Street North In front of 572 Main
Street
Handicapped parking
Main Street North In front of 600 Main
Street
Handicapped parking
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 171/505
Street Side Location Authorized Used
Main Street North In front of 700 Main
Street
Handicapped parking
Main Street North In front of 742 Main
Street
Handicapped parking
Main Street South In front of 745 Main
Street
Handicapped parking
Main Street South In front of 437 Main
Street
Handicapped parking
Main Street South In front of 525 Main
Street
Handicapped parking
Main Street South Corner of Main Street
and Kitson Street
Handicapped parking
9th Street
[Repealed by Ord.
No. 1054,
7/17/2018]
Queen Street
[Repealed by Ord.
1018, 5/17/2016]
Sarah Street North In front of 519 Sarah
Street
Handicapped parking
Sarah Street South Rear of Monroe
County Courthouse (2
spaces)
Handicapped parking
Scott Street
[Added by Ord. No.
1045, 12/5/2017]
North In front of 524 Scott
Street
Handicapped parking
Scott Street North Corner of Scott Street
and Bell Terrace
(alongside 2 Bell
Terrace)
Handicapped parking
Scott Street South In front of 501 2nd
Street
Handicapped parking
Scott Street West In front of 71 2nd
Street
Handicapped parking
2nd Street West In front of 81 2nd
Street
Handicapped parking
2nd Street West In front of 87 2nd
Street
Handicapped parking
7th Street West 700 Sarah Street Handicapped parking
North 6th Street West In front of 17 North 6th
Street
Handicapped parking
South 6th Street West First space alongside
601 Main Street
Handicapped parking
Thomas Street
[Added by Ord. No.
1081, 8/6/2019]
East In front of 509 Thomas
Street
Handicapped parking
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 172/505
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
2.
1.
2.
A.
B.
C.
3.
4.
Street Side Location Authorized Used
Thomas Street South In front of 813 Thomas
Street
Handicapped parking
Williams Street West First parking space off
of Main Street
Handicapped parking
Parking Lots.
Lot Side Location Authorized Use
Stroudsburg
Borough Pool
N/A Parking lot - 3 spaces Handicapped parking
Penalties.
[Amended by Ord. No. 1020, 9/20/2016; and by Ord. No. 1058, 8/21/2018]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this Part shall be assessed a fine of $50 if paid
within seven days.
If not paid within seven days of the date of the ticket, the fine will be increased to $100.
If payment is not made within 14 days of the date on the ticket, prosecution will be initiated,
and the fine will be increased to $125 plus the cost of prosecution.
When person or persons cause a vehicle to remain in violation of any provision of this Part, it
shall be declared an additional violation each additional 12 hours that such person or persons
permit such vehicle to remain in violation of any provision of this Part.
§ 15-317. Abandoned Vehicles.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015; as amended by Ord. 1018, 5/17/2016]
It shall be unlawful for any person to own or have custody of any abandoned vehicle or to permit
any such vehicle to be parked upon any street, highway, alley or other public property in the
Borough of Stroudsburg.
No person shall park or leave on the streets, highways or public property of the Borough any
vehicle without current registration plates for more than 48 hours.
The Borough of Stroudsburg, once it has identified the owner or person having custody of any
abandoned vehicle, will notify that person requiring removal of the abandoned vehicle within 48
hours after receipt of the notice. Notices for removal will be by any of the following methods:
Posting or affixing the notice to the vehicle.
Hand delivery to the address of the vehicle owner.
Sent by certified mail.
If, after notification is executed in accordance with the above, the vehicle is not moved or is
deemed abandoned as stated in § 15-101, the vehicle may be towed by the Borough of
Stroudsburg in accordance with Part 5 of this chapter, at the expense of the owner.
§ 15-318. Penalties.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 173/505
1.
2.
3.
A.
1.
A.
B.
C.
2.
1.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015; as amended by Ord. 1018, 5/17/2016]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this Part shall be assessed a fine of $15 if paid
within 10 days.
If not paid within 10 days of the date on the ticket, the fine will be increased to $35.
If payment is not made within 20 days of the date on the ticket, prosecution will be initiated, and
the fine will be increased to $60 plus the cost of prosecution.
§ 15-319. Electric Vehicle Charging Station Zones.
[Added by Ord. No. 1066, 6/4/2019]
The following is hereby established as an electric vehicle charging station zone, and it shall be
unlawful for any person to park any vehicle or to allow the same to remain parked in any of the
following locations, unless the electric vehicle is being charged. Upon the completion of the
charge, the electric vehicle must be immediately removed from the space.
Two spaces adjacent to the westerly side of the lower level of Municipal Parking Lot 2.
Penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this section shall be assessed a fine of $15 if
paid within seven days of the date on the ticket.
If not paid within seven days of the date on the ticket, the fine will be increased to $35.
If payment is not made within 14 days of the date on the ticket, prosecution will be initiated,
and the fine will be increased to $60 plus the cost of prosecution.
Part 4. METERED PARKING
§ 15-401. Parking Meter Zones Established.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
Parking meter zones and municipal parking lots are hereby established upon and along the
following streets. It shall be unlawful to park a vehicle or to allow the same to remain parked
therein for longer than the time limits prescribed. The time limit starts from the time the vehicle
was initially parked in the space. Once the time limit has elapsed, the vehicle must vacate that
parking space and move to any other parking space.
[Amended by Ord. 1025, 3/7/2017]
Street or Lot Between Time Limit
Ann Street 5th Street and Williams Street No limit
8th Street Main Street and Ann Street 3 hours
8th Street Main Street and Sarah Street No limit
8th Street 114 South 8th Street and Sarah Street No limit
Main Street 8th Street and Pocono Creek Bridge No limit
Main Street 5th Street and 10th Street 3 hours
Main Street 4th Street and 5th Street 3 hours
Main Street Inter Borough Bridge and 4th Street No limit
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 174/505
A.
B.
C.
2.
Street or Lot Between Time Limit
Main Street At 437 Main Street 15 minutes
Main Street At 548 Main Street 15 minutes
Main Street At 563 Main Street 15 minutes
Main Street At 580 Main Street 15 minutes
Main Street At 724 Main Street 15 minutes
Main Street At 744 Main Street 15 minutes
Main Street At 761 Main Street 15 minutes
Main Street At 809 Main Street 15 minutes
Monroe Street 7th Street and 9th Street No limit
Monroe Street 6th Street and 7th Street 3 hours
Municipal Lot 1 — No limit
Municipal Lot 2 — No limit
Municipal Lot 3 — No limit
Municipal Lot 3 East side of lot - Main Street entrance -
2 spaces
15 minutes
Municipal Lot 5 — No limit
North 9th Street Main Street and Sarah Street No limit
South 9th Street Mill Alley and Ann Street No limit
Sarah Street 5th Street and 8th Street No limit
7th Street Sarah Street and Ann Street 3 hours
7th Street Sarah Street and Bank Alley 3 hours
7th Street At 41 North 7th Street 15 minutes
7th Street Remaining meters No limit
6th Street Bank Alley and Ann Street No limit
6th Street Sarah Street and Ann Street 3 hours
6th Street Sarah Street and Bank Alley 3 hours
6th Street At 7 North 6th Street 15 minutes
6th Street At 13 North 6th Street 15 minutes
6th Street At 15 North 6th Street 15 minutes
Williams Street Ann Street and Main Street No limit
Except for Sundays and legal holidays, the requirement for deposit of coins in meters shall be in
effect between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., prevailing local time, on Monday through
Friday, and between 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., prevailing local time, on Saturday. The following
shall apply to parking in municipal lots:
[Amended by Ord. 1039, 9/5/2017]
Municipal Parking Lot No. 1 shall be controlled by meters. The deposit of coins in meters shall
be in effect between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., prevailing local time, on Monday
through Friday, and between 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., prevailing local time, on Saturdays.
Municipal Parking Lot No. 2 shall be controlled by meters and permits. Metering shall be
enforced between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., prevailing local time, Monday through
Saturday. Permits shall be enforced 24 hours.
Municipal Parking Lot No. 3 shall be controlled by meters and permits. Metering shall be
enforced between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., prevailing local time, Monday through
Saturday. Permits shall be enforced 24 hours.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 175/505
D.
E.
F.
3.
Municipal Parking Lot No. 4, known as the "Sarah Street Extension Parking Lot," shall be
controlled by parking permits, which will be enforced 24 hours a day, seven days a week.
Municipal Parking Lot No. 5 shall be controlled by meters and parking permits. Metering shall
be enforced between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., prevailing local time, on Monday
through Saturday. Permits shall be enforced 24 hours.
Municipal Parking Lot No. 6 shall be controlled by meters and parking permits. Metering shall
be enforced between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., prevailing local time, on Monday
through Saturday. Permits shall be enforced 24 hours.
No parking from 2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. at the following municipal lots:
[Amended by Ord. 1039, 9/5/2017; and by Ord. No. 1072, 3/5/2019]
Lot Number Day
1 Tuesday
2 Tuesday (east half)/Thursday (west half)
3 Monday (east half)/Thursday (west half)
4 Wednesday
5 Monday (east half)/Thursday (west half)
6 Wednesday
§ 15-402. Installation and Characteristics of and Control Over
Parking Meters.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
Parking meters shall be installed in each of the parking meter zones and municipal parking lots
established, immediately adjacent to each individual parking space. Each meter shall be placed or set
in such manner as to show that the parking space adjacent to such meter is or is not legally occupied.
Each meter installed shall indicate by a proper legend the legal parking time established by the
Borough and, when occupied, shall indicate by its digital display the duration of the period of legal
parking and, on expiration of such period, shall indicate illegal or overtime parking. Such meters, after
installation, shall be under the management and supervision of the Borough Manager.
§ 15-403. Parked Vehicles to Be Wholly Within Marked Spaces.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
Lines and/or markings shall be painted or placed upon the curb, sidewalk and/or street adjacent to
each parking meter for the purpose of designating the parking space for which such meter is to be
used. Each vehicle parked adjacent to any parking meter shall be parked wholly within the lines or
markings so placed and applicable to such meter. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle across any
such line or marking, or to park any vehicle in such a position that such vehicle shall not be wholly
within the area so designated by such lines or markings.
§ 15-404. Manner of Parking at Meters.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
When a parking space in any parking meter zone is parallel with the adjacent curb or sidewalk, any
vehicle parked in such parking space shall be parked so that the front of such vehicle shall be nearest
to the parking meter; when a parking space in any parking meter zone is diagonal to the curb or
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 176/505
sidewalk, any vehicle parked in such parking space shall be parked with the front of such vehicle
nearest to such meter.
§ 15-405. Coin Deposit in Meters.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
Any person or persons causing a vehicle to be parked in a parking space shall deposit in the parking
meter adjacent to such space coin or coins of the United States of America according to the time limits
and rates indicated on the legend of such meter.
§ 15-406. Rates for Parking.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
The Borough Council of the Borough of Stroudsburg may, by resolution, from time to time, revise and
change parking rates and determine the length of time that parking is permissible in any individual
parking space which is regulated by the meter immediately adjacent thereto; and notice thereof shall
be given to the public, stating the length of time during which parking is permitted and the conditions
regulating the same, by either placing said notice on the parking meter or in the immediate vicinity of
said parking facility.
§ 15-407. Unlawful to Park After Time on Meter Has Elapsed;
Evidence of Violation.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015; as amended by Ord. No. 1069, 3/5/2019]
Any person or persons who cause a vehicle to remain in a parking space after the prescribed time, for
which coins or tokens have been deposited, has elapsed are hereby determined to be illegally parked;
and each additional two hours that such person or persons permit such vehicle to remain in an
individual parking space after the prescribed time for parking has elapsed is hereby declared to be an
additional violation. The fact that a vehicle is in an individual parking space when the time signal on the
parking meter regulating said parking space shows that no parking is permitted, or that the time has
expired, shall be deemed prima facie evidence of the unlawful parking of said vehicle by its operator
and/or owner. The elapse of two hours from the time reported on the notice to the owner or operator of
a motor vehicle shall be deemed prima facie evidence of additional violations of the parking of said
motor vehicle by the operator or owner.
§ 15-408. Unlawful to Deposit Coin in Meter to Extend Parking
Time Beyond Legal Limit.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this Part for any person to deposit or to cause to be deposited in
any parking meter any coin for the purpose of increasing or extending the parking time of any vehicle
beyond the total legal parking time in a parking meter zone.
§ 15-409. Tampering With Meters Unlawful.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this Part 4 for any person to deface, tamper with, open or willfully
break, destroy or impair the usefulness of any parking meter, or parking meter stand or coin depository
installed under the provisions of this Part; provided, nothing herein shall apply to the servicing or
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 177/505
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
1.
2.
A.
B.
C.
D.
1.
opening of parking meters by officers, employees and/or police officers of the Borough under the
direction of the Mayor and/or the Borough Council.
§ 15-410. Report of Violations.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
It shall be the duty of the police officers and parking enforcement personnel of the Borough, in
accordance with the instructions of the Borough Manager or Chief of Police, to report all violations
of any provision of this Part 4, indicating, in each case:
The section thereof violated.
The location where such violation took place, including the parking meter at which the vehicle
was illegally parked.
The state and license number of such vehicle.
The date and time of violation.
The date and time of the notice of the violation.
Other facts deemed necessary for a clear understanding of the circumstances attending the
violation.
Every such police officer or parking enforcement person shall place upon such vehicle a notice to
the owner or driver thereof that such vehicle was parked in violation of a provision of this Part and
shall indicate on the notice the date and time the notice was placed on the vehicle.
§ 15-411. Suspension of Regulations.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
The Borough Council may suspend in whole or in part the parking meter regulations set forth in this
Part 4 during such days and hours as may be designated by it.
§ 15-412. Fines.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015; amended by Ord. 1023, 11/15/2016; and by Ord. No. 1058, 8/21/2018]
Any person, firm, corporation or owner of any vehicle parked in violation of any provision of this
Part 4, or aiding, abetting or assisting in the violation thereof, shall be assessed a fine in
accordance with the following schedule:
Ten dollars for each separate parking violation if paid within seven days of the time the notice
of violation was issued, except violations of § 15-408 will have a fine of $15.
The owner or driver may discharge the fine by paying the sum of $10, respectively, at the
Municipal Building, 700 Sarah Street, within the time limit.
If not paid within seven days of the date on the ticket, the fine will be increased to $30, except
violations of § 15-408 will have a fine of $35.
If payment is not made within 14 days of the date on the ticket, prosecution will be initiated,
and the fine will be increased to $50, except violations of § 15-408 will have a fine of $60, plus
the cost of prosecution.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 178/505
E. The penalty for violating § 15-409 depends on the extent of damage inflicted. The act may be
punishable as a felony, misdemeanor or summary offense (18 P.S. § 3304).
§ 15-413. Disposition of Fines.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
The fines for violations deposited in the parking fine boxes shall be collected regularly by the person or
persons designated by the Borough Council to make the collection from the coin boxes in the parking
meters, and said payments so collected shall be deposited by the Borough Manager to the credit of the
Borough.
§ 15-414. Collection of Meter and Fine Depositories.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
The Borough Council shall designate a person or persons who shall collect the coins in the parking
meters and fine boxes and deliver the same to the depository. Each collector of costs from the parking
meters and from the fine boxes shall furnish a bond, in the sum of at least $40,000, to the Borough for
faithful performance thereof.
§ 15-415. Metered Parking Lots for Certain Types of Vehicles
Only.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
The metered parking lots established by this Part shall be for the use of passenger cars, passenger
vans and pickup trucks only, and it shall be unlawful for any person to park any other type of vehicle in
any of those lots.
§ 15-416. Municipal Parking Lot Parking Permits.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
The Borough of Stroudsburg shall offer for sale to members of the public parking permits in the
downtown area to be used in the municipal parking lots. The permit will allow for unrestricted parking at
any meter within the metered lots, except for those days and times listed in § 15-401. The permits shall
be sold on a quarterly basis at a fee set by the Borough Council. The Council of the Borough may, by
resolution, from time to time, revise and change the fee for these permits.
§ 15-417. Display of Permit.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
The permit shall be hung from the rearview mirror while parked in said lot. Failure to properly display
the permit may result in a parking violation and/or fine.
Part 5. REMOVAL AND IMPOUNDMENT OF ILLEGALLY
PARKED VEHICLES
§ 15-501. Authority to Remove and Impound Illegally Parked
Vehicles.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 179/505
1.
2.
1.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
The Stroud Area Regional Police Department is hereby authorized to remove and impound, or to order
the removal and impoundment of, any vehicle parked upon any street, alley, highway or public property
in the Borough in violation of any provision of the law or of any ordinance of the Borough.
§ 15-501.1. Scofflaw.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
If any motor vehicle/conveyance is illegally parked in violation of this chapter or any applicable
provision of the Motor Vehicle Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or if the owner of any
motor vehicle/conveyance is delinquent in payment of fines and costs imposed by a District
Magistrate and for whom a warrant of arrest has been issued by a District Magistrate as a result of
his violation of the parking laws of the Borough of Stroudsburg or the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, then that owner's motor vehicle(s)/conveyance(s) shall be prohibited from parking
on any streets within the Borough and shall be seized, removed and impounded.
This Part is enacted as an enforcement procedure for the protection of the public peace, safety
and welfare and the safeguarding of property and shall be used generally for the prevention and
removal of traffic hazards, prevention and abatement of public nuisances arising from traffic law
violations and for the protection of the public rights in the use of Borough streets and roads.
§ 15-501.2. Definitions.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
As used in this Part, the following terms shall have the meaning indicated:
AUTHORIZED PERSONNEL
A police officer of the Stroud Area Regional Police Department or parking enforcement officer
of the Borough of Stroudsburg, and/or any designees thereof, who are authorized by the
Borough Council to engage in the enforcement of parking ordinances of the Borough of
Stroudsburg.
BOOT, BOOTING OR BOOTED
The act of immobilizing a motor vehicle in such a manner as to prevent its operation;
however, no such vehicle shall be immobilized by any means other than by the use of a
device or other mechanism which will cause no damage to such vehicle unless it is moved
with such device or mechanism in place, and which device is certified as acceptable by the
Stroud Area Regional Police Department.
INDICIA OF OWNERSHIP
Any identifying card and plate or plates issued to evidence authority for a motor vehicle to be
operated on a public street or highway or a certificate of title issued to evidence that a person,
other than a lienholder, has the property right in or title to a motor vehicle.
PUBLIC GROUND OR PROPERTY
Includes, but is not limited to, parks, public parking lots, streets, highways and roads.
UNPAID PARKING VIOLATIONS
Violations of the ordinances and regulations of the Borough of Stroudsburg, or violations of
the provisions of Title 75 (Pa.C.S.A.), the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code, relating to parking,
standing or stopping of vehicles, for which a parking ticket has been issued and for which
payment is outstanding and unpaid.
UNSETTLED CITATIONS
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 180/505
1.
2.
A.
B.
1.
Citations for unpaid parking violations for which a citation and summons have been issued
which either remain unpaid after the time for payment set forth in the citation and summons or
for which a warrant has been issued, and including adjudicated citations for which the fines
and costs imposed remain unpaid. This shall include payment plans set by the District
Magistrate or brought before the Borough that are in default or have not been fulfilled as
agreed to by the individual issued the citation.
UNSETTLED PARKING VIOLATIONS
Violations of the ordinances and regulations of the Borough of Stroudsburg, or violations of
the provisions of Title 75 (Pa.C.S.A.), the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code, relating to parking,
standing or stopping of vehicles, for which a parking ticket has been issued and for which
payment is outstanding and unpaid for over 30 days from the date of issuance of the parking
ticket.
§ 15-501.3. Boot Installation.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
A vehicle found parked within the Borough upon any public ground or property at any time may, by
or under the direction of any police officer of the Stroud Area Regional Police Department, or by or
under the direction of any parking enforcement officer of the Borough, be booted if there are five
or more unsettled citations and/or unsettled parking violations pending against the owner, or any
co-owner, of the vehicle. No further notice to the owner or co-owner of the vehicle is required
before the vehicle is booted under the provisions of this section.
If a payment plan has been reached by the owner with the Borough or District Magistrate as to
payment of any one or all five or more unsettled citations and/or unsettled parking violations, and
the owner or any co-owner defaults on that payment plan, or fails to pay as agreed, the vehicle
may be booted without any further notice to the owner or co-owner.
§ 15-501.4. Notice of Booting.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
Upon booting of such vehicle, the police officer or authorized employee of the Borough shall place or
cause to be placed on the vehicle, in a conspicuous manner, notice sufficient to warn reasonably
observant individuals that the vehicle has been immobilized and that any attempt to move the vehicle
might result in damage to the vehicle. The notice shall also outline the procedure for obtaining removal
of the boot. As soon as practicable, the police officer or employee of the Borough shall provide the
owner of the vehicle, at his request, with a list of the unsettled violations or unsettled citations and shall
serve any outstanding warrants for which, or on account of which, the vehicle was booted.
§ 15-501.5. Removal of Boot.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
The owner of a booted vehicle, or a person authorized by the owner, shall be permitted to secure
the release of the vehicle upon:
Payment of the collateral required for his or her appearance before a District Magistrate to
answer for each unsettled citation or outstanding warrant or payment of the amount of the
fine, penalty and costs, if any, for each unsettled citation and each unsettled parking violation.
Payment of the fees as prescribed in § 15-501.8 of this Part.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 181/505
1.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A.
B.
2.
§ 15-501.6. Towing and Storage of Vehicles.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
The boot shall remain in place for 48 hours, except as provided below, unless the owner has complied
with § 15-501.5 of this Part regarding payment of fines, costs and fees. If such compliance has not
occurred within 72 hours, the vehicle shall be towed or impounded in accordance with § 15-501.3 of
this Part. If the booting occurs when a vehicle is parked in violation of any provision of the law, or any
ordinance of the Borough, or if the booted vehicle or immobilization device appears to have been
tampered with, then such vehicle is subject to immediate towing and impounding. Towing and storage
fees shall be paid, along with the fees specified in § 15-501.8 of this Part, before the owner of the
vehicle, or person authorized by the owner, shall be permitted to repossess or secure release of the
vehicle. Vehicles unclaimed within 30 days of towing and storage shall be deemed abandoned and
subject to disposal, as such, in the manner authorized by law.
§ 15-501.7. Election to Be Subject to Statutory Provisions.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
The Borough of Stroudsburg hereby elects to be subject to the provisions of § 6309.1 of Title 75 of the
Pennsylvania Vehicle Code (75 Pa.C.S.A. § 6309.1) relating to the impoundment of vehicles for
nonpayment of fines; vehicles or combinations with a gross vehicle weight rating of 17,000 pounds or
less.
§ 15-501.8. Booting Fees.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015; as amended by Ord. 1018, 5/17/2016]
The owner or co-owner of the booted vehicle shall be individually and separately responsible for
any and all costs associated with such immobilization.
Penalty Fee.
The owner or co-owner of the booted vehicle shall be assessed a penalty fee for such
immobilization, payable to the Borough Office, according to the following schedule:
[Amended by Ord. 1025, 3/7/2017]
$50 for the first boot of an owner or co-owner of a vehicle;
$150 for the second boot of the same owner or co-owner;
$300 for the third boot of the same owner or co-owner;
$50 will be added to each additional boot after the third boot of the same owner or coowner.
The fee shall be satisfied prior to removal of the boot from the booted vehicle.
§ 15-501.9. Tampering With Boot Prohibited.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
Any person who shall tamper with, injure, damage, deface, remove or attempt to remove any device
used to immobilize a vehicle which has been booted pursuant to this Part, or who shall move or
attempt to move the booted vehicle before the release of the vehicle has been officially secured, shall
be guilty of a summary offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fine not less than $300 nor more
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 182/505
than $500, together with the cost of prosecution, or be imprisoned for not more than 30 days, or both,
and shall be required to make full restitution for damages caused by such actions.
§ 15-501.10. Implementation and Enforcement.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
It shall be the duty of the police officers of the Stroud Area Regional Police Department, or parking
enforcement officers of the Borough of Stroudsburg, to enforce the provisions of this Part.
§ 15-501.11. Right to Hearing Not Waived.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
Nothing in this Part shall be construed to deprive any person of his or her constitutional right to a
hearing or trial as to the violations for which parking tickets, notices, or citations have been issued.
§ 15-502. Approved Storage Garages.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
The Borough Council shall utilize storage garages designated by the Stroud Area Regional Police
Department to serve as impound lots for the storage of such impounded vehicles.
§ 15-503. Towing and Storage Charges.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
Every such approved storage garage shall have authority to charge the owner of record of every such
impounded vehicle the towing and storage charges.
§ 15-504. Garage to Post Bond.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
Every such approved storage garage shall furnish a bond in an adequate amount as shall be fixed by
the Borough Council, for the indemnifying of the owner of any such impounded vehicle against the loss
thereof, or injury or damage thereto, while in the custody of the keeper of the pound.
§ 15-505. Notification to Owners of Impounded Vehicles.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
Within 24 hours from the time of removal of any vehicle under authority granted by this Part, notice of
the fact that such vehicle has been impounded shall be sent by the Borough to the owner of record of
such vehicle. Such notice shall include the make, model, registration plate number, the location the
vehicle is held, notification of the right to reclaim said vehicle within 30 days after the date of the notice
upon payment of a fee for towing and storage charges, and notification that failure to reclaim said
vehicle is deemed consent to the disposition of the vehicle. Such vehicle(s) shall not be released from
impoundment until all fines and penalties due the Borough are paid.
§ 15-506. Effect of Payment of Towing and Impoundment
Charges Without Protest.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 183/505
[1]
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
The payment of any towing and impounding charges authorized by this Part shall, unless such
payment shall have been made under protest, be final and conclusive and shall constitute a waiver of
any right to recover the money so paid.
§ 15-507. Effect of Payment of Towing and Impoundment
Charges Under Protest.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
In the event that any towing and impounding charges, authorized by this Part, shall be paid under
protest, the offender shall be entitled to a hearing before a District Justice or court of record having
jurisdiction, in which case the defendant shall be proceeded against and shall receive such notice as is
provided for by the Vehicle Code,[1] in other cases of summary offenses, and shall have the same
rights as to appeal and waiver of hearing.
Editor's Note: See 75 P.S. § 101 et seq.
§ 15-508. Record of Vehicles Removed and Impounded.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
The Borough Office shall keep a record of all vehicles impounded, and it shall be able at all reasonable
times to furnish the owners, or agents of the owners thereof, information as to the place of storage of
such vehicles.
§ 15-509. Owner or Operator of Vehicle Remains Liable for Fine
or Penalty.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
The payment of towing and storage charges shall not operate to relieve the owner or operator of any
vehicle from liability for any fine or penalty for the violation of any law or ordinance on account of which
such vehicle was removed and impounded.
§ 15-510. Restrictions Upon Removal of Vehicles.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
No vehicle shall be removed under the authority of this Part if, at the time of the intended removal
thereof, the owner or person for the time being in charge of such vehicle is present and expresses a
willingness and intention to remove such vehicle immediately.
Part 6. SNOW AND ICE EMERGENCY
§ 15-601. Definitions.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
The following words, when used in this Part, shall have the following meanings, unless the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
CHAINS
Full chains, strap chains or other types of chains mounted on both rear wheels of a motorized
vehicle.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 184/505
A.
B.
PRIMARY SNOW EMERGENCY ROUTE
Designated streets, as defined in § 15-605 of this Part, which are primary transportation routes
through the Borough and are considered to be essential to the rapid movement of emergency
vehicles and normally carry the heaviest traffic volume or represent a significant physical hazard
during times of snow.
SNOW
Any precipitation depositing snow, sleet, hail, ice and freezing rain on streets within the Borough.
SNOW REMOVAL CONDITION
A snow removal condition is hereby declared to exist in the Borough whenever one of the
following exists:
Accumulation to a depth of three inches or more; when this condition exists due to depth of
accumulation, no action by the Mayor or Borough official is necessary to implement the
conditions of this Part.
When, in the opinion of the Mayor or such person designated by the Mayor, the street
conditions are hazardous and dangerous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic because of snow
accumulation.
SNOW TIRES
Tires having treads designed for use in snow, which tires must be in such condition as to serve the
purpose for which they are designed.
VEHICLE
Any self-propelled motorized vehicle licensed to travel upon the streets, roads and highways of the
Borough.
§ 15-602. Notice and Duration of Snow Removal Condition.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
In the event of a snow removal condition, said condition shall occur immediately, and notice shall
immediately be issued to local radio and news services. In either instance, a snow removal condition is
presumed to continue for a period of 24 hours following the accumulation of snow or until such other
period of time as designated by the Mayor.
§ 15-603. Alternate Parking Requirement.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
In the event of a snow removal condition, parking will be permitted on the streets with the same
conditions as stated in § 15-307, "Alternate Parking Established on Certain Streets."
§ 15-604. Unattended Vehicles Prohibited During Emergency.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
During such time as a snow removal condition is in effect or alternate side parking as a result of a
snow removal condition, it shall be a violation of this Part for any person, firm, organization or entity to
park, abandon or leave unattended any vehicle on any streets, roads, highways or any specified side
of the street and municipal parking lots and their adjacent rights-of-way within the boundaries of the
Borough that have been publicly designated for snow removal or plowing.
§ 15-605. Certain Streets Designated for Snow Removal.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 185/505
A.
1.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
The following streets within the Borough are hereby designated for snow removal or plowing, and
parking thereon shall be prohibited while a snow removal condition is in effect:
Street Between
Ann Street 5th Street to 10th Street
Bryant Street Park Avenue to Village Drive
8th Street Ann Street to Phillips Street
Fulmer Avenue 8th Street to Wallace Street
Main Street Western Borough line to eastern Borough line (after
6:00 p.m. and before 8:00 a.m.)
McConnell Street 2nd Street to 5th Street
9th Street Ann Street to Scott Street
Park Avenue Barry Street to Broad Street
Sarah Street 5th Street to 9th Street
7th Street Ann Street to Sarah Street
6th Street Ann Street to Scott Street
3rd Street 5th Street to Lower Main Street
§ 15-606. Notification of Primary Snow Route.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
During the period of November 1 to May 1, the primary snow route shall be identified by signage
consistent with approved traffic markings and shall provide notice to the public of the right of the
Borough to remove cars which are left unattended during a period of snow emergency. Secondary
snow routes or other provisions of a Mayor's proclamation shall be noticed by notifying news sources
and temporarily marking roads when appropriate and feasible.
§ 15-607. Snow Tires or Chains Required.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
During such time as a snow removal condition is in effect, any person, firm, organization or entity
operating or causing to be operated a vehicle which is not equipped with appropriate tires for winter
conditions or chains upon any street, road or highway within the boundaries of the Borough resulting in
such vehicle becoming stalled or incapable of moving under its own power, or who leaves such vehicle
abandoned or unattended on any street, road or highway within the boundaries of the Borough as a
result of its inability to move under its own power because of its failure to be equipped with snow tires
or chains, shall be in violation of this Part 6 and shall be subject to the penalties and fines set forth in
§ 15-608.
§ 15-608. Penalties.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015; as amended by Ord. No. 1058, 8/21/2018]
During such time as a snow removal condition is in effect, any person who shall park a vehicle
anywhere upon or along any of the streets of the Borough that have been publicly designated for
snow removal or plowing shall be guilty of a violation of this Part 6 and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $100 if paid within seven days.
[Amended by Ord. No. 1068, 3/5/2019]
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 186/505
A.
B.
2.
A.
B.
1.
If not paid within seven days of the date on the ticket, the fine will be increased to $150.
If payment is not made within 14 days of the date on the ticket, prosecution will be initiated,
and the fine will be increased to $175.
Any person who shall operate a vehicle upon the streets of the Borough, if such vehicle shall
become stalled during such time as a snow removal condition is in effect, and if such stalling shall
have been by reason of the failure to have such vehicle equipped as prescribed in § 15-607 of this
Part, shall be guilty of a violation of this Part, and, upon conviction thereof, such person shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of $25 together with costs of prosecution.
Part 7. RESIDENTIAL PARKING DISTRICTS
§ 15-701. Council to Designate Residential Parking Districts.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
The Borough Council may, in compliance with this Part 7, designate, repeal, or revise residential
parking districts, and it may establish the parking restrictions, i.e., days, hours, and exemptions for
each district. Residential parking districts shall not be designated in a nonresidential zone as ordained
by the Borough of Stroudsburg's Zoning Ordinance [Chapter 27]. The process of designating, revising,
or repealing any residential parking district could begin either by the Borough Council's initiative or
upon submission of a petition to the Council from residents of the district.
§ 15-702. Designation Criteria.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
A residential area shall be deemed impacted and thereby eligible for residential parking district
designation provided the following criteria are satisfied:
The area must be zoned residential.
During the proposed hours of restricted parking, except any legal holidays as specified in the
definition section proposed for exemption, the number of vehicles of nonresidents parked
legally or illegally on a street in the district is equal to 30% or more of the legal on-street
parking capacity of the street. The percentage of nonresident parking shall be determined by
averaging the results of two surveys conducted on different days and at different times of the
day but within the hours of restricted parking. For purposes of this evaluation, a legal parking
space shall be 22 linear feet.
§ 15-703. Public Hearing.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
The Borough Council shall hold a public hearing on any proposed designation of, revision to, or repeal
of a residential parking district. The public hearing shall be held only after the Borough Manager has
compiled data to determine if the area satisfies the criteria for designation and the proposed ordinance
and public hearings have been duly advertised.
§ 15-704. Final Action.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 187/505
1.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
2.
3.
Within 65 days following the public hearing, the Borough Council shall take final action on the
proposed ordinance.
§ 15-705. Parking Restrictions in Residential Parking Districts.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
Except for motor vehicles displaying a valid permit for the proper residential parking district, it shall be
unlawful for any person to park any motor vehicle, or allow any motor vehicle to be parked, in a
residential parking district for more than the time allowed by the parking restrictions established for that
district. The parking restrictions for each residential parking district shall be established by ordinance of
the Borough Council at the time each respective district is created. Residential parking permit holders
must comply with all other parking regulations in effect at the time the district is designated or as may
be amended by the Borough Council. In areas with existing parking meters, vehicles displaying a valid
residential parking district permit may be parked in metered spaces within the designated district
without the need to deposit coins.
§ 15-706. Residency Required for Permit.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
A residential parking district permit shall be issued to any vehicle of a resident of a residential
parking district for the district in which the person resides. A residential parking district permit shall
also be issued to any vehicle of an adversely impacted neighbor of a residential parking district,
provided that the adversely impacted neighbor meets the conditions set forth in Subsection 2 of
this section. In addition to the residential parking district permit, each dwelling unit in a residential
parking district making application shall receive two short-term visitors' passes. The short-term
visitors' passes shall be valid for a three-day period. For the purpose of this Part 7, a resident is
any adult who lives or resides in a structure approved for residential occupancy and who is the
owner of or a tenant in the structure or who can demonstrate some other indication of exclusive
right of occupancy. A property owner who maintains a seasonal or temporary residence in excess
of 100 days within the permit year shall also be considered a resident.
When the designation of a residential parking district adversely impacts other Borough residents
because their residence is not situated within the residential parking district and because they do
not have on- or off-street parking, the adversely impacted neighbor may petition the Borough
Council for a residential parking district permit. The adversely impacted neighbor must prove to
the Council's satisfaction, the following:
That the applicant (adversely impacted neighbor) is a resident as defined in § 15-706 above;
That the applicant resides in a residential zoning district;
That a portion of the applicant's property (residence) is within 80 feet of the residential parking
district;
That the applicant shows his/her property (residence) does not abut a street where on-street
parking is allowed; and
That the applicant demonstrates the lack of adequate off-street parking and the inability to
develop the property to provide for legal off-street parking.
The Borough Council shall hold a public hearing on the application and make a decision on same
within 65 days of the hearing. An adversely impacted neighbor whose application has been
approved by the Borough Council shall follow the same prescribed procedures, be entitled to the
same rights, and pay the same fees as specified for residents in this Part 7.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 188/505
A.
B.
C.
1.
2.
§ 15-707. Permit Application.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
An application for a residential parking district permit shall be made by a resident of a district to
the Borough Office on forms provided by the Borough. The application for a permit shall contain
information to verify that the applicant is a bona fide resident of the district for which application
has been made and has legal title to or the right to possession of the motor vehicle to be
permitted. The information shall include but not be limited to the following:
Applicant's name, address, operator's permit number, and date of issuance;
Vehicle owner's name, address, operator's permit number, and date of issuance;
The make, model, color, state of registration, and license number of the vehicle to be
registered.
A parking permit may not be issued for any motor vehicle for which one or more unpaid citations
have been issued by the Borough for parking violations. The Borough shall issue the parking
permit upon finding the applicant meets the requirements specified in this section and has paid the
required fee.
§ 15-708. Permit Fee and Term.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015; as amended by Ord. No. 1057, 8/21/2018]
The annual permit fee for a residential parking district permit shall be established by resolution of the
Borough Council. The fee shall be payable at the time the application is submitted. The permit term for
each residential parking district shall be determined at the time the district is designated. Residential
parking permits may be renewed by qualified residents upon the payment of the annual fee on or
before the anniversary date of the term. In order to renew the permit, residents must present their
short-term visitors' passes. The fee shall be prorated; after the midpoint of the permit term, residents
shall pay 1/2 of the established fee. No portion of any fee is refundable.
§ 15-709. Display of Permit.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
The permit shall be affixed to the back of the interior rearview mirror facing the front windshield of the
vehicle. Short-term visitors' passes and temporary passes shall be displayed on the front dash of the
vehicle. Failure to properly display the permit or visitor's pass may result in a parking violation and/or
fine.
§ 15-710. Expiration of Permits.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
A permit expires and is void when the owner or user of a permitted vehicle no longer resides within the
district, as defined in this Part 7. A resident shall remove a permit sticker from any permitted motor
vehicle upon its expiration or upon moving outside of the district. Furthermore, a resident shall return
short-term visitors' passes to the Borough Office. Permits shall be transferred from one vehicle to
another during the permit period solely in accordance with regulations governing such transfers.
§ 15-711. Permit Transfers and Replacements.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 189/505
(1)
(2)
A.
1.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
When a vehicle to which is a permit is affixed is sold, transferred, demolished, or in any other manner
rendered unusable to the resident, the resident shall remove the permit from the motor vehicle and
may request the issuance of a replacement permit. The owner of the permitted vehicle shall notify the
Borough Office of a change in status of the motor vehicle. The application for a replacement permit
shall be the same as the application for an original or renewal permit. The replacement permit shall be
issued and be valid for the unexpired term of the original permit, except that a replacement permit may
not be issued for any motor vehicle for which one or more unpaid citations have been issued by the
Borough for parking violations. The fee for a replacement permit shall be prorated as set forth in § 15-
708.
§ 15-712. Temporary Permits.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
The Borough Office shall issue a temporary residential parking permit for use by a bona fide long-term
visitor to a residence within a residential parking district. An application for a long-term temporary
permit shall be made by a resident of a district on a form that shall be prescribed by the Borough
Office. The long-term visitor parking permit shall be valid for a seven-day period. The fee for a
temporary permit, if any, shall be established by resolution of the Borough Council.
§ 15-713. Residential Parking Districts Designated.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
The following areas of the Borough of Stroudsburg are hereby designated as residential parking
districts with the parking restrictions described below:
The Hill District.
The Hill District shall encompass the permitted parking on Scott Street from North Eighth
Street to North Fifth Street; the permitted parking on Thomas Street from Stone Street to
North Fifth Street; the permitted parking on the north side of Sarah Street from North
Eighth Street to North Fifth Street; the permitted parking on North Eighth Street from
Sarah Street to Scott Street; the permitted parking on North Seventh Street from Thomas
Street to Scott Street; the permitted parking on North Sixth Street from Sarah Street to
Scott Street; and the permitted parking on Wallace Street from Thomas Street to Scott
Street. The residential parking district restrictions for the Hill District shall be in effect
Monday through Saturday, inclusive, from 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., prevailing time. Motor
vehicles not displaying a valid residential parking district permit may not be parked on the
streets of the Hill District for more than one hour, with the exception of metered parking
spaces on Sarah Street. The parking restrictions set forth in this subsection shall not
apply on the legal holidays as specified in the definition section. The permit term for the
Hill District shall commence on October 1 and expire two years later on September 30.
Within the boundaries of the Hill District, there shall be a school zone in the vicinity of the
Ramsey Elementary School. The school zone shall encompass the permitted parking on
Scott Street from Wallace to North Seventh Street; the permitted parking on North
Seventh Street from Scott Street to Thomas Street; the permitted parking on Thomas
Street from North Seventh Street to Wallace Street; and the permitted parking on North
Sixth Street from Thomas Street to Scott Street. The Stroudsburg School District shall
receive, for a fee as required in § 15-708 hereof, 17 permits to park within the school
zone as follows: five permits on Scott Street, four on Thomas Street, and four permits on
North Sixth Street. The school zone parking permits shall be valid only Monday through
Friday from 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., prevailing time. The term of the permits for the school
zone shall be established by § 15-708 and § 15-713, Subsection 1A(1), hereof. The
permits shall be retained by the school district for use by school district employees only.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 190/505
B.
C.
1.
2.
3.
4.
The West Side District. The West Side District shall encompass the permitted parking on
Linden Street from West Main Street to Hamilton Street; Hamilton Street south side between
Linden Street and Elizabeth Street; Fetherman Street from Main Street to Dreher Avenue;
and Tenth Street from Main Street to Ninth Street. The residential parking district restrictions
for the West Side District shall be in effect Monday through Friday, inclusive, from 7:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m., prevailing time. Motor vehicles not displaying a valid residential parking district
permit may not be parked on the streets of the West Side District for more than one hour. The
parking restrictions set forth in this subsection shall not apply on legal holidays as specified in
the definition section. The permit term for the West Side District shall commence on
November 1 and expire two years later on October 30.
The South Side District. The South Side District shall encompass the permitted parking on
Bryant Street between Park Avenue and Broad Street. The residential parking district
restrictions for the South Side District shall be in effect Monday through Saturday, inclusive,
from 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., prevailing time. Motor vehicles not displaying a valid residential
parking district permit may not be parked on the streets of the South Side District for more
than one hour. The parking restrictions set forth in this subsection shall not apply on the legal
holidays as specified in the definition section. The permit term for the South Side District shall
commence on June 1 and expire two years later on May 31.
§ 15-714. Penalties.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015; as amended by Ord. No. 1020, 9/20/2016; and by Ord. No. 1058, 8/21/2018]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this Part shall be assessed a fine of $50 if paid
within seven days.
[Amended by Ord. No. 1070, 3/5/2019]
If not paid within seven days of the date on the ticket, the fine will be increased to $100.
[Amended by Ord. No. 1070, 3/5/2019]
If payment is not made within 14 days of the date on the ticket, prosecution will be initiated for said
violation, and the owner shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $125, together with costs of
prosecution.
[Amended by Ord. No. 1070, 3/5/2019]
When any person or persons cause a vehicle to remain in violation of any provision of this Part, it
shall be declared an additional violation each additional 12 hours that such person or persons
permit such vehicle to remain in violation of any provision of this Part.
§ 15-715. Severability.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
In the event that any provision, section, sentence, or clause of this Part 7 shall be invalid, such
invalidity shall not affect or impair any remaining provision, section, sentence, or clause of this Part 7. It
is the intent of this Borough that such remainder shall be and shall remain in full force and effect.
Part 8. FIRE LANES
§ 15-801. Authority of the Fire Marshal.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 191/505
The Fire Marshal of the Borough of Stroudsburg shall have the authority to designate and mark such
fire lanes as may be reasonable and necessary on private property devoted to public use. The
Stroudsburg Borough Council shall adopt a resolution approving these areas so designated by the Fire
Marshal as "fire lanes" within said Borough. Such fire lanes shall be those areas immediately adjacent
to a building or buildings for a distance of 24 feet from said building or buildings or 24 feet from the
curb adjacent to said building or buildings on property such as shopping centers, bowling alleys,
theaters, hospitals, churches and similar locations as may be deemed necessary by the Fire Marshal
to ensure proper ingress and egress of Fire Department and emergency vehicles for the protection of
persons and property. Parking in such fire lanes shall be prohibited, and such fire lanes shall be posted
"No Parking-Fire Lane."
§ 15-802. Areas Posted.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
Whenever the Fire Marshal of Stroudsburg Borough shall determine that parking of motor vehicles
upon any public or private street, lane, alley or private parking lot is liable to interfere with the operation
of the Fire or Police Department or hamper egress of occupants from buildings in case of fire or
emergency, parking in such areas shall be prohibited, and said areas shall be posted "No Parking-Fire
Lane."
§ 15-803. Private Property.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
On private property that is devoted to public use, there shall be maintained one or more unobstructed
lanes to provide for the ingress and egress of Fire Department vehicles, equipment and personnel,
said lanes to be a minimum of 12 feet in width each and laid out for convenient access from the public
thoroughfares and water supplied to the building and buildings. The marking of said lanes shall be
performed and maintained by, and at the expense of, the property owner or occupier.
§ 15-804. Unlawful Acts.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to barricade, stop a vehicle, park or otherwise
block any of the passages, entrances or exitways to, in, about or out of any public building or any place
occupied for public use or accommodation, whether upon public or private property, so as to interfere
with or obstruct the free and unimpeded passage of persons and fire equipment around the said
building, nor shall any person park a motor or trailer in disregard of any sign erected pursuant to the
provisions of this Part.
§ 15-805. Building Defined.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
For the purpose of this Part, the term "building" shall mean the exterior surface of the vertical wall of
the structure, excluding any marquee, portico, mansard roof or similar appendages.
§ 15-806. Fire Marshal Defined.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
For the purpose of this Part, the term "Fire Marshal" shall mean the Chief of the Stroudsburg Borough
Volunteer Fire Department or his designee.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 192/505
1.
2.
3.
1.
2.
3.
§ 15-807. Notice of Violation.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
Notice of violation of this Part shall be effectuated by the placing of a parking ticket upon the vehicle
parked or stopped in the fire lane in question.
§ 15-808. Penalties.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015; as amended by Ord. No. 020, 9/20/2016; by Ord. No. 1058, 8/21/2018; and by
Ord. No. 1073, 4/2/2019]
Any person, firm or corporation, etc., or its agent, servant, employee, etc., violating any of the
provisions of this Part, upon conviction thereof before a District Magistrate, shall be fined $100.
Each additional 12 hours during which such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate
offense and punishable as such.
If not paid within seven days of the date on the ticket, the fine will be increased to $150.
If payment is not made within 14 days of the date on the ticket, prosecution will be initiated, and
the fine will be increased to $175.
§ 15-809. Purpose.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
It is declared that enactment of this Part is necessary for the protection, benefit and preservation of the
health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the Borough of Stroudsburg and the general public.
§ 15-810. Effective Date.
[Ord. 1010, 11/10/2015]
This Part shall become effective five days after enactment, as provided by law.
Chapter 16. Parks and Recreation
Part 1. REGULATIONS FOR BOROUGH RECREATIONAL
FACILITIES
§ 16-101. Rules and Regulations.
[Ord. 300, 6/5/1947, § 1; as amended by Ord. 599, 12/19/1983]
The following rules and regulations are hereby adopted for the use and protection of the playground
and occupants thereof:
The use of bicycles is prohibited.
The playing of golf or any professional game or sport is prohibited.
Dogs shall not be permitted in or on the playground, either with or without leash, and both the
attendant and/or the owner may be held responsible for violation of this paragraph, except for
Borough sponsored activities.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 193/505
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
The swimming pools shall be in operation from Monday through Friday from 12:00 p.m. to 6:00
p.m. and on Saturday and Sunday from 1:00 p.m. to 5:00 p.m. The playground and play area shall
be in operation from Monday through Friday from 10:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. and on Saturday and
Sunday from 10:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. No person or persons shall enter or use the swimming pools
or the playground, play area or any building or buildings used in connection therewith except
during the hours of operation as herein set forth.
No part or parts of the playground or play area shall be used as a thoroughfare for the use of
vehicles of any kind, animals or pedestrians.
No person or persons shall remove any equipment or furnishings whatsoever from the playground,
swimming pools or other buildings used in connection therewith, or from their usual or accustomed
place or places, or damage or deface the same; and no person shall damage or deface any trees,
plants, bushes, shrubbery, lights or other property in or upon the playground or used in connection
therewith.
No person or persons shall commit a breach of the peace, be guilty of vagrancy, riotous or
disorderly conduct; engage in fighting, assault, quarreling, or inciting others to fight, assault or
quarrel, or engage in any other unlawful act tending to imperil or endanger the safety of the
occupants of the playground, or to damage the property or equipment thereof.
No person or persons shall use publicly profane, blasphemous, or indecent language, or commit
open lewdness or any act of public indecency, or make any indecent exposure of the person; nor
shall any person or persons be found in a state of intoxication or drunkenness, or consume or
possess upon the playground any beer, wines or intoxicating liquors.
No person or persons under the influence of intoxicating liquors shall be permitted in or upon the
playground nor shall any person or persons deposit or bring upon the playground any refuse or
other matter, other than such as result from the regular and accustomed usage of a playground.
No person or persons shall make wilfully or cause to make any loud, boisterous, or unseemly
noise or disturbance to the annoyance of the peaceful occupants of the playground and the
residents nearby.
The Council of the Borough of Stroudsburg aforesaid may from time to time change the hours of
the operation of said playground other than those hereinbefore mentioned, in which event such
hours thus determined shall fix the time after which the provisions of this ordinance shall apply; or
the said Council may permit the usage of the playground on certain occasions, the usage of which
is herein prohibited, but such usage shall apply only for the time designated and after which the
provisions of this ordinance shall be effective.
§ 16-102. Penalties.
[Ord. 300, 6/5/1947, § 2; as amended by Ord. 599, 12/19/1983]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part 1 shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $300, together with costs of prosecution, or to
imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days.
Chapter 17. (Reserved)
Chapter 18. Sewers and Sewage Disposal
Part 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 194/505
1.
A.
B.
C.
D.
2.
3.
4.
5.
1.
§ 18-101. Purpose and Policy.
[Ord. 683, 11/8/1989, § 1]
This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for direct and indirect contributors into the
wastewater collection and treatment system owned and operated by the Borough, to effect
compliance with applicable state and federal laws required by the Clean Water Act of 1977 and
the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR Part 403). At the time of the enactment hereof,
Stroudsburg Borough operates the wastewater collection and treatment systems, and so long as
Stroudsburg Borough continues to do so, where the context refers to operations, this meaning
shall be supplied.
The objectives of this Part are:
To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipal wastewater system which will
interfere with the operation of the system or contaminate the resulting sludge or otherwise be
incompatible with the system.
To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipal wastewater system which will pass
through the system inadequately treated into receiving water or the atmosphere.
To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewater and sludges from the system.
To provide for equitable distribution of the cost for the implementation of the Borough's
Municipal Industrial Pretreatment Program.
This Part provides for the regulation of direct and indirect contributors to the municipal wastewater
system through the issuance of permits to certain nondomestic users and through enforcement of
general requirements for the other users; authorizes monitoring and enforcement activities;
requires user reporting; assumes that each existing customer's capacity will not be preempted,
and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the
program established herein.
Nothing contained in this Part shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or
arrangement between the Borough and significant users within or out of the Borough, whereby a
waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the Borough by special agreements,
in writing, executed prior to such acceptance, containing safeguards, limitations, and conditions
acceptable to the Borough and in conformance with minimum EPA pretreatment requirements.
The citation of statute law, regulatory law, executive order or any official act includes any
amendments thereto and includes enactments, regulations, or executive orders which supplant
the citations stated.
§ 18-102. Definitions and Abbreviations.
[Ord. 683, 11/8/1989, § 2]
Definitions. Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms and phrases as
used in this Part shall have the meanings hereinafter designated:
ACT OR THE ACT
The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33
U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
APPROVAL AUTHORITY
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 195/505
The Director in an NPDES state with an approved state pretreatment program, or the
Administrator of the EPA in a non-NPDES state, or the Director in an NPDES state without an
approved state pretreatment program.
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF A SIGNIFICANT USER
An authorized representative of a significant user may be a principal executive officer of at
least the level of vice president if the significant user is a corporation; a general partner or
proprietor if the significant user is a partnership or proprietorship, respectively; a duly
authorized representative of the individual designated above, if such representative is
responsible for the overall operation of the facilities from which the indirect discharge
originates; or any governmental entity within the Borough. The signature must conform to
requirements set forth in 40 CFR 403.12(1).
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD)
The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure, five days at 20° C., expressed in terms of weight and concentration
[milligrams per liter (mg/l)].
BOROUGH
Stroudsburg Borough, Monroe County, Pennsylvania.
BUILDING DRAIN
That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge
from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to
the building sewer, beginning five feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall.
BUILDING SEWER
A sewer conveying wastewater from the premises of a user to the POTW.
CATEGORICAL STANDARDS
National Categorical Pretreatment Standards or pretreatment standards.
CONTROL AUTHORITY
The term "control authority," as defined hereinabove, or the superintendent if the Borough has
an approved pretreatment program under the provisions of 40 CFR 403.11.
COOLING WATER
The water discharged from any use, such as air-conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or to
which the only pollutant added is heat.
DIRECT DISCHARGE
The discharge of treated or untreated wastewater directly to the waters of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY (EPA)
The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the term may also be used
as a designation for the Administrator or other duly authorized official of said agency.
GRAB SAMPLE
A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a one-time basis, with no regard to the flow
in the waste stream and without consideration of time.
HOLDING TANKS WASTES
Any waste from holding tanks, such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic
tanks, and vacuum-pump tank trucks.
IMPROVED PROPERTY
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 196/505
Any property within the Borough upon which there is erected a structure intended for
continuous or periodic habitation, occupancy or use by human beings or animals and from
which structure wastewater shall be or may be discharged.
INDIRECT DISCHARGE
The discharge or the introduction of pollutants into the POTW, including holding tank waste
discharged into the system as outlined in 40 CFR 403.3(g) and Sections 30(b), (c), and (d) of
the Act.
INDUSTRIAL USER
An industrial source of indirect discharge.
INTERFERENCE
The inhibition or disruption of the POTW treatment processes or operations or its sludge
operations which contributes to a violation of any requirement of the Borough's NPDES
permit. The term includes prevention of sewage sludge use, sludge processes, or disposal by
the POTW in accordance with Section 405 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1345), or any criteria,
guidelines, or regulations developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), the
Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or more stringent state criteria, including
those contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Title IV of SWDA
applicable to the method of disposal or use employed by the POTW.
NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS OR PRETREATMENT
STANDARD
Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance
with Section 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 131 and 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N,
or 40 CFR Parts 401-471), which applies to a specific industry.
NATIONAL POLLUTION DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM OR NPDES
A permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317).
NATIONAL PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD OR PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE
STANDARD
Any regulation developed under the authority of Section 307(b) of the Act and 40 CFR 403.5.
NEW SOURCE
Any source, the construction of which is carried out at a site at which no other source is
located, or the construction totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes
the discharge of pollutants at an existing source, or the production or wastewater generating
processes of the constructed facility are substantially independent of an existing source at the
same site [and in any event, the construction of which is commenced after the publication of
proposed regulations prescribing a Section 307(c) (33 U.S.C. § 1317) Categorical
Pretreatment Standard which will be applicable to such sources, if such standard is thereafter
promulgated within 120 days of proposal in the Federal Register. Where the standard is
promulgated later than 120 days after proposal, a new source means any source, the
construction of which is commenced after the date of promulgation of the standard.]
NITROGEN AMMONIA (NH -N)
The quantity of ammonia nitrogen expressed in terms of weight and concentration (milligrams
per liter) as nitrogen and determined by an analytical method outlined in 40 CFR Part 136.
NITROGEN TOTAL KJELDAHL (TKN)
The quantity of total kjeldahl nitrogen (TKN) expressed in terms of weight and concentration
(milligrams per liter) as nitrogen and determined by an analytical method outlined in 40 CFR
Part 136.
OCCUPIED BUILDING
3
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 197/505
Any structure for continuous or periodic human occupancy from which sanitary sewage is or
may be discharged, and includes, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, dwellings,
flats, apartments, stores, shops, offices, and business or industrial establishments.
OWNER
Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or partial of any improved property.
PASS THROUGH
A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United states in quantities which, alone
or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation
of any requirements of the POTW's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or
duration of a violation).
PERSON
Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock
company, trust, estate, government entity, any other legal entity or any of their legal
representatives, agents or assigns. The masculine gender shall include the feminine. The
singular shall include the plural where indicated by the context.
pH
The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions, expressed in
grams per liter of solution.
PHOSPHATE (PO AS P)
The quantity of phosphate ion (PO ), expressed in terms of weight and concentration
(milligrams per liter) as phosphorus and determined by an analytical method outlined in 40
CFR Part 136.
POLLUTANT
Any dredged soil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge,
munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or
discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, and industrial, municipal, and agricultural waste
discharged into water.
POTW TREATMENT PLANT
That portion of the POTW designed to provide treatment to wastewater, including any
improvements, enlargements, and modifications thereto.
PRETREATMENT OR TREATMENT
The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the
nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to, or in lieu of,
discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POTW. The reduction or alteration
can be obtained by physical, chemical, or biological processes, or by process changes, or by
other means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR 403.6(d).
PRETREATMENT STANDARDS
Any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment other than a National
Pretreatment Standard imposed on a significant user.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW)
The treatment works, as defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1292), which is owned
in this instance by the Borough and Stroud Township. This definition includes any sewers of
the Borough that convey wastewater to the POTW treatment plant, but does not include
pipes, sewers, or other conveyances not connected to a facility providing treatment.
SEWER
Any pipe or conduit constituting a part of the POTW used or usable for sewage collection
services.
4
4
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 198/505
2.
SHALL
Is mandatory; MAY is permissive.
SIGNIFICANT USER
Any nonresidential user of the Borough's wastewater disposal system who has a discharge
flow of 25,000 gallons or more per average workday; or has a flow greater than 5% of the flow
in the Borough's wastewater collection and treatment system; or has in its wastes toxic
pollutants as defined pursuant to Section 307 of the Act or Pennsylvania statutes and rules; or
is found by the Borough, Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources (DER), or
the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to have significant impact, either singly or in
combination with other contributing significant users, on the wastewater treatment system, the
quality of sludge, the system's effluent quality, or air emissions generated by the system.
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC)
A classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the
Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1972.
STATE
State of Pennsylvania.
STORMWATER
Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting
therefrom.
SUPERINTENDENT
The superintendent of the wastewater treatment plant who is charged by the Borough with
certain duties and responsibilities by this Part, or his duly authorized representative, deputy,
or agent.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS
The total suspended matter that floats on the surface of or is suspended in water, wastewater,
or other liquids, and which is removable by laboratory filtering.
TOXIC POLLUTANT
Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the
Administrator of the EPA under the provision of CWA 307(a) or other acts.
USER
Any person who contributes, causes, or permits the contribution of wastewater into the
POTW.
WASTEWATER
The liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes from dwellings, commercial
buildings, industrial facilities, and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water,
and stormwater that may be present, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed into
or permitted to enter the POTW. (See § 18-108 for prohibited substances.)
WATERS OF THE STATE
All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs,
aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage systems, and all other bodies or accumulation of water,
surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow
through, or border upon the state or any portion thereof.
Abbreviations. The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings:
ASTM American Standard Testing Methods
CFR Code of Federal Regulations
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 199/505
1.
A.
B.
2.
CWA Clean Water Act
DER Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources
EPA U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
l Liter
mg Milligrams
mg/l Milligrams per liter
NPDES National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
O&M Operation and Maintenance
POTW Public Owned Treatment Works
SIC Standard Industrial Classification
SWDA Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 U.S.C. § 6901 et seq.
USC United States Code
TKN Total Kjeldahl Nitrogen
TSS Total Suspended Solids
WPCF Water Pollution Control Federation
§ 18-103. Severability.
[Ord. 683, 11/8/1989, § 2]
In the event that any provision, section, sentence, clause or part of this Part shall be held invalid, such
invalidity shall not affect or impair any remaining provision, section, sentence, clause, or part of this
Part. It is the intent of this Borough that such remainder shall be and shall remain in full force and
effect.
§ 18-104. Enforcement.
[Ord. 683, 11/8/1989, § 2]
Notification. Whenever the Borough finds that any user or significant user has violated or is
violating this Part, his user permit or significant user permit, or any prohibition, limitation of
requirements contained herein, the Borough may serve upon such person a written notice, stating
the nature of the violation. Within 30 days of the date of the notice, a plan for the satisfactory
correction thereof shall be submitted to the Borough by the user or significant user.
Harmful Discharges; Permit Suspensions.
The Borough may suspend a user permit or a significant user permit whenever such
suspension is necessary in the opinion of the Borough in order to stop an actual or threatened
discharge which presents, or may present, an imminent or substantial endangerment to the
health or welfare of persons or to the environment, or causes interference to the POTW, or
causes the Borough to violate any condition of its NPDES permit.
Any person notified of a suspension of his permit shall immediately stop or eliminate the
discharge. Any person notified of a suspension of his permit shall immediately stop or
eliminate the discharge. In the event of a failure of the person to comply voluntarily with the
suspension order, the Borough shall take steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize
damage to the POTW system or endangerment to any individuals. The Borough shall
reinstate the permit upon proof of the elimination of the noncomplying discharge by the user
or significant user, payment of any damages, fines, penalties or costs associated with the
discharge, and the submission of a detailed written statement describing the causes of the
harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 200/505
A.
B.
C.
D.
3.
A.
B.
C.
D.
4.
5.
1.
2.
Revocation of Permit. Any user or significant user is subject to revocation of a permit granted
hereunder for violation of applicable state and federal regulations, or by reason of the commission
of any of the following acts:
Failure to report factually on discharge wastewater constituents and characteristics.
Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater constituents and
characteristics.
Refusal to permit reasonable access to the premises for inspection and monitoring.
Violation of the conditions of the permit.
Rights to Appeal.
A user, upon receipt of notification of suspension or revocation of a user permit or significant
user permit, may appeal the decision in writing to the Council of the Borough with a statement
of reasons therefor within 10 days of the notice.
Thereafter, upon notice in writing given to the permit holder or any agent or officer thereof at
least five days prior to the time fixed therefor, the Council of the Borough shall convene and
conduct a hearing on the propriety or lack thereof of the notice of suspension or revocation.
The cost of the stenographic transcript of such a proceeding shall be borne by the appellant,
who shall pay a filing fee of $400 per hearing session to cover the cost thereof.
The findings and determinations of the Council shall be in writing and shall be mailed to the
owner or to his duly authorized representative within 48 hours of the hearing, with a certified
copy thereof to be filed with the Borough. The determination shall be binding both upon the
Borough and all parties in interest.
If the decision of the Council sustains the notice of suspension or revocation of permit, the
user shall be given 10 days' notice of the new date of suspension or revocation by the
Borough.
Legal Action. If any person discharges sewage, industrial wastes, or other wastes into the POTW
or other requirements which are contrary to the provisions of this Part, federal or state
pretreatment requirements, or any order of the Borough, or violates any other provisions of this
Part, the Borough may commence an action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in a court
of competent jurisdiction.
§ 18-105. Penalties.
[Ord. 683, 11/8/1989, § 2]
Fines. Any user or significant user alleged to have violated an order of the Borough or to have
failed to comply with any provision of this Part or the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued
hereunder shall be prosecuted before a District Justice and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
subject to a fine of not more than $1,000 for each offense. Each day on which a violation shall
occur or continue to occur shall be deemed to be a separate and distinct offense.
Civil Penalties. In addition to prosecution before a District Justice as set forth in § 18-105,
Subsection 1, hereof, the Borough may recover civil penalties of $1,000 per day per violation, plus
damages, costs, reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, and costs of court reporters' transcripts,
as well as other expenses of litigation made necessary as the result of violations of this Part or the
orders, rules, regulations, and permits issued hereunder, to be recovered in an action at law
instituted by the Borough against the user or significant user alleged to have been responsible
therefor.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 201/505
1.
2.
3.
4.
A.
1.
§ 18-106. Falsifying Information: Punishable Offense.
[Ord. 683, 11/8/1989, § 6]
Any person who knowingly makes any false statements, representations, or certification in any
application, record, report, plan, or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this
Part or user or significant user permit, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate
any monitoring device or method required under this Part shall be punished as provided by law.
§ 18-107. Public Sewer Not Available.
[Ord. 683, 11/8/1989, § 2]
Private Sewage System to be Approved. Where the public sanitary sewer is not available to a
building existing as of the effective date of this Part, the building sewer shall be connected to an
approved private sewage system. Said system shall comply with the provisions of this chapter and
the requirements of the Department of Environmental Resources and all other applicable
ordinances of the Borough now in effect or as hereafter may be enacted or amended.
Connecting to Public Sewers When Becomes Available. At such time as a public sewer becomes
available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system as provided in this section, the
building sewer shall be connected to the public sewer in compliance with the then-existing
Borough regulations and ordinances. Within 90 days from the date of connection to the public
sewer, the private sewer disposal system shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with clean gravel.
Maintenance. Any person, firm or corporation who shall use a private sewage disposal facility as
permitted by this section shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facility in a
sanitary manner at all times in accordance with all state regulations. It shall be a violation of this
Part for the owner of any property to allow a private sewage disposal system to operate
improperly.
System of Adjoining Municipality Available. If the sewer system of an adjoining municipality is
available, and if the Borough and adjoining municipality execute an agreement permitting
connection of Borough properties to the sewer system, then, upon notice, the Borough properties
shall be required to connect to the system of the adjoining municipality.
§ 18-108. Prohibited Discharges Into Sanitary Sewerage System.
[Ord. 683, 11/8/1989, § 2]
No user or significant user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or indirectly, any
pollutant or wastewater which will interfere with the operation or performance of the POTW. These
general prohibitions apply to all such users of the POTW, whether or not the user is subject to
National Categorical Pretreatment Standards or any other national, state, or local pretreatment
standards or requirements. A user or significant user may not contribute the following substances
to the POTW:
Any liquids, solids, or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are or may be
sufficient, either alone or by interaction with other substances, to cause fire or explosion, or
be injurious in any other way to the POTW. At no time shall two successive readings on an
explosion hazard meter at the point of discharge into the system (or at any point in the
system) be more than 5%, nor any single reading over 10%, of the lower explosive limit (LEL)
of the meter. Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to, gasoline, kerosene, naphtha,
benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, hydrides and sulfides and any other
substance determined by the Borough, the state or the EPA to be a fire hazard or a hazard to
the system.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 202/505
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or other
interference with the operation of the wastewater treatment facilities such as, but not limited
to, grease, garbage with particles greater than 1/2 inch in any dimension, animal guts or
tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass,
straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, waste paper, wood, plastics,
gas, tar, asphalt residues, residues from refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud,
glass grinding, polishing wastes, fur, ashes, incinerator residue, dredged spoil, solid waste,
construction materials, rock, sand, cellar dirt, feasters, wood, wax, cinders, or medical waste.
Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the
superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing
floatable grease in such amounts as to cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or other
interference with the operation of the wastewater treatment facilities, or any flammable
wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients, except such interceptors shall not be required for
private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity
approved by the Borough and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for
cleaning and inspection. In the maintaining of these interceptors, the owner(s) shall be
responsible for the proper removal and disposal by appropriate means of the captured
material and shall maintain records of the dates and means of disposal, which are subject to
review by the superintendent and the Borough. Any removal and hauling of the collected
materials not performed by owner's (owners') personnel must be performed by currently
licensed waste-disposal firms.
Any wastewater having a pH less than 5.0, unless the POTW is specifically designed to
accommodate such wastewater, or wastewater having any other corrosive property capable
of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and/or personnel of the POTW.
Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction
with other pollutants, to injure, to interfere with any wastewater treatment process, to
constitute a hazard to humans or animals, to create a toxic effect in the receiving waters or
the POTW, or to exceed the limitation set forth in a Categorical Pretreatment Standard. A
toxic pollutant shall include, but not be limited to, any pollutant identified pursuant to Section
307(a) of the Act.
Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or solids which either singly or by interaction with
other wastes are sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to life, or are sufficient to
prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair.
Any substance which may cause the POTW's effluent or any other product of the POTW,
such as residues, sludges, or scums, to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse, or to
interfere with the reclamation process. In no case shall a substance discharged to the POTW
cause the POTW to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines, or
regulations developed under Section 405 of the Act; any criteria, guidelines, or regulations
affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the
Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substance Control Act, or state criteria applicable to the sludge
management method being used.
Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate its NPDES permit or the water quality
standards of the receiving water.
Any wastewater with an objectionable color not removed in a treatment process such as, but
not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions.
Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW
treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater with a temperature at the
introduction into the POTW which exceeds 40° C. (104°), unless the POTW treatment plant is
designed to accommodate such temperature.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 203/505
K.
L.
M.
N.
O.
2.
1.
2.
A.
3.
Any pollutants, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, COD, etc.), released at a flow
rate and/or pollutant concentrations which will cause interference to the POTW. In no case
shall a sludge load have a flow rate or contain concentrations or quantities of pollutants that
exceed for any time period longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average twentyfour-
hour concentration, quantities, or flow during normal operation.
Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the Superintendent in compliance with
applicable state or federal regulations.
Any wastewater which causes a hazard to human life or creates a public nuisance.
Stormwater, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage or cooling water.
No person shall dispose or dump septage into the POTW without written permission of the
Borough.
When the Borough determines that a user or significant user is contributing to the POTW any of
the above enumerated substances in such amounts as to interfere with the operation of the
POTW, the Borough shall advise the user of the impact of such contribution on the POTW, and
develop effluent limitations for such user to correct the interference with the POTW.
§ 18-109. Regulation of Industrial Waste.
[Ord. 683, 11/8/1989, § 2]
Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards. Upon the promulgation of the Federal Categorical
Pretreatment Standard under Section 307 of the Clean Water Act for a particular industrial
subcategory, the federal standard, if more stringent than limitations imposed under this Part for
sources in that subcategory, shall control; and the Borough shall be responsible to notify all
affected users or significant users of the applicable reporting requirements under 40 CFR 403.12.
Each significant user shall be responsible to notify the Borough of changes to his status under the
federal, state, or local regulations.
Modification of Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards. Where the POTW treatment plant
achieves consistent removal of pollutants limited by Federal Pretreatment Standards, the Borough
may apply to the approval authority for modifications of specific limits in the Federal Pretreatment
Standards. "Consistent removal" shall mean the reduction in the amount of a pollutant or alteration
of the nature of the pollutant by the POTW treatment plant to a less toxic or harmless state in the
effluent which is achieved by the system in 95% of the samples taken when measured according
to the procedures set forth in Section 403.7(c)(2) of Title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations,
Part 403, General Pretreatment Regulations for Existing and New Sources of Pollution,
promulgated pursuant to the Act. If the requirements contained in 40 CFR Part 403, 403.7, are
fulfilled and prior approval from the approval authority is obtained, the Borough may then modify
pollutant discharge limits in the Federal Pretreatment Standards.
Specific Pollutant Limitations.
No person shall discharge wastewater containing in excess of:
Parameter
Max. Conc. from Industrial Connections to
POTW
(mg/l)
Antimony 5.0
Arsenic 0.1
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 204/505
B.
C.
D.
Parameter
Max. Conc. from Industrial Connections to
POTW
(mg/l)
Barium 4.0
Boron 1.0
Cadmium 0.05
Chromium (hexavalent) 0.1
Chromium (trivalent) 1.0
Copper 1.0
Cyanide, total 0.2
Iron 5.0
Lead 0.1
Manganese 1.0
Mercury 0.01
Nickel 1.0
Total phenolics 0.5
Selenium 0.04
Silver 0.1
Tin 3.0
Vanadium 3.0
Zinc 1.0
Total toxic organics 1.0
Any single toxic organic 0.5
These are end-of-lateral concentrations in the wastewater stream that exist after all process
and sanitary waste streams connected to the industry's wastewater collection system have
mixed completely. The concentrations represent state-of-the-art for local limits that will assure
protection of the wastewater treatment process. The end-of-lateral concentrations are
generally lower than Categorical Pretreatment Standards which apply to concentrations
measured at the end of the manufacturing process.
Where Categorical Pretreatment Standards are available, § 403.6 of the General
Pretreatment Regulations provides a formula for calculation of an alternate value for the
specific pollutant concentration limit based on combined waste strength. This formula will be
applied to the wastewater stream, including domestic sewage flows and other applicable
flows, to calculate an end-of-lateral concentration. The calculated concentration and the
concentration based on local limits will be compared and the lower of the two limits will be
applied in the permit for the industrial discharge.
All wastewater entering the Borough's collection system shall be pretreated to normal
domestic levels unless otherwise stated in writing by the Borough by way of the significant
user permit. These levels shall be:
BOD — 250 mg/l
Suspended Solids — 250 mg/l
Ammonia Nitrogen — 25 mg/l as N
TKN — 40 mg/l as N
Phosphate — 10 mg/l as P
5
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 205/505
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
1.
A.
B.
C.
2.
State Requirements. State requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply in any case
where they are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations, or those in this Part.
Borough's Right of Revision. The Borough reserves the right to establish by ordinance more
stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the wastewater disposal system if deemed
necessary to comply with the objectives presented in § 18-101, Subsection 2, of this Part.
Excessive Discharge. No significant user shall ever increase the use of process water or in any
way attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to
achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the Federal Categorical Pretreatment
Standards, or with any other pollutant-specific limitation developed by the Borough, state, or
federal agencies.
Accidental Discharge. Each significant user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of
prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this Part. Facilities to prevent accidental
discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the significant user's own
cost and expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this
protection shall be submitted to the Borough and shall be approved by the Borough before
construction of the facility. All existing significant users shall complete such a plan prior to being
issued a permit. No significant user who commences contribution to the POTW after the effective
date of this Part shall be permitted to introduce pollutants into the system until his accidental
discharge procedures have been approved by the Borough. Review and approval of such plans
and operating procedures shall not relieve the significant user from the responsibility to modify his
facility, as necessary, to meet the requirements of this Part. In the case of an accidental discharge,
it is the responsibility of the significant user to immediately telephone and notify the Borough of the
incident. The notification shall include location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and
volume, and corrective actions.
Written Report. Within five days following an accidental discharge, the significant user shall submit
to the Borough a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to
be taken to mitigate any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a
result of damage to the POTW or aquatic life or any other damage to person or property. Such
report shall not relieve the user or significant user of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability
which may be imposed by this Part or other applicable law.
Notice to Employees. A notice shall be permanently posted on the significant user's bulletin board
or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a dangerous discharge.
Employers shall ensure that all employees who may cause or suffer such a dangerous discharge
to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedures.
§ 18-110. Fees.
[Ord. 683, 11/8/1989, § 2]
It is the purpose of this section to provide for the recovery of costs from significant users of the
POTW for the implementation of the program established herein. The applicable charges or fees
shall be established by resolution of Borough Council.
The Borough may adopt charges and fees, which may include:
Fees for reimbursement of the costs of setting up and operating the Borough's pretreatment
program.
Fees for monitoring, inspections, and surveillance procedures.
Fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures and construction.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 206/505
D.
E.
F.
G.
3.
A.
B.
1.
2.
3.
Fees for permit applications.
Fees for filing appeals.
Fees for consistent removal by the Borough of pollutants otherwise subject to Federal
Pretreatment Standards.
Other fees the Borough may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained herein.
These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this Part and are separate from all other fees
chargeable by the Borough.
§ 18-111. Sewer Service to Properties Outside of Borough.
[Ord. 683, 11/8/1989, § 2]
Council Approval Required.
Effective immediately, no premises outside the Borough of Stroudsburg, not already
connected, will be permitted to connect into the sanitary sewage system of said Borough
without first obtaining the approval of Borough Council. This restriction shall not apply to
individual properties in areas of adjoining municipalities served by a sanitary sewerage
system subject to an agreement by and between Stroudsburg Borough and the adjoining
municipality.
In the event any municipality adjoining the Borough of Stroudsburg shall construct its own
sanitary sewage system, and the adjoining municipalities sewage system will service the
properties connected to the POTW, then and in that event each and every property owner
situate in said adjoining municipality but serviced by the Borough of Stroudsburg sanitary
sewage system shall be disconnected from the Borough sewage system and connected into
the sewage system constructed in the municipality in which the premises are situate, unless
the Borough and the adjoining municipality mutually agree to the contrary.
Properties on Municipal Boundaries. Any town- or row houses, garden apartments, low-rise
apartments, hotels or motels, or any other type of multi-type buildings which are or will be
constructed of which any portion is located within the boundaries of the Borough of Stroudsburg
and the remaining portion is located in an adjoining municipality, only that portion of the building
constructed within the Borough boundaries will connect into the sanitary sewage system of the
Borough of Stroudsburg.
Council to Establish Connection, User Permit Fees. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the event
Borough Council grants approval to connect a premises outside the Borough into the Borough
sanitary sewer system, the Council shall establish connection fees and such other fees as it
deems appropriate in its sound discretion. Subsections 1 and 2 hereof shall not apply where
approval is granted to connect a premises outside the Borough.
§ 18-112. Segregation of Sewer Revenues; Sewer Fund.
[Ord. 683, 11/8/1989, § 2]
All moneys received by the Borough from the collection of the sewer rentals and all penalties thereon,
connection fees and all other charges which may be levied by this Part shall be segregated and kept
separate and apart from all other funds of the Borough and shall be used only for the purpose of
defraying the expenses of the Borough in the administration, operation, maintenance, repair, alteration,
improvement, expansion, inspection, depreciation or other expenses in relation to the sewer system
and for such debt service payments as the Borough may be required to make.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 207/505
1.
2.
3.
A.
1.
A.
B.
C.
2.
Part 2. SEWER RENTALS
§ 18-201. Imposition of Sewer Rentals and Service Charge.
[Ord. 649, 5/31/1988, § 301]
There is hereby imposed upon the owners of each property upon which a building is connected to
the Stroudsburg sanitary sewerage system a quarterly service charge. The quarterly rental shall
be based upon the quantity of water use, as evidenced by meter readings of water meters
installed and maintained by the Stroudsburg Municipal Authority for the purpose of measuring
water purchased from the Authority. If a building is connected to the sanitary sewerage system
and is not connected to the Authority's water system, see § 18-203 of this Part 2. The quantity of
water recorded by a meter shall be conclusive on both the user and Borough, except when the
meter has been found to be registering inaccurately or has ceased to register. In such cases, the
quantity shall be determined by the average of the two previous quarters' registration when the
meter recorded accurately. The quarterly service charge shall be an amount fixed by the Borough
Council (§ 18-202, Subsection 2) and determined for individual properties by § 18-201, Subsection
3.
A quarterly rental and service charge shall be paid for all buildings connected to the Stroudsburg
sanitary sewerage system. The owner of a vacant building may discontinue quarterly sewer rental
and service charge payments only by physically disconnecting the building from the Stroudsburg
sanitary sewerage system and Stroudsburg Municipal Authority water system at the curb line. If
the owner later connects to the sanitary sewerage system, he/she shall not be required to pay the
capital contribution charge required by § 18-205 of this Part 2; however, connection fees shall be
paid.
When sanitary sewer service is provided through one sanitary sewer lateral to a mixed use
building, apartment house, group of house trailers, or to any building having more than one unit
(each trailer, store, apartment, office, shop, manufacturing establishment, or other similar use
being hereby designated as a unit), each such unit shall be subject to the same charges (rental
and service charge) as would be applied if separate connections had been made to each such
unit. In those instances in which separate connections do not exist, the service charge shall be
determined by multiplying the quarterly service charge by the total number of units contained in
the building or located on the lot serviced.
§ 18-202. Sewer Rental Rate Schedule and Service Charge.
[Ord. 649, 5/31/1988, § 302; as amended by Ord. 831, 1/8/2003, § 1; by Ord. 868, 12/20/2006; by Ord.
881, 12/19/2007; by Ord. 896, 12/18/2008; by Ord. 937, 12/16/2010; by Ord. 952, 1/3/2012, by Ord.
958, 12/5/2012; by Ord. 981, 12/18/2013; by Ord. 996, 12/16/2014; by Ord. 1011, 12/1/2015; by Ord.
No. 1047, 1/16/2018; and by Ord. No. 1062, 12/18/2018]
The quarterly sewer rental imposed by § 18-201 hereof shall be:
$4.70 per 1,000 gallons of water used.
The quarterly service charge shall be:
$75 per residential unit.
$85 per commercial/institutional unit.
$95 per industrial unit.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 208/505
1.
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(2)
A.
2.
§ 18-203. Measuring Volume of Water.
[Ord. 649, 5/31/1988, § 303]
If any building or group of buildings serviced by the Stroudsburg sanitary sewerage system obtains
part or all water used from a source other than the Stroudsburg Municipal Authority, then such water
supply or source shall be metered in a manner acceptable to the Borough. All meters not provided by
the Authority but required by this section shall be furnished, installed, and maintained at the owner's
expense with installation approved by the Borough.
§ 18-204. Rental Payment Schedule, Penalties, Liens, Water
Disconnections.
[Ord. 649, 5/31/1988, § 304; as amended by Ord. 774. 4/7/1999]
All bills for sewer rental and quarterly service charges shall be dated and shall be due and payable
upon presentation thereof. A penalty of 5% shall be added to the total amount due and payable if
payment is not made within 30 days from the date of such bill. If the bill is not paid within 60 days
of the date thereof, a penalty of 9% shall be added to the total amount due. If the bill is not paid
within 90 days from the date of such bill, an additional one-percent penalty shall be added to the
total amount. For each thirty-day period beyond the ninety-day penalty, a penalty of 1% per thirtyday
period shall be added.
If any person refuses or neglects to pay charges for sewer rental or quarterly service charge as
provided herein within 90 days of the date of such bill, the Borough may collect the amount of the
bill plus penalties in any manner provided by law, including by lien filed in the nature of a municipal
lien, which shall be collected in the manner provided by law for the collection of such liens. The
Borough may elect to collect the charges by assigning its claim to a collection agent and/or may
cause water service to the property to be discontinued. With respect to accounts remaining unpaid
for 90 days, the procedures set forth below shall be followed:
Delinquencies Without Payment Agreements.
All notices or demands sent by the Borough pursuant to this Subsections 2 shall be sent
by certified mail to the property owner. Copies if any such notices or demands shall be
sent to any tenants of the property owners.
The Borough Manager or his or her agent shall notify the property owner, in writing, of the
total amount due, demanding that payment be made in full within 30 days. A copy of the
letter will be sent to the tenant if the property is a rental property. If the property owner or
the tenant has not paid the account by the end of the 30 days, the Borough may file a lien
according to the following procedures:
The total amount due to the Borough will be calculated. This amount will include the
penalties imposed pursuant to Subsection 1 above, as well as the costs to file and
satisfy the lien.
A lien will be filed in the office of the Monroe County Prothonotary for the amounts
due as calculated in Subsection 2A(2)(a) above.
Another demand for payment will be sent to the property owner after the lien has
been filed. Payment will be required within 10 days of the demand letter, which will
be sent by certified mail.
Those failing to pay the account and failing to enter into a written payment
agreement within the ten-day period will be turned over to a collection agency. In
such case, the account will be forwarded to the agency authorized by the Borough
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 209/505
(e)
(3)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
(1)
(2)
C.
A.
B.
3.
Council to collect the debt. The agency may add additional charges to the delinquent
account.
When full payment is made, the lien will be removed.
The Borough may also act to have the water service to the property disconnected in
accordance with Subsection 3 hereinbelow.
Delinquencies with a Payment Agreement.
The Borough may enter into a payment agreement for a delinquent account, providing for
installment payments of the delinquent amounts over a period not to exceed one year.
During the term of any payment agreement, the property owner must make timely
payments thereunder, as well as make timely payments of current charges.
If the account holder fails to make two consecutive payments, the Borough Manager or
his or her agent will send a letter via certified mail to the account holder requesting
payment of missed payments within 10 days.
The process to collect delinquent amounts will then follow the procedures set forth in
Subsection 2A(2)(d) above.
Owners in Bankruptcy.
An owner in bankruptcy is responsible for paying sewer rental charges for the periods
subsequent to the date of the filing of the petition in bankruptcy. During the pendency of a
bankruptcy, the owner's property will not be liened without court approval, nor will court
action to collect the delinquency be initiated. However, other remedies available to the
Borough with respect to delinquent accounts may be exercised with respect to accounts
of owners in bankruptcy for post-petition delinquencies. The Bankruptcy Code permits
the Borough, in specified circumstances, to require payment of security deposits.
Accordingly, if the account of an owner in bankruptcy was already delinquent at the time
the petition in bankruptcy was filed, then at any time after 20 days after the petition was
filed, the Borough may require the owner to pay a security deposit for continued service
in the amount of twice the last quarterly sewer bill. The security deposit shall be refunded
upon the owner's making timely payment of four successive quarterly bills.
If the account of an owner in bankruptcy becomes delinquent post-petition, the Borough
may also follow its usual procedures to terminate water service to the owner's property,
and notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, action may be taken to collect postpetition
debt as may be authorized under law.
If any sewer rental and quarterly service charge is not paid within 90 days of said bill, the Borough
may direct the Stroudsburg Municipal Authority to disconnect water service to the property
charged. Water service to the charged property shall not be restored until all delinquent bills and
penalties against the same are paid in full. In addition, prior to restoring service, the Borough may
require the property owner to pay a security deposit, which shall be in the amount of two times the
amount of the last quarterly sewer bill. If the Borough elects to disconnect water service, the
procedures set forth below shall be followed:
The owner, and the owner's tenants if a tenant is occupying the property, will be given 30
days to pay the delinquent amount or enter into a payment agreement with the Borough
before the claim is assigned to the Stroudsburg Municipal Authority.
If the tenant or property owner does not pay the account and does not enter into a satisfactory
payment agreement within the thirty-day period, then the Borough, by action of the Borough
Council, will assign that claim to the Stroudsburg Municipal Authority.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 210/505
C.
D.
1.
2.
3.
The Stroudsburg Municipal Authority will follow its established procedures for service
disconnection, which procedures shall comply with 53 P.S. § 2261 and shall include not less
than 10 days' notice of shutoff, which notice shall be given by both mail and posting.
Upon payment of the delinquent amounts, together with penalties, the Borough shall advise
the owner whether and in what amount a security deposit shall be required prior to
reconnection of water service.
§ 18-205. Determination of Fractional Service Charges.
[Ord. 649, 5/31/1988, § 305]
Whenever sewer service begins after the first day or terminates before the last day of any calendar
quarter or whenever ownership of a serviced property is changed during a calendar quarter, the
quarterly service charge shall be determined by multiplying the amount of the quarterly service charge
by a fraction having the total number of days in the quarter as a denominator and the number of days
sewer service was provided as a numerator.
§ 18-206. Owners of Property Responsible for Sewer Rentals
and Service Charges.
[Ord. 649, 5/31/1988, § 306; as amended by Ord. 705, 6/12/1991, § 1]
The owner or owners of property are responsible for all quarterly service charges and for all sewer
rentals rendered to any tenant or occupant.
All owners and persons occupying property connected to the sewer system shall give the Borough
their correct address. Failure to receive bills shall not be considered an excuse for nonpayment
nor permit for extension of a period during which bills are payable at their face value.
The owner or owners of properties connected to the sewer system shall be responsible for
ascertaining the accuracy of the quarterly sewer bills, including the number of units billed under
the quarterly service charge. When an owner or owners pay an incorrect quarterly service charge,
the Borough shall not reimburse the owner or owners for the overbilling. Conversely, when the
Borough discovers it underbilled an owner or owners for the number of units billed for quarterly
service charges, the Borough shall not back-charge the owner or owners. All owners must inform
the Borough of changes in the number of units at their properties.
§ 18-207. Definitions.
[Ord. 649, 5/31/1988, § 307]
COMMERCIAL/INSTITUTIONAL UNIT
Includes offices, retail and wholesale establishments, automobile service stations, laundromats,
hotels, churches, schools, and non-profit agencies, provided each office, store, or place of
business is considered a separate unit even though such units are contained in one building.
INDUSTRIAL UNIT
Includes factories, mills, manufacturers, assemblers, and warehouses, provided each factory, mill,
manufacturer, assembler, or warehouse is considered a separate unit even when contained in one
building.
RESIDENTIAL UNIT
A building or portion thereof with exclusive culinary and/or sanitary facilities designed for
occupancy by one person or one family (household).
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 211/505
A.
B.
C.
D.
1.
A.
B.
C.
2.
Part 3. CONNECTIONS
§ 18-301. Connections Required When Public Sewers Available.
[Ord. 683, 11/8/1989, § 3]
Properties Required to Connect as System Becomes Available.
As from time to time sewer service becomes available to additional properties within the
Borough by reason of improvement of properties abutting on or adjoining any sewer forming
part of the sanitary sewage system or by reason of the extension of the sanitary sewage
system so as to make sewer service available to additional improved properties or by reason
that properties did not connect to the sanitary sewage system when it became available in the
past each and every property shall be required to connect his, or her or its premises with the
sanitary sewage system, but only upon receipt of due notice from the Borough to so connect.
All wastewater from any improved property, after connection of such improved property to a
sewer, shall be subject to such limitations and restrictions as shall be established herein or
otherwise shall be established by this Borough from time to time.
No person shall place, shall deposit or shall permit to be placed or to be deposited upon
public or private property within the Borough any wastewater; subject, however to such permit
requirements and limitations and restrictions as shall be established herein or otherwise shall
be established by the Borough from time to time.
No person shall discharge or shall permit to be discharged to any natural outlet within the
Borough any wastewater except where suitable treatment has been provided that is
satisfactory to the Borough; subject, however to such permit requirements and limitations and
restrictions as shall be established herein or otherwise shall be established by the Borough
from time to time.
Cesspools, Sinkholes, Septic Tanks.
No privy vault, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or similar receptacle shall be used or shall be
maintained at any time upon any improved property that has been connected to a sewer or
that shall be required under § 18-301, Subsection 1, to be connected to a sewer.
Every such privy vault, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or similar receptacle in existence shall
be abandoned and, at the discretion of the Borough, shall be cleansed and shall be filled, at
the expense of the owner of such property, under the direction and supervision of the
Borough; and any such privy vault, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or similar receptacle not so
abandoned and, if required by the Borough, not cleansed and filled, shall constitute a
nuisance, and such nuisance may be abated, as provided by law, at the expense of the owner
of such improved property.
No privy vault, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or similar receptacle shall be connected to the
sanitary sewerage system at any time.
§ 18-302. Time Limit for Connecting.
[Ord. 683, 11/8/1989, § 3]
The owner of any improved property benefited, improved, or accommodated by a sewer shall connect
such improved property with such sewer, in such manner as the Borough may require, within 90 days
after notice to such owner from this Borough to make such connection, for the purpose of discharge of
all wastewater from such improved property; subject, however, to such permit requirements and to
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 212/505
1.
2.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
A.
3.
such limitations and restrictions as shall be established herein or otherwise shall be established by the
Borough from time to time.
§ 18-303. Connections With Permit Only.
[Ord. 383, 11/8/1989, § 3]
No unauthorized persons shall uncover, make any connections with, or opening into, or use, or alter, or
disturb the POTW or any appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written user permit from the
Borough as set forth in § 18-304 of this Part. All costs and expenses incidental to the installation,
connection, and maintenance of a building sewer shall be borne by the owner(s). The owner(s) shall
indemnify the Borough from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the
installation of a building sewer.
§ 18-304. Connection (User or Significant User) Permits.
[Ord. 683, 11/8/1989, § 3]
Applications. Permits for connection shall be issued from the Borough Manager's office. Forms for
such application will be furnished by the Borough. There shall be two classes of connection
permits: user permits for residential uses and commercial uses not qualifying as a "significant
user" under § 18-102 of this Part and significant user permits for establishments producing
industrial wastes and commercial uses qualifying as significant users. In either case, the owner or
his agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the Borough. The permit
application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information considered
pertinent in the judgment of the Borough. A permit fee shall be paid to the Borough at the time the
application is filed. All connection permit applications shall be reviewed and approved in writing by
the Borough prior to permit issuance. Permit fees for user of significant user permits are
established in § 18-306 of this Part.
Authority to Impose Conditions, Modify and Revoke Permits. The Borough may impose conditions
in any user permit for compliance with pollutant limitations, which conditions are deemed
necessary by the Borough to ensure continued compliance with pretreatment standards and
requirements. Moreover, the Borough may modify existing permits to respond to changes in
industrial discharges to alleviate problems at the POTW treatment plant, to meet standard quality
water standards, or to incorporate National Categorical Pretreatment Standards and requirements.
The Borough may also prohibit the transfer of user permits when an industry is acquired by a new
owner, and revoke user permits to ensure against violations of permit conditions.
Authority to Require Information.
The Borough shall require a user of sewer services to provide information needed to
determine compliance with this Part or other applicable local, state, or federal laws, rules, or
regulations. These requirements may include:
Wastewater discharge peak rate and volume records over a specified time period.
Information on raw materials, processes, and products affecting wastewater volume and
quality.
Quantity and disposition of specific liquid, sludge, oil, solvent or other materials important
to sewer use control.
A plot plan of sewers on the user's property showing sewer facility locations and all
proposed sewer connections to these facilities.
Details of systems to prevent and control storms from entering municipal sewers.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 213/505
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
4.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
A.
5.
The cost for providing this information shall be borne by the user of the sewer services in
addition to other charges and sewer rentals.
All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastewaters to
which reference is made in this Part shall be determined in accordance with procedures
established by the Administrator pursuant to Section 304(g) of the Act, and contained in 40
CFR Part 136 and amendments thereto, or with any other test procedures approved by the
Administrator. Sampling shall be performed in accordance with the techniques approved by
the Administrator.
The user shall be responsible for submitting all applicable County, regional, state, or federal
permits or planning documents required for approval of sewer connection.
Significant Users Permit.
All significant users proposing to connect to or contribute to the POTW shall obtain a
significant user permit before connecting to or contributing to the POTW. All existing
significant users connected to or contributing to the POTW shall apply for a significant user
permit within 30 days after the effective date of this Part.
Whenever a user becomes subject to a new National Categorical Pretreatment Standard, but
has not previously submitted an application for a significant user permit as required by § 18-
304, the user shall apply for a significant user permit within 180 days after the promulgation of
the applicable National Categorical Pretreatment Standard.
Permit Application.
A person, corporation, or firm required to obtain a significant user permit shall complete and
file with the Borough an application in the form prescribed by the Borough, accompanied by
the required fee. In support of the application, the significant user shall submit in units and
terms appropriate for evaluation, the following information:
Name, address, and location of the facility (if it is different from the address).
SIC number, according to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, Bureau of the
Budget, 1972, as amended.
Wastewater constituents and characteristics including, but not limited to, those mentioned
in § 18-108 of this chapter shall be determined by a reliable analytical laboratory in
compliance with 40 CFR 403.12(1); sampling and analyses shall be performed in
accordance with procedures established by the EPA pursuant to Section 304(g) of the
Act, and contained in 40 CFR Part 136, as amended.
Time and duration of contribution.
Average daily and three-minute peak wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly, and
seasonal variation, if any.
Site plan, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details to show all sewers,
sewer connections, and appurtenances by the size, location, and elevation.
Description of activities, facilities, and plant processes on the premises, including all
materials which are or could be discharged.
The nature and concentration of any pollutant in the discharge which are limited by any
Borough, state, or federal pretreatment standards; and a statement regarding whether or
not the pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and if not, whether
additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required
for the significant user to meet applicable pretreatment standards.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 214/505
(a)
(b)
(c)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
6.
If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment
standards, the shortest schedule by which the significant user will provide such additional
pretreatment. The completion data in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance
date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. The following conditions shall
apply to this schedule:
The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the
commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and
operation of additional pretreatment facilities required for the significant user to meet
the applicable pretreatment standards (e.g., hiring an engineer, completing
preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing permit for major components,
commencing construction, completing construction, etc.).
No increment referred to in Subsection 5A(9)(a) shall exceed nine months.
No later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date for
compliance, the significant user shall submit a progress report to the Borough,
including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress to
be met on such date, and if not, the date on which it expects to comply with this
increment of progress; the reason for delay, and the steps being taken by the
significant user to return the construction to the schedule established. In no event
shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the
superintendent.
Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes, and rate of production.
Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day).
Number and type of employees, the hours of plant operation, and proposed or actual
hours of pretreatment system operation.
Any other information as may be deemed by the Borough to be necessary to evaluate
the permit application.
The Borough will evaluate the data furnished by the significant user and may require
additional information. After evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished, the Borough
may issue a significant user permit subject to terms and conditions provided herein.
Permit Conditions. Significant user permits shall be expressly subject to all provisions of this Part
and all other applicable regulations, user charges, and fees established by the Borough. Permits
may contain the following:
The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the wastewater to be discharged to
a community sewer.
Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents and characteristics.
Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow
regulation and equalization.
Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities.
Specifications for monitoring programs which may include sampling locations, frequency of
sampling, number, types, and standards for tests and reporting schedule.
Compliance schedules.
Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge reports (see § 18-304,
Subsection 9).
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 215/505
H.
I.
J.
K.
7.
8.
A.
B.
C.
9.
Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating to wastewater discharge
shall be for a period of three years (minimum) or, in the case of unresolved litigation, a
minimum of three years from the termination or settlement of said litigation.
Requirements for notification of the Borough of any new introduction of wastewater
constituents or any substantial change in the volume or character of the wastewater
constituents being introduced into the wastewater treatment system.
Requirements for notification of slug discharges in accordance with § 18-104, Subsection 2,
of this chapter.
Other conditions as deemed necessary by the Borough to ensure compliance with this
chapter.
Significant User Permit Duration. Significant user permits shall be issued for a specified time
period, not to exceed five years. A permit may be issued for a period less than a year or may be
stated to expire on a specific date. A significant user shall apply for permit reissuance a minimum
of 180 days prior to the expiration of his significant user's existing permit. The terms and
conditions of his permit may be subject to modification by the Borough during the term of the
permit, as limitations or requirements as identified in § 18-108 of this chapter are modified or other
just cause exists. A significant user shall be informed of any proposed changes in his permit at
least 30 days prior to the effective date of change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit
shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance.
Permit Transfer Requires Borough Approval. Significant user permits are issued to a specific
significant user for a specific operation. A significant user permit shall not be reassigned, or
transferred, or sold to a new owner, new significant user, different premises, or a new or changed
operation without the written approval of the Borough. Any succeeding owner shall also comply
with the terms and conditions of the existing permit.
Reporting Requirements in Permits.
Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable pretreatment standards,
or in the case of a new source, following commencement of the introduction of wastewater
into the POTW, any significant user subject to pretreatment standards and requirements shall
submit to the Borough a report indicating the nature and concentration of all pollutants in the
discharge from the regulated process which are limited by pretreatment standards or
requirements. The report shall state whether the applicable pretreatment standards or
requirements are being met on a consistent basis, and if not, what additional O&M and/or
pretreatment is necessary to bring the significant user into compliance with the applicable
pretreatment standards or requirements. This statement shall be signed by an authorized
representative of the significant user and certified by a qualified professional engineer
registered in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
Every significant user subject to a pretreatment standard after the compliance date of such
pretreatment standard; or, in the case of a new source, after commencement of the discharge
to the POTW, shall submit to the Borough during the months of June and December, unless
required more frequently in the pretreatment standards or by the Borough, a report indicating
the nature and concentration of pollutants in the effluent which are limited by such
pretreatment standards. In addition, this report shall include a record of all daily flow which,
during the reporting period, exceeded the average daily flow allowed in the permit. At the
discretion of the Borough and in consideration of such factors as local high or low flow rates,
holidays, budget cycles, etc., the Borough may agree to alter the months during which the
above reports are to be submitted.
The Borough may impose mass limitations on significant users which are using dilution to
meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements or in other cases where the
imposition of mass limitations are appropriate. In such cases, the report required by
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 216/505
10.
A.
B.
11.
12.
Subsection 1 of this section shall indicate the mass of pollutants regulated by pretreatment
standards in the effluent of the significant user. These reports shall contain the results of
sampling and analysis of the discharge, including the flow and the nature and concentration
or production and mass, where requested by the Borough, of pollutants contained therein
which are limited by the applicable pretreatment standards. The frequency of monitoring shall
be prescribed in the applicable pretreatment standard. The frequency of monitoring shall be
prescribed in the applicable pretreatment standard. All analysis shall be performed in
accordance with procedures established by the Administrator pursuant to Section 304(g) of
the Act, and contained in 40 CFR Part 136 and amendments thereto, or with any other test
procedures approved by the Administrator. Sampling shall be performed in accordance with
the techniques approved by the Administrator.
Monitoring Facilities. The Borough shall inspect the facilities of any user to ascertain whether the
purpose of this Part is being met and all requirements are being complied with. Persons or
occupants of premises where wastewater is created or discharged shall allow the Borough,
through its representative(s), ready access during all working hours to all parts of the premises for
the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, or in the performance of
any of his duties. The Borough, the DER, and the EPA shall have the right to set up on a user's or
significant user's property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling inspection,
compliance monitoring, and/or metering operations. Where a user or significant user has security
measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into his premises,
the user or significant user shall make necessary arrangements with their security guards so that
upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the Borough, the DER, and the EPA
will be permitted to enter without delay, for the purposes of performing their specific
responsibilities.
Pretreatment.
Users and significant users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to
comply with this Part and shall achieve compliance with all Federal Categorical Pretreatment
Standards within the time limitations as specified by the federal pretreatment regulations. Any
equipment or facilities required to the Borough shall be provided, operated, and maintained at
the user's expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating
procedures shall be submitted to the Borough before construction of the facility. The review of
such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve a user from the responsibility of
modifying his facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the Borough under the
provisions of this Part. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of
operation shall be reported to and be accepted by the Borough prior to the user's or
significant user's initiation of the changes.
Annually the Borough shall publish in a newspaper of general circulation a list of the users
and significant users who failed to comply with pretreatment requirements or standards at
least once during the previous 12 months. The notification also shall summarize any
enforcement actions taken by the Borough against these users and significant users during
the same 12 months. See: 40 CFR 403.8(2) (VII).
Information and data on a user or significant user obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit
applications, permits and monitoring programs, and from inspections shall be available to the
public or other governmental agencies without restriction unless the user or significant user
specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Borough that the release
of such information, processes, or methods of production [are] entitled to protection as trade
secrets of the user or significant user. When requested by the person furnishing a report, those
portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made
available for inspection by the public but shall be made available, upon written request, to
governmental agencies for uses related to this Part, the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System (NPDES) Permit, state disposal permit, and/or the pretreatment programs provided. Any
such portions of a report shall also be available for use by the state or any state agency in judicial
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 217/505
1.
2.
A.
B.
3.
A.
B.
4.
review or enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater
constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as confidential information.
§ 18-305. Compliance With Specifications in Making
Connections.
[Ord. 683, 11/8/1989, § 3]
Old Building Sewers. Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found, on examination and test by the Borough, to meet all requirements of this
Part.
Construction of Building Sewer to Specifications. The size, slope, alignment, materials or
construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe,
joint testing, and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the requirements of the Building and
Plumbing Code or other applicable rules and regulations of the Borough.
Downspouts Not To Be Connected.
No person shall make connection of sump pumps, roof downspouts, foundation drains,
areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or
building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to the POTW unless such
connection is approved in writing by the Superintendent for purposes of disposal of polluted
surface drainage.
The connection of a building sewer into the POTW shall conform to the requirements of the
Building and Plumbing Code or other applicable rules and regulations set forth in appropriate
specifications of the ASTM and the WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9. All such connections
shall be made gastight and watertight and verified by proper testing. Any deviation from the
prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the Borough before installation.
Building Sewer Connections; Street Openings.
All excavations for a building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades
and lights, so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other
public property disturbed in the course of work shall be restored in compliance with Chapter
21, Streets, of the Borough of Stroudsburg Code of Ordinances.
No excavation, construction, or connection work shall be commenced within a Borough rightof-
way until the owner, or his agents and/or independent contractor, shall have first filed a
bond in an amount as determined by the Borough, agreeing to indemnify and save harmless
the Borough against any and all loss, damages, costs, and expenses which the Borough may
thereafter suffer, incur, be put to or pay by reason of the failure to complete properly any of
the aforesaid excavation, construction, or connection work. The term "owner" as used herein,
shall be deemed to include the owner or owners in fee simple, lessees of the premises,
occupiers of the premises, and all other parties having a beneficial use or interest in the
premises and occupying the same with the consent and permission of the owner of the fee
title.
§ 18-306. Connection (User Permit or Significant User Permit)
Fees.
[Ord. 683, 11/8/1989, § 3]
The connection (user permit or significant user permit) fee shall be $250 per connection to the sanitary
sewerage system; it shall be paid with the connection (user permit or significant user permit)
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 218/505
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
application. The connection fee shall be required for all connections to the sewerage system.
§ 18-307. Tapping Fee.
[Ord. 683, 11/8/1989, § 3; as amended by Ord. 708, 8/14/1991, § 1]
The tapping fee shall be $2,700 per equivalent dwelling unit; it shall be paid prior to issuance of a
building permit or approval of a subdivision/land development application, whichever action occurs
first.
For the purposes of this Part, an equivalent dwelling unit shall be any use that may discharge
10,000 gallons of sewage into the sanitary sewage system in a three-month period. Upon
application of either a building permit or subdivision/land development plan, the applicant shall
supply information projecting the quarterly sewage flow from the development. Except applications
for single family residential development (one equivalent dwelling unit), the applicant's projections
may be reviewed by the Borough's consulting sewer engineer, who shall determine the tapping fee
to be paid before approval. The consulting sewer engineer may recommend that the tapping fee
be estimated and after one year the applicant's annual water consumption be averaged to
determine the average number of equivalent dwelling units per quarter. The tapping fee shall then
be adjusted, either increased or decreased, to reflect the average quarterly flow.
In no case, however, shall the tapping fee be less $2,700.
Upon receipt of the tapping fee from the applicant and upon plan approval or issuance of the
building permit, an allocation shall be issued to the applicant. The Borough shall reserve capacity
at the POTW treatment plant for the allocation for a period of 24 months. After 24 months from the
date the allocation is issued, the Borough shall withdraw the reserved capacity for the allocation.
Allocation of reserve capacity shall not be transferable. All unused reserve capacity shall revert to
the Borough.
§ 18-308. Collection System Improvements.
[Ord. 683, 11/8/1989, § 3]
If at the time of recommendation of the Borough's consulting sewer engineer and a determination by
Borough Council that the POTW collection and conveyance system must be enlarged or enhanced to
accommodate any building or development plan, the applicant shall bear the cost of enlarging or
enhancing the collection and conveyance system.
Part 4. INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE OF GREASE
TRAPS
§ 18-401. Purpose.
[Ord. No. 1053, 7/3/2018]
The purpose of this Part is to aid in the prevention of sanitary wastewater system blockages, backups
and obstructions from contributions and accumulation of fats, oils, and greases into the sanitary
wastewater system from all food service establishments and any and all retail, industrial or commercial
establishments.
§ 18-402. Definitions.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 219/505
[Ord. No. 1053, 7/3/2018]
As used in this Part, the following terms shall have the meanings set forth below:
BOROUGH
The Borough of Stroudsburg.
BROWN GREASE
Waste vegetable oil, animal fat, grease, etc., that is recovered from the wastewater drain and
grease trap.
FATS, OILS, AND GREASES
Organic polar compounds derived from animal and/or plant sources that contain multiple carbon
chain triglyceride molecules. These substances are detectable and measurable using analytical
test procedures established in the United States Code of Federal Regulations (40 CFR 136), as
may be amended from time to time. All are sometimes referred to herein as "grease" or "greases."
FOOD/FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT
Any permanently fixed location that produces, prepares, processes, handles and/or serves food
that contains grease or produces grease as a by-product as part of its retail business and/or
business activity. The term shall also be given its normal industry definition. This term shall not
include those establishments that sell only prepackaged food/drink that do not require that
food/food service establishment to produce, prepare, process, handle and/or serve the food/drink
within that establishment.
GREASE TRAP
A device that separates and collects oil, grease and settable solids at the entrance of the sanitary
wastewater system, thereby preventing them from traveling through the wastewater pipes and
treatment system.
INSPECTING OFFICIAL
An employee and/or representative of the Borough of Stroudsburg Building Code Department
(Construction Code Official or Code Administrator), Department of Public Works (Superintendent)
and/or Health Department (Health Officer).
MANUFACTURER, PROCESSOR or DISTRIBUTOR
Any business that manufactures, processes and/or distributes food and/or food products as part of
its wholesale business.
NONCOMMERCIAL FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT
Any permanently fixed location that has the ability to produce, prepare, process, handle and/or
serve food that contains grease or produces grease as a by-product as part of its operations. The
term shall include, but not be limited to, schools, churches and/or halls that, although not a retail
business and/or engaging in business activity, have the ability to produce, prepare, process,
handle and/or serve food that contains grease or produces grease as a by-product as part of its
operations.
USER
Any person who contributes, causes or permits the discharge of wastewater into the sanitary
wastewater systems within the Borough's boundaries.
YELLOW GREASE
Grease derived from used cooking oil from the food industry as typically found in frying oils from
deep fryers.
§ 18-403. Installation and Maintenance of Grease Traps.
[Ord. No. 1053, 7/3/2018]
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 220/505
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
A.
B.
C.
D.
1.
All existing, proposed, or newly remodeled food service establishments and noncommercial food
service establishments within the Borough shall be required to install, at the user's expense, an
approved, properly operated and maintained grease trap or acceptable grease recovery system.
The inspecting official may require that a grease trap and all related plumbing in food service
establishments and noncommercial food service establishments be upgraded to the current-day
industry standards.
Food waste, including fat, oil, and grease, cannot be discarded into a slop sink, floor drain, toilet or
any other plumbing fixture not connected to a grease trap.
The grease trap shall be in proper operation and efficiency, at the owner's expense, at all times.
Cleaning of a grease trap shall be done at a minimum biweekly or more often as required, with
complete removal of all contents, including floating materials, wastewater, bottom sludge and
solids, by all food service establishments. The aforementioned cleaning of a grease trap may be
done at a less-frequent rate at noncommercial food service establishments dependent upon usage
and production of grease, to be determined by the Construction Code Official/Code Administrator
or Health Officer.
Waste material from the grease trap shall be discarded in accordance with all applicable federal,
state, county and local laws, rules, code provisions and/or regulations. Contents of the grease trap
shall be disposed of by a private waste hauler firm hired by the establishment, with written
documentation of waste hauler name, address, phone number, dates waste removed and volume
in gallons, and type of grease (yellow or brown), and such records shall be maintained on
premises for a period not less than 24 months and made available to the inspecting official upon
request. In no event shall the waste material removed from the grease trap be returned to any
private or public portion of the Borough's sanitary sewer system and/or the municipal waste
stream by either a food service establishment or noncommercial food service establishment.
A maintenance log shall be kept by a food service establishment up-to-date and include the time,
date and signature of the person performing the biweekly or more-often maintenance/cleaning. A
maintenance log shall be kept by a noncommercial food service establishment up-to-date and
include the time, date and signature of person performing the maintenance/cleaning, the
frequency of which is to be determined by the Construction Code Official/Code Administrator or
Health Officer. Such logs, required herein, shall be maintained on premises for a period not less
than 24 months and made available to the inspecting official upon request.
§ 18-404. Best Management Practices.
[Ord. No. 1053, 7/3/2018]
All food service establishments and noncommercial food service establishments regulated
under/pursuant to this Part shall adhere to best management practices dealing with fat, oil and
grease disposal and shall educate their employees, agents, representatives and/or volunteers to
these practices. Best management practices for users shall include, but are not limited to, the
following:
Training staff or volunteers on grease-handling procedures.
Hanging/displaying grease-handling posters in all applicable areas.
Instructing employees and/or volunteers that food waste shall not be disposed of/discharged
into the sanitary sewer system.
Providing appropriate paper towel dispensers for dry-wiping grease from spills, pots, fry
grilling equipment, and other surfaces saturated with fat, oil and grease residue.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 221/505
E.
F.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
Using strainer baskets in sinks to catch food waste.
Directing all drains from grease-producing surfaces to a properly sized grease trap.
§ 18-405. Access and Inspections.
[Ord. No. 1053, 7/3/2018]
The inspecting official shall have the authority to perform periodic inspections, at the very least,
annually, of those establishments generating fat, oil or grease in their operations and shall notify
the user of any additional required maintenance or repairs within a stated time period. The user
may be required to install, at their sole cost and expense, additional controls to provide a complete
system which prevents discharges of undesirable materials into the sanitary wastewater system.
Access to grease traps by an inspecting official shall be provided during normal business hours,
unless an emergency situation requires access during off-business hours, then access shall be
provided to the inspecting official immediately upon request.
In addition to the inspection set forth above, the inspection official shall have the authority to
conduct inspections pursuant to a complaint, for new construction or installation, and such other
periodic inspections that the inspection official deems necessary and appropriate.
The production of the receipts for the biweekly disposal by a private waste hauler is required for
the issuance of an annual food license by the Health Department for all food service
establishments that produce, serve, handle and/or prepare oil, fat and/or grease in the course of
business. In the event that the food service establishment is unable to produce satisfactory
documentation of the disposal, a food license may be denied and the food service establishment
may be subject to fines contained herein.
The production of the receipts, as determined required by the Construction Code Official/Code
Administrator or Health Officer, for the disposal by a private waste hauler is required for the
issuance of a food license by the Health Department for all noncommercial food service
establishments that produce, serve, handle and/or prepare oil, fat and/or grease. In the event that
the noncommercial food service establishment is unable to produce satisfactory documentation of
the disposal, a food license may be denied and the food service establishment may be subject to
fines contained herein.
Upon written notification by the inspecting official, the user shall be required to perform the
maintenance and/or repair within the time period set forth by the inspecting official. Upon
inspection by the inspecting official, the user may be required to install, at his sole cost and
expense, additional controls or an increased-size system to provide a grease trap system which
prevents discharges of any and all grease(s) as defined herein.
§ 18-406. Additives.
[Ord. No. 1053, 7/3/2018]
Any biological additive(s) placed into the grease trap or building discharge line, including, but not
limited to, enzymes, commercially available bacteria, or other additives designed to absorb, purge,
treat, or otherwise eliminate fats, oils and/or grease, shall not be considered an acceptable substitute
for the installation and maintenance of a grease trap as required herein.
§ 18-407. Enforcement; Fees; Violations and Penalties.
[Ord. No. 1053, 7/3/2018]
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 222/505
1.
2.
3.
A.
B.
C.
4.
When the discharge from a food service establishment or noncommercial food service
establishment causes an obstruction, damage, or any other impairment to the treatment works, or
causes any expense, fine, penalty, or damage of any nature whatsoever to the Borough, the
inspecting official shall invoice the owner/user of same incurred by the Borough. If the invoice is
not paid within seven days of receipt, the inspecting official shall notify the Borough Attorney to
take any and all actions as shall be appropriate to seek reimbursement.
An inspection fee shall be imposed for all inspections performed by an inspecting official as a
result of a complaint and/or violation against a food service establishment and/or manufacturer,
distributor, processor or noncommercial food service establishment, in the amount of $100.
For each reinspection carried out pursuant to an unresolved complaint and/or violation, a fee of
$100 shall be imposed.
Any person who violates any section of this Part is subject to the following fines:
First offense: up to $250 per day until the violation is corrected, plus reimbursement of costs
and damages;
Second offense: up to $500 per day until the violation is corrected, plus reimbursement of
costs and damages; and
Third or more offenses: $1,000 per day until the violation is corrected, plus reimbursement of
costs and damages. In addition, the Borough may terminate/close the user's ability/access to
the Borough sanitary sewer system.
Chapter 19. Signs and Billboards
Part 1. SANDWICH BOARD SIGNS
§ 19-101. Definitions.
[Ord. 889, 7/12/2008; as amended by Ord. 926, 8/4/2010]
As used in this Part 1, the following words shall have the meanings indicated:
LICENSE
An annual certificate issued for the placement of a sandwich board sign.
PRIVATE PROPERTY
Property which is owned by a private citizen or corporation.
PUBLIC PROPERTY
Property which is owned by a political subdivision, government body or public service corporation
or property located within any public right-of-way.
SANDWICH BOARD SIGN
Any temporary "A" frame sign which may readily be moved from place to place and which is
intended to be placed on a sidewalk or pedestrianway in front of the business for which the
commercial message is intended. A sandwich board sign shall not be an outdoor advertising sign;
and, therefore, it may not direct attention to a business, commodity, service, entertainment, or
attraction sold, offered, or existing elsewhere than the business where the sign is displayed.
SPECIAL EVENT SIGN
Any temporary "A" frame sign which may readily be moved from place to place and which is
intended to be placed on a sidewalk or pedestrian way which is intended to give directions to a
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 223/505
A.
B.
C.
1.
2.
A.
B.
C.
1.
special event taking place in the Borough of Stroudsburg. Special event signs shall only be
permitted as part of approval of the special event by Borough Council. The size, location and
construction of these signs shall comply with the requirements of this Part 1.
§ 19-102. Licenses and Permits.
[Ord. 889, 7/12/2008; as amended by Ord. 926, 8/4/2010]
An annual sandwich board sign license shall be required for all sandwich board signs located on
public property.
All sandwich board and special event sign owners shall be required to obtain an annual
sandwich board sign license from the Code Enforcement Officer prior to placing a sandwich
board sign on public property. Applications shall be submitted on an approved form provided
by the Borough.
The applicant shall provide a signature of approval from the property owner along with proof
of liability insurance for the property and a fee of $30 for each sign.
All licenses will be valid for one year and shall expire on June 30th of each year unless
revoked pursuant to section § 19-104 of this Part.
Sign permits shall be required for all sandwich board signs located on private property subject to
the provisions in Part 8, Sign Requirements, of the Zoning Ordinance [Chapter 27].
§ 19-103. Design and Display Requirements.
[Ord. 889, 7/12/2008; as amended by Ord. 926, 8/4/2010]
Sandwich board signs shall only be allowed for use in conjunction with retail stores or shops, and
eating or drinking establishments within pedestrian-oriented commercial areas in commercial
zoning districts. A pedestrian-oriented commercial area consists of one or more contiguous blocks
where at least 75% of the block face contains buildings which abut the street sidewalk and the
sidewalk is wide enough to allow for at least five feet of width for unrestricted pedestrian
movement with sandwich board signs in place. Sandwich board signs shall meet the following
requirements:
Number of Signs. One sandwich board sign per establishment shall be permitted. Special
events signs shall be limited to the number of signs and locations as approved by Borough
Council.
Area and Height. The maximum area shall be eight square feet per side of the sign. The width
of the sign shall not exceed two linear feet. The maximum height shall be four feet.
Location. Signs may be placed on a sidewalk directly in front of the applicant's business
establishment and may only advertise as to the applicant's business. No off-premises
advertising shall be permitted. The sign shall be placed on that part of the sidewalk closest to
the associated use, and the nearest part of the sign structure shall not be separated by more
than one foot from the wall of the building. The sign must be placed so as not to interfere with
or obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic, and a minimum of five feet of passage must be
maintained on the sidewalk between the street and the sign. Signs may not be anchored to
the sidewalk or attached or chained to poles, newspaper vending boxes, or other structures or
appurtenances.
Option #1:
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 224/505
D.
E.
F.
1.
2.
Exception: In the event that the sidewalk is not wide enough or has obstructions which make
meeting the five-foot wide pedestrian passage requirement impossible, the minimum
pedestrian passage may be reduced below the five-foot minimum requirement but in no case
shall be less than three feet.
Option #2:
Exception: In a commercial zoning district a business which does not front on Main Street and
is located on the same zoning lot which has street frontage on Main Street, the business not
fronting on Main Street will be permitted to place a sandwich board sign on the Main Street
sidewalk in front of the Building. The sandwich board sign will be permitted provided
authorization is granted by the property owner. When the business/property owner chooses to
exercise this option, the insurance indemnification shall specify liability coverage for the area
where the sign is to be located.
Location. The sign shall be placed as specified in Subsection 1C with the additional
requirement that the sign be located as remote from the entrance of the Main Street business
entrance while still providing a safe pedestrian passage route.
Lighting and Display Hours. Signs may not be illuminated and may be displayed during
daylight hours only. Signs must be removed each evening by 5:30 p.m. during the period from
October 1 through March 31, and by 9:00 p.m. during the period from April 1 through
September 30.
Design. The sign frame shall be painted, stained wood, anodized aluminum, or metal. Plastic
framed signs are prohibited. Stenciled or spray-painted signs are prohibited. Windblown
devices, including balloons, may not be attached or otherwise made part of the sign.
Indemnification. Any person erecting a sign shall indemnify and hold harmless the Borough
and its officers, agents, and employees from any claim arising from the presence or
placement of the sign on Borough property or right(s)-of-way. The person placing the
sandwich board sign shall sign an indemnification agreement, approved by the Borough
Solicitor, prior to the issuance of a sign permit. The indemnification agreement shall be
accompanied by evidence of insurance covering the liability assumed in this subsection and
the agreement.
§ 19-104. Enforcement and Penalties.
[Ord. 889, 7/12/2008; as amended by Ord. 926, 8/4/2010]
Expiration or Revocation of License. Licenses shall be issued for a period not to exceed one year.
Any license may be revoked by the Code Enforcement Officer at any time upon failure of the
licensee to follow the regulations set forth in this Part. After written notification to remove the
sandwich board sign from the public property is served to the Licensee and/or violator of this
chapter, and if the licensee does not remove the sign, the Codes Enforcement Officer is
authorized to remove the sign from the public property.
Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $300, together with the costs of
prosecution, or to undergo imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a
violation of this Part continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 20. Solid Waste
Part 1. STORAGE, COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL OF
GARBAGE AND REFUSE
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 225/505
1.
2.
1.
§ 20-101. Approval of Plan.
[Ord. 596, 9/14/1983, § 1; as amended by Ord. 712, 10/10/1991, § 1]
The County Plan, as amended, is hereby approved; such documents together to constitute the Solid
Waste Management Plan of and for this municipality under the Act, and the proper officials of the
county are hereby authorized to file such documents with DER for purposes of approval under the Act.
§ 20-102. Definitions.
[Ord. 596, 9/14/1983, § 2; as amended by Ord. 712, 10/9/1991, § 2; and by Ord. 905, 6/3/2009]
The following terms shall have the following meanings in this Part:
COLLECTOR
Any person collecting or transporting municipal solid waste or recyclables for owners or
occupants of property in the municipality, including the municipality itself if it undertakes the
collection of municipal solid waste directly, and any business or institution within the
municipality which generates sufficient municipal solid waste to require disposal directly by its
own employees and equipment.
DUMPSTER
A large container for the temporary storage of solid waste materials, debris and/or recyclable
materials, that can be emptied into refuse trucks for the removal of the contents. These
containers are usually sized from one cubic yard to less than 10 cubic yards.
MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE
Any garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or office waste, and other material including solid,
semi-solid material resulting from the operation of residential, municipal, commercial or
institutional establishments and from community activities, but not including any liquid waste
or sludge, and other solid waste which is within the definition of "municipal solid waste" as set
forth in the Act, excluding: (1) all wastes which are defined by federal or state law or
regulations as hazardous waste or residual waste; and (2) any waste which the generator
thereof may dispose of for cash or other actual value.
PERSON
Any individual, partnership, association, corporation or governmental entity.
ROLL-OFF BOX
A large container for the temporary storage of solid waste materials, debris and/or recyclable
materials, that is delivered to a site by means of a flatbed truck, placed on said site through a
hydraulic mechanical means, and, when full, removed from the site through the same means.
These containers usually range in size from 10 cubic feet to 40 cubic yards.
TRASH CONTAINER
A leak proof, container that holds rubbish and waste until it is collected.
Certain terms used herein are also defined in the recitals hereto.
§ 20-103. Prohibitions.
[Ord. 596, 9/14/1983, § 3; as amended by Ord. 962, 12/19/2012]
It is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and unlawful for any person to accumulate upon any
property in this municipality municipal solid waste or to dispose of it except in accordance with this
Part.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 226/505
2.
3.
1.
2.
1.
It is hereby declared to be unlawful for any person to act as a collector in this municipality without
first obtaining a license from the Monroe County Municipal Waste Management Authority pursuant
to this Part and such additional requirements as the Monroe County Municipal Waste
Management Authority may by appropriate action hereafter establish, which licenses, however,
shall all require the licensees to comply with the provisions of this Part.
No person may place a used lead acid battery in mixed municipal solid waste, discard, or
otherwise dispose of a lead acid battery, except by delivery to an automotive battery retailer or
wholesaler, to a secondary lead smelter permitted by the Environmental Protection Agency, or to a
collection or recycling facility authorized under the laws of the Commonwealth.
§ 20-104. Recycling Reports Required.
[Ord. 596, 9/14/1983, § 6; as amended by Ord. 712, 10/9/1991, § 4; and by Ord. 962, 12/19/2012]
All collectors providing municipal solid waste and recycling collection service to apartment
buildings, apartment complexes, commercial profit organizations, governmental offices, and other
similar establishments within the Borough of Stroudsburg shall submit quarterly recycling reports
due on January 15, April 15, July 15, and October 15 of each year. The reports shall remit
recycling information for the quarter preceding the due date. The quarterly reports shall state: the
customers' names and addresses for whom recycling collection is provided; the recyclable
materials being collected; the total weight of every recyclable material, as listed in Act 101,
collected from the collector's recycling customers. The report shall list only customers from the
Borough of Stroudsburg. The quarterly reports must be notarized by a Notary Public.
All recyclable materials collected by the collectors through agreements with their customers shall
be recycled — that is, taken to a recycling facility or directly to a plant which uses the recyclable.
The Twin-Borough Recycling Program reserves the right to inspect any records to verify the
reports.
§ 20-105. Operations by Licensed Collectors.
[Ord. 596, 9/14/1983, § 7; as amended by Ord. 712, 10/9/1991, § 5; and by Ord. 962, 12/19/2012]
Unless and until this municipality subsequently determines to engage directly in the activities of a
collector, licensed collectors shall be responsible for receiving municipal solid waste from properties in
the municipality pursuant to contracts between them and the owners or occupants of property.
Whenever requested by the Borough of Stroudsburg, the owner of any real estate within the Borough
shall present proof adequate in the judgment of the municipality designee that the owner of said real
estate has a current contract with a licensed hauler to dispose of municipal waste generated on the
premises on a weekly basis or more often. The owner of the premises shall have 72 hours to provide
proof to the municipality designee that he has a current contract with a licensed hauler to provide
sufficient service to satisfy the terms and conditions of this Part. As contemplated in the plan, all
collectors shall dispose of all municipal solid waste collected within the municipality at the landfill, and
in compliance with such reasonable regulations for the operation thereof. Disposal at any other place
shall be a violation of this Part.
§ 20-106. Anti-Scavenging Provisions.
[Ord. 596, 9/14/1983, § 8; as amended by Ord. 712, 10/9/1991, § 6; and by Ord. 962, 12/19/2012]
No person shall handle, take or remove municipal solid waste set out for collection unless duly
licensed by the Monroe County Municipal Waste Management Authority. Any person who picks up
said solid waste for his or her own use shall be guilty of an infraction of this Part.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 227/505
2.
1.
A.
B.
C.
2.
A.
B.
C.
3.
No person shall handle, take or remove municipal recycling set out for collection unless duly
licensed by the municipality. Any person who picks up said recyclables for his or her own use shall
be guilty of an infraction of this Part.
§ 20-107. Private Dumps and Landfills Prohibited.
[Ord. 596, 9/14/1983, § 9; as amended by Ord. 962, 12/19/2012]
No person shall use or permit to be used any property owned or occupied by him within the
municipality as a public or private dump or landfill for municipal solid waste, whether generated within
the municipality or elsewhere within the boundaries of the county.
§ 20-108. Nuisances Prohibited.
[Ord. 596, 9/14/1983, § 10; as amended by Ord. 905, 6/3/2009; and by Ord. 962, 12/19/2012]
No person shall accumulate municipal solid waste upon any property owned or occupied by him in
the municipality except in such limited quantities and for such limited periods of time as shall
insure that no air or visual pollution or health or fire hazard shall be created thereby and any other
accumulation thereof on any premises is hereby declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited.
Storage of Refuse and Garbage.
Every tenant, occupant, or owner of any premises or property in the Borough of Stroudsburg
on which refuse is produced, created or accumulated shall provide for safe, sanitary and
adequate storage of the same pending collection or disposal in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
It is unlawful for any person occupying or maintaining any premises within the Borough of
Stroudsburg where garbage is created, produced, or accumulated to fail or neglect to procure
and maintain a standard container for receiving and holding without leakage or escape of
odors, all garbage which is produced, created, or accumulated upon such premises and all
such persons shall deposit all such garbage in such a standard container. For sanitary
purposes, garbage shall be bagged or wrapped to prevent leakage and odors when placed in
containers.
Where conditions permit, all dumpsters and/or roll-off boxes shall be stored upon private
property. All dumpsters and/or roll-off boxes shall not be stored on the public street side of
said property, unless approval is granted by the Codes Officer.
Collection Requirements.
All residents and occupants of all properties in the Borough of Stroudsburg shall have regular
garbage collection provided by an approved waste hauler.
All occupants of single-family residences and of multi-family residences not exceeding four
dwelling units shall deposit all garbage and refuse in refuse containers for pickup.
The refuse containers shall be placed within five feet of the curb or street edge or in an
accessible location approved by the Codes Officer or Health Officer but shall not be placed in
the street. The containers shall be placed in the required location for collection no earlier than
7:00 p.m. on the day preceding a designated pickup day and shall be removed from the
curbside location no later than 7:00 p.m. after the container has been emptied. Except during
these prescribed hours, the mobile containers and all other refuse containers shall be kept in
a location no closer to the street than the front line of the residential structure.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 228/505
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
1.
2.
3.
All residential waste shall be collected at least once each week with the exception that
arrangements shall be made in advance with the collector for pickup of bulky, waste and for
payment of any special fees. All residential housing, commercial, municipal, institutional and
industrial waste shall be collected at least once each week and more often if required in order
to control health hazards, odors, or unsightly conditions.
All recyclable materials shall be collected in accordance with Part 2 of this chapter.
All authorized collectors operating within the Borough of Stroudsburg shall comply with the
Solid Waste Management Plan with regards to the licensing of collectors and the
transportation of waste to the county designated disposal facility.
Commercial customers and residential properties which exceed four dwelling units must use
dumpsters unless given permission by the Borough to use alternate containers. A commercial
customer authorized to use alternate containers must not place the containers out for
collection prior to 7:00 p.m. the evening before the collection day. The containers are not
allowed to be at the edge of the right-of-way after collection day. Alternate containers must be
stored at a location on the premises of the commercial customer so they are not visible from
any roadway.
Permits are required for roll-off boxes on private property. The application shall be obtained
from the Codes Enforcement Office and the permit shall be obtained prior to storage of the
roll-off box. The fee shall be $25 per roll-off box.
Roll-off boxes shall be permitted for two weeks unless the roll-off box is needed for
construction debris during active construction.
Dumpsters and roll-off boxes shall not be stored for more than 48 hours after they are filled.
§ 20-109. Penalties.
[Ord. 596, 9/14/1983, § 11; as amended by Ord. 712, 10/9/1991, § 7; by Ord. 962, 12/19/2012; by Ord.
1031, 8/15/2017; and by Ord. 1036, 7/18/2017]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this Part shall, upon conviction thereof in a summary
proceeding before a District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600 or shall be
committed to the county jail for a period not exceeding 30 days; each day's continuance of a
violation of this Part shall constitute a separate offense.
Notice and Payment of Violation. Upon the discovery of any violation under the terms of this Part,
the municipality shall, through its authorized agents, give notice to the owner of a violation
hereunder, either by personal delivery to such owner, by United States mail directed to the lastknown
address of such person or persons, as shown in the real estate registry records of the
municipality, or by leaving the same on the premises where such violation occurs.
If such person shall, within seven days after the delivery, mailing or leaving of such notice, pay to
the Treasurer of the municipality the sum of $25 for the violation, the same will constitute full
satisfaction for the violation noted in said notice. If two or more violations are issued for the same
property during a calendar year, the second and subsequent violations' payment shall increase an
additional $25 per subsequent violation to a maximum of $300. The failure of such person to make
payment, as aforesaid, within seven days, shall render such owner subject to the penalties as
provided hereinabove.
§ 20-110. Abatement of Nuisances.
[Ord. 596, 9/14/1983, § 12; as amended by Ord. 962, 12/19/2012]
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 229/505
In addition to the remedies provided in § 20-111 herein, any continued violation of this Part which shall
constitute a nuisance in fact, or which in the opinion of the governing body of this municipality shall
constitute a nuisance, may be abated by proceeding against the violator in a court of equity for relief.
§ 20-111. Regulations.
[Ord. 596, 9/14/1983, § 13; as amended by Ord. 962, 12/19/2012]
The collection of municipal solid waste in the municipality and the disposal thereof shall be subject to
such further reasonable rules and regulations as may from time to time be promulgated by the
governing body of the municipality, including, but without limitation, regulations as to the form of license
application, the terms of licenses and license issuance procedures; provided, however, that no such
rules or regulations shall be contrary to the provisions of this Part or applicable law.
§ 20-112. Amendments, Contract.
[Ord. 596, 9/14/1983, § 14; as amended by Ord. 712, 10/9/1991, § 8; and by Ord. 962, 12/19/2012]
The municipality reserves the right to amend this Part or repeal it at any time; provided that the
requirement for use of the landfill for disposal of municipal solid waste from the municipality shall not
be so amended or repealed without the prior express approval of the Authority. If in the future the
municipality itself becomes a collector, it agrees to deliver all municipal solid waste so collected to the
landfill.
Part 2. RECYCLING
§ 20-201. Definitions.
[Ord. 699, 11/14/1990, § 1; as amended by Ord. 962, 12/19/2012]
The following words and phrases when used in this Part shall have the meanings given to them in this
section unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
ALUMINUM CANS
Empty all-aluminum beverage and food containers.
BIMETALLIC CONTAINERS
Empty food or beverage containers consisting of steel and aluminum.
BIWEEKLY PICKUP
Curb-side collection of recyclable materials on an alternating (every other week) basis.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT
Those properties used primarily for commercial or industrial purpose and those multiple dwelling
residential buildings containing more than four dwelling units.
COMMUNITY ACTIVITIES
Events that are sponsored by public or private agencies or individuals that include, but are not
limited to, fairs, bazaars, socials, picnics, and organized sporting events.
CONTAINERS
Buckets, pails, baskets, or cans provided by the municipality or designated by the municipality for
the source separation or storage of recyclable materials.
CORRUGATED PAPER
Structural paper material with an inner core shaped in rigid, parallel furrows and ridges.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 230/505
DEPARTMENT
The Department of Environmental Resources of the Commonwealth and its authorized
representatives.
FERROUS CONTAINERS
Empty steel or tin-coated steel food or beverage containers.
GLASS CONTAINERS
Bottles and jars made of clear, green, or brown glass. Excluded are plate glass, automotive glass,
blue glass, and porcelain and ceramic products.
HIGH-GRADE OFFICE PAPER
All white paper, bond paper, and computer paper used in commercial, institutional, municipal
establishments and in residences.
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENT
Those facilities that house or serve groups of people such as, but not limited to, hospitals, schools,
day care centers, and nursing homes.
JOINT RECYCLING PROGRAM
Twin Boroughs Program operated by the Borough of East Stroudsburg and the Borough of
Stroudsburg.
LEAD ACID BATTERIES
Includes, but not limited to, automotive, truck, and industrial batteries that contain lead.
LEAF WASTE
Leaves, garden residues, shrubbery and tree trimming, and similar material, but not including
grass clippings.
MAGAZINES AND PERIODICALS
Glossy printed matter containing miscellaneous written pieces published at fixed or varying
intervals and bound by glue or staples. Expressly excluded are all other paper products of any
nature whatsoever.
MULTI-FAMILY HOUSING PROPERTIES
Any properties having more than four dwelling units per structure.
MUNICIPAL ESTABLISHMENTS
Public facilities operated by the municipality and other governmental and quasi-governmental
authorities.
MUNICIPALITY
Borough of Stroudsburg.
NEWSPAPERS
Paper of the type commonly referred to as newsprint and distributed at fixed intervals, having
printed thereon news and opinion and containing advertisements and other matters of public
interest. Expressly excluded are glossy advertising inserts often included with newspapers.
PERSON(S)
Owners, lessees, and occupants of residences, commercial, or institutional establishments.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS
Source separated recyclable materials, including materials listed in § 1501 of Act 101 and
materials identified by the municipality to be recycled.
RESIDENTIAL UNITS
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 231/505
1.
2.
3.
Any occupied single or multi-family dwelling having four or less dwelling units per structure.
SCAVENGING
Collecting or gathering recyclable materials.
SOURCE SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS
Those materials separated at the point of origin for the purpose of being recycled.
WASTE
A material whose original purpose has been completed and which is directed to a disposal or
processing facility or is otherwise disposed. The term does not include source separated
recyclable materials or materials approved by the Department of beneficial use.
§ 20-202. Mandatory Recycling.
[Ord. 699, 11/14/1990, § 1; as amended by Ord. 710, 9/11/1991, §§ 1, 2; and by Ord. 962, 12/19/2012]
Through the Joint Recycling Program, the Borough of Stroudsburg shall provide biweekly curbside
pickup of at least three recyclable materials, as Borough Council shall from time to time
designate by resolution and from the list of recyclables in § 1501 of the Municipal Waste Planning,
Recycling, and Waste Reduction Act, for residential units located within the Borough of
Stroudsburg. Participation in the curb-side recycling pickup shall be mandatory for occupants of all
residential units. Failure to participate and proof of violation of this section shall be determined by
the presence of designated recyclable materials in the resident's municipal waste, which is
prepared for collection. Occupants of all residential units shall utilize recycling containers or similar
containers to source separate those recyclable materials designated by Borough Council. Nothing
in this Part shall be deemed to impair the ownership of separated materials by the person who
generated them unless and until such recyclable materials are placed at curb-side or similar
location for collection by the municipality.
Commercial, institutional, municipal establishments, community activities, and industrial
establishments and multifamily housing properties are required to recycle. Commercial,
institutional, municipal establishments, community activities, and industrial establishments shall
recycle high grade office paper, aluminum, corrugated paper (cardboard), clear glass, colored
glass and leaf waste. Multi-family housing properties shall recycle the same recyclable materials
as the Twin-Borough curb-side recycling program. Said resources are designated by resolution of
Borough Council pursuant to Subsection 1. Nothing in this Part shall limit commercial, institutional,
municipal establishments, community activities, and industrial establishments and multi-family
properties authority to recycle any recyclable materials. Commercial, institutional, municipal
establishments, community activities, and industrial establishments and multi-family properties
that do not recycle through their trash hauler or by delivering materials to the Twin-Borough
Recycling Center must submit annual reports of the total weight of materials recycled. The annual
report shall be submitted no later than January 15 of each year.
Currently existing recycling programs by industrial, institutional, commercial, municipal
establishments, community activities, or private individuals shall be exempt from this Part.
However, those operations will be required to provide the municipality with yearly reports due
January 15 of each year. The report shall include the name of the operation, volume, and type of
material recycled. New recycling operations seeking an exemption must get Council approval prior
to startup. New operations are those not in effect by September 26, 1991.
§ 20-203. Recyclable Materials Borough Property; Scavenging
Prohibited.
[Ord. 699, 11/14/1990, § 1]
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 232/505
1.
2.
1.
2.
3.
Recyclable materials, as mandated by a resolution of the Borough Council, shall become property of
the Borough of Stroudsburg upon being placed at the curb or similar location. Scavenging, collecting,
or picking up of recyclable materials from the curb or similar location by any person other than
authorized employees of the Borough of Stroudsburg and the Borough of East Stroudsburg shall be
prohibited. It shall be a violation of this Part for any person, except authorized employees of the
Borough of Stroudsburg and East Stroudsburg, to scavenge, collect, or pick up any recyclable
materials from any recycling drop-off centers located in the Borough of Stroudsburg.
§ 20-204. Containers Borough Property; Storage of Containers.
[Ord. 699, 11/14/1990, § 1]
Recycling containers provided by the Borough of Stroudsburg either to residents or drop-off
centers are and shall remain property of the Borough of Stroudsburg. All recycling containers shall
be returned to the municipality when a user moves out of the Borough of Stroudsburg.
Recycling containers, whether or not provided by the municipality, shall be stored either in the
user's dwelling or in the rear of the building and out of sight from the street. Any recycling
container shall not be placed at the curb more than 48 hours before collection nor left at the curb
longer than 48 hours after collection. Users shall be responsible for proper removal and disposal
of debris, garbage, left in recycling containers. Any recycling, containers left at the curb for more
than 48 hours after collection may be removed by the municipality.
§ 20-205. Education; Public Notice.
[Ord. 699, 11/14/1990, § 1]
The municipality shall sustain a public education program concerning the joint recycling program. The
public education may include, but is not limited to, newsletter articles, display advertisements in local
newspapers, direct mail, and pamphlets. The Borough Manager's Office shall be responsible for the
sustained public education campaign. Public education information shall be disseminated at least
semiannually.
§ 20-206. Leaf Composting.
[Ord. 699, 11/14/1990, § 1]
Disposal of leaf waste with municipal solid waste shall be prohibited. The municipality shall provide a
weekly leaf collection service for a minimum of six weeks per season. Nothing in this section shall be
construed to prohibit a person from composting leaf waste on his/her property.
§ 20-207. Enforcement; Incentives; Penalties.
[Ord. 699, 11/14/1990, § 1; as amended by Ord. 784, 4/5/2000, § 2; and by Ord. 962, 12/19/2012]
The Borough Manager shall have the authority to assign enforcement, with Borough Council's
consent, of this Part to any Borough employee(s) under the direction of the Borough Manager.
Furthermore, the Stroud Area Regional Police Department shall be authorized to enforce the antiscavenging
provision of this Part.
The Borough Council shall have the authority to create, by resolution, recycling incentive
programs.
Any person violating the anti-scavenging provision of this Part shall be subject to citation for a
summary offense, and if convicted, sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600. The procedure
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 233/505
A.
B.
C.
D.
1.
for enforcement of the mandatory participation provisions shall be:
Any person failing to participate on two occasions shall receive a written warning.
Any person failing to participate after receiving a written warning shall receive a citation for a
summary offense and, if convicted, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $50.
Any person failing to participate after one conviction for failure to participate shall receive a
citation for a summary offense and, if convicted, to pay a fine of not more than $250.
Any person failing to participate after two or more convictions for failure to participate shall
receive a citation for a summary offense and if convicted, to pay a fine of not more than $600.
Any person violating any other provision of this Part shall be subject to citation for summary
offense and, if convicted, sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600.
Chapter 21. Streets and Sidewalks
Part 1. STREETS
A.. Street Openings and Excavations.
§ 21-101. Definitions.
[Ord. 782, 12/15/1999]
The following words, when used in this Part 1A, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section, except in those instances where the context clearly indicates otherwise:
ALLEY (PUBLIC)
A minor right-of-way providing secondary access to the side or rear of one or more properties
but which shall have a maximum right-of-way width of 24 feet.
APPLICANT
Any person who makes application for a permit.
BOROUGH
The Borough of Stroudsburg, County of Monroe, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
BOROUGH MANAGER
The person in charge of Borough affairs, including the Street Department or the street
operations in the Borough, or his authorized deputy, representative or inspector.
CALENDAR YEAR
January 1 through December 31, inclusive.
CONCRETE
Includes soil cement, plant cement concrete or reinforced cement concrete; material
contained in the base course of some Borough streets.
COST
Actual expenditures incurred by the Borough for labor, equipment and materials. These
expenditures include all fringe benefits and overhead.
DEGRADATION FEE
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 234/505
A fee paid by the permittee to the Borough to defray a percentage of the costs for
maintaining, resurfacing and reconstruction of Borough streets resulting from the depreciation
of streets associated with street openings.
[Amended by Ord. 1002, 5/5/2015]
DEPARTMENT
The Street Department of the Borough of Stroudsburg.
EMERGENCY
Any unforeseen circumstance or occurrence, the existence of which constitutes a clear and
immediate danger to persons or properties.
FLOWABLE BACKFILL
A type of backfill material composed of materials approved by the Pennsylvania Department
of Transportation and the Borough of Stroudsburg.
INSPECTION FEE
A fee paid by the permittee to the Borough to defray street opening inspection costs.
MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY
Any body corporate and politic created pursuant to the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
PERMIT FEE
A fee paid by the permittee to the Borough to cover the costs of issuing, processing and filing
the street opening permit.
PERMITTEE
Any person who has been issued a permit and has agreed to fulfill all the terms of this Part
1A.
PERSON
Any natural person, partnership, firm, association, utility, corporation or authority created
pursuant to an act of the Pennsylvania General Assembly. Whenever used in any section
prescribing and imposing a penalty, the term "person," as applied to associations, shall mean
the partners or members thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers thereof.
PUBLIC UTILITY COMPANY
Any company subject to the jurisdiction and control by the Pennsylvania Public Utility
Commission.
RESURFACE
A process which provides a new wearing surface in a certain paved street area between
curbs with the same material that was existing prior to excavation or approved by the Borough
of Stroudsburg or its designee.
ROADWAY EXCAVATION (STREET OPENINGS)
Any ditch, trench excavation, tunnel, saw cut, test or vent hole, or opening in or under the
surface of any street.
SIDEWALK AREA
That portion of the street right-of-way reserved for sidewalks.
STREET
An entire right-of-way of a public street, public easement, public right-of-way, public highway,
public alley, public way or public road accepted or maintained by the Borough or in which the
Borough maintains utility lines within the Borough limits.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 235/505
2.
A.
B.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
VENT HOLE
An exploratory opening to vent vapors, gas or liquids to the surface, including jackhammer or
drill holes, four inches in diameter or less.
WORKDAY
A normal business day for the Borough government, i.e., Monday through Friday, except
designated holidays.
In this Part 1A, the singular shall include the plural, and the masculine shall include the feminine
and the neuter.
§ 21-102. Street Openings and Pavement Cuts.
[Ord. 782, 12/15/1999]
Permit Required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to make any tunnel, opening or excavation of any kind in or
under the surface of any street without first securing a permit from the Borough for each
separate undertaking.
Any person maintaining pipes, lines or other underground facilities in or under the surface of
any street may proceed with an opening without a permit when emergency circumstances
demand the work to be done immediately, provided that the permit could not reasonably and
practically have been obtained beforehand. The person shall thereafter apply for a permit on
the first regular business day on which the office of the Borough Manager is open for
business, and said permit shall be retroactive to the date when the work was begun. In all
cases where emergency openings are necessary, the Borough Street Department shall be
notified prior to such opening by contacting the Monroe County Control Center, who shall
send the appropriate message to the supervisor.
Street Openings Limited. No person to whom a permit has been granted shall perform any of the
work authorized by such permit in any amount greater than that specified in the permit, except
that, upon approval by the Borough Manager, additional work may be done under the provisions of
the permit in such an amount as the Borough Manager shall deem appropriate and necessary to
complete the work. Any deposit and bond posted in connection with the permit shall be deemed to
cover any such additional work as may be approved pursuant to this section within the limit
mentioned herein.
Commencement of Work. Work for which a permit has been issued shall commence within 10
days after the issuance of the permit therefor. If not so commenced, the permit shall be
automatically terminated unless the permittee applies, in writing, to the Borough Manager for an
extension of time within which to commence work. If such an extension is granted, the original
permit shall remain in force for the period of time specified in the extension. Permits which
terminate within 10 days after issuance or within any extension of time granted by the Borough
Manager may be renewed only upon the payment of an additional permit fee as originally
required.
Permits Nontransferable. Permits are not transferable from one person to another, and the work
shall not be made in any place other than the location specifically designated in the permit.
Expiration of Permits. Every permit shall expire at the time stated in the permit. If the permittee
should not complete the work within the specified time, he shall, prior to expiration of the permit,
present, in writing, to the Borough Manager a request for an extension of time, setting forth therein
the reasons for the requested extension. If, in the opinion of the Borough Manager, such an
extension is necessary and not contrary to the public interest, the permittee may be granted
additional time for the completion of the work.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 236/505
6.
7.
8.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
C.
D.
9.
10.
1.
Municipal Utility Cuts. All street openings required by utilities owned and/or operated by the
Borough shall be made and restored under the direction and supervision of the Borough Manager.
The permit, fee, deposit, insurance and bond requirements of this Part 1A shall not be applicable
to any openings made by such municipally owned and/or operated utilities. This shall not include
independent operating authorities. Any designated fee shall be paid to a special fund from the
appropriate Borough fund.
Rights of Borough. Every permit shall be granted subject to the right of the Borough or of any
other person to lawfully use the street for any purpose, not inconsistent with the permit.
Denial of Permit. No permit shall be granted to any applicant unless the applicant has paid to the
Borough any and all monies due to the Borough for prior excavations made or for any loss,
damage or expense in any manner occasioned by or arising from the work done by the applicant
or his designee under the provisions of this subpart.
Revocation of Permits.
Any permit may be revoked by the Borough Manager after notice to the permittee for:
Violation of any condition of the permit or any provision of this Part 1A.
Violation of any provision of any other applicable ordinance or law relating to the work.
Existence of any condition or the doing of any act constituting or creating a nuisance or
endangering life or property.
A permittee shall be granted a period of three days from the date of the notice to correct the
violation and to proceed with the diligent pursuit of the work authorized by the permit before
said permit is revoked.
Written notice of any such violation or condition shall be served upon the permittee or his
agent engaged in the work. The notice shall contain a brief statement of the reasons for
revoking the permit. Notice may be given either by personal delivery thereof to the person to
be notified or by certified or registered United States mail addressed to the person to be
notified at his last known address.
When any permit has been revoked and the work authorized by the permit has not been
completed, the Borough Manager shall do such work as may be necessary to restore the
street or part thereof to as good a condition as before the opening was made. All expenses
hereby incurred by the Borough shall be recovered from the deposit or bond the permittee
has made or filed with the Borough. Should the deposit or bond be insufficient to cover the
Borough's expenses, the permittee shall reimburse the Borough for expenses exceeding the
deposit or bond. Additional permits to the permittee shall be denied until all expenses incurred
by the Borough are reimbursed.
Emergency Openings. Any emergency street openings shall be substantiated in writing on the
next business day when an emergency street opening is requested. An emergency permit fee is
required. The emergency permit fee shall be set from time to time by resolution of the Stroudsburg
Borough Council.
[Amended by Ord. 1002, 5/5/2015]
§ 21-103. Applications and Permits.
[Ord. 782, 12/15/1999]
Duties and Responsibilities of Applicants. It shall be the duty and the responsibility of any
applicant to:
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 237/505
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
2.
A.
B.
C.
1.
Make written application for such permit with the Borough Manager on such form as he shall
prescribe. No work shall commence until the Borough Manager has approved the application
and plan and issued a permit and until the permittee has paid and provided all fees, deposits,
certificates and bonds required by this Part 1A.
Furnish a plan showing the work to be performed under this permit. A copy of such plan shall
be returned to the applicant at the time the permit is granted. The said plans hereinbefore
referred to shall include the location of the proposed work and also the location of other
underground utilities in the said street or streets.
All street openings require PA One Call notification prior to application for a permit. A PA One
Call serial number is required on the permit application.
All permits will at all times be in the possession of a competent person actually on the work
site and will be shown at all times to any police officer or properly authorized officer or
employee of the Street Department upon demand.
Agree to save the Borough, its officers, employees and agents harmless from any and all
costs, damages and liabilities which may accrue or be claimed to accrue by reason of any
work performed under said permit. The acceptance of any permit under this Part 1A shall
constitute such an agreement by the applicant whether the same is expressed or not.
Duties and Responsibilities of Permittees. It shall be the duty and responsibility of any person
receiving a permit to:
Pay a permit fee as set by current Borough of Stroudsburg resolution.
Make a deposit in an amount set by current Borough of Stroudsburg resolution to cover the
cost of restoring the street damaged by such work.
[Amended by Ord. 1002, 5/5/2015]
Furnish a maintenance, indemnity and performance bond as required by § 21-106.
Furnish certificate of insurance as required by § 21-107.
Keep the original copy of the permit, a copy of the PA One Call notification or PA One Call
serial number, and an approved copy of the plan at all times while such work is in progress at
the location for which said permit was granted and show such permit and/or plan upon
demand by the Borough Manager, police authorities or their designee.
§ 21-104. Street Opening Regulations.
[Ord. 782, 12/15/1999]
Opening and Excavation Restrictions.
No opening or excavation in any street shall extend beyond the center line of the street before
being backfilled and the surface of the street temporarily restored.
No more than 150 feet, measured longitudinally, shall be opened in any street at any one
time, except by special permission of the Borough Manager.
Excavation will be by open cut from the surface, and no tunneling or drifting will be permitted
except by permission and so noted on the permit. The amount of trench opened and also the
amount unfilled will at all times be subject to the decision of the department. No trench or
excavation will be under-cut or have a greater width at the bottom than at the top. In case of
slips or slides of the excavation, the same will be trimmed to solid earth and the top surface
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 238/505
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
(1)
(2)
J.
cut back to the limit of the same before any backfilling is commenced. When necessary or
required by the Occupational Safety and Health Association (OSHA), Subpart P, Excavations,
Trenching and Storing, 1926.650, 1926.651, 1926.652, 1926.653, the sides of a trench will be
sheathed and braced and rendered secure until the construction has been laid therein and the
trench refilled. Care will be taken not to move or disturb other subsurface structures, and in
crossing these or running parallel with or near them, they will be securely hung, braced and
supported in place until the work is completed. The applicant will maintain their respective
services and will repair all damage done to any of the said structures in a manner consistent
with sound engineering and construction principles. In rock excavation, all drilling and blasting
will be conducted with the greatest possible care and all possible precautions taken to guard
against accidents. The permittee will at all times exercise the utmost care in the use of
explosives so as not to endanger life or property and will at all times comply with Title 25,
Rules and Regulations for the Storage, Handling, and Use of Explosives, as set forth by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. Blasting delays less than one-half
second will not be permitted in the Borough except when waived by the Engineer. The
permittee will be required to obtain blasting permits from the Zoning and Code Enforcement
Officer.
All utility facilities shall be located sufficiently ahead of trench excavation work to avoid
damage to those facilities and to permit their relocation if necessary.
Pipe drains, pipe culverts or other facilities encountered shall be protected by the permittee.
Any person whose facilities are damaged or caused to be relocated by the permittee may
make the necessary repairs or relocation and file a claim against the permittee with the
Borough for the cost of such repairs or relocation. Public utility companies concerned shall be
notified by the Borough in sufficient time to determine the validity of the damage or relocation
claims. The cost of such repair or relocation work may be held by the Borough Manager from
the deposit pending determination of liability for the damage.
Monuments of concrete, iron or other lasting material set for the purpose of locating or
preserving the lines of any street or property subdivision, or a precise survey reference point
or a permanent survey benchmark within the Borough shall not be removed or disturbed or
caused to be removed or disturbed. The permittee shall pay all expenses incident to the
proper replacement of the monument.
When work is performed by the permittee that interferes with the established drainage system
of any street, provision shall be made by the permittee to provide proper drainage to the
satisfaction of the Borough Manager and at the permittee's expense.
When any earth, gravel or other excavated material is caused to roll, flow or wash upon any
street, the permittee shall cause the same to be removed from the street at the conclusion of
the current workday. In the event the earth, gravel or other excavated material so deposited is
not removed, the Borough Manager shall cause such removal, and the cost incurred shall be
paid by the permittee or deducted from his deposit.
Work zone traffic control violations shall result in the imposition of the following penalties:
Upon receipt of oral or written notice of violation from the authorized representative of the
Borough or a police officer whose jurisdiction includes the permitted work area, the
permittee shall cease to perform any further work in the permitted area except to restore
the area to a safe condition. No further work may commence in the permitted area until
the violations have been remedied. Where the permittee has received oral notice of the
violation, written notice shall be sent to the permittee within 10 days of receipt of the oral
notice.
Confiscation of the applicant's permit by any police officer or authorized representative of
the Borough.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 239/505
(3)
(4)
(5)
K.
L.
M.
N.
O.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
P.
Revocation of the applicant's permit by the Borough.
Removal of facilities installed without a permit or in violation of the provisions of this
section.
Fines, imprisonment or other penalties as are provided by statute.
The Borough may revoke a permit whenever it determines that the permitted excavation is not
being maintained, is in violation of a condition of the permit or this section, constitutes a
hazard to traffic, or interferes with the proper use of the street by the Borough or the public.
Every permittee shall place around the project such barriers, barricades, lights, warning flags
and danger signs as shall be determined by the Borough Manager to be necessary for the
protection of the public. Barricading shall be in compliance with the regulations as set forth in
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Department of Transportation, Publication 213, and any
future revisions thereto. Copies of this publication shall be made available in the office of the
Borough Manager for inspection by the public. Whenever any person fails to provide or
maintain the safety devices required by the Borough Manager, such devices shall be installed
and maintained by the Borough. The amount of the cost incurred shall be paid by the
permittee or deducted from his deposit. No person shall willfully move, remove, injure, destroy
or extinguish any barrier, warning light, sign or notice erected, placed or posted in accordance
with the provisions of this Part 1A.
[Amended by Ord. 1002, 5/5/2015]
Access to private driveways shall be provided except during working hours when construction
operations prohibit provision of such access. Free access must be provided at all times to fire
hydrants.
Excavated materials shall be laid compactly along the side of the trench and kept trimmed up
so as to cause as little inconvenience as possible to public travel. In order to expedite the flow
of traffic or to abate a dust nuisance, the Borough Manager may require the permittee to
provide toe boards or bins; and if the excavated area is muddy and causes inconveniences to
pedestrians, temporary wooden plank walks shall be installed by the permittee as directed by
the Borough Manager. If the street is not wide enough to hold the excavated material without
using part of the adjacent sidewalk, the permittee shall keep a passageway at least one-half
the sidewalk width open along such a sidewalk line.
Work authorized by a permit shall be performed between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00
p.m., Monday through Saturday, unless the permittee obtains written consent from the
Borough Manager to do the work at an earlier or later hour. Such permission shall be granted
only in case of an emergency or in the event the work authorized by the permit is to be
performed in traffic-congested areas.
In granting any permit, the Borough Manager may attach such other conditions thereto as
may be reasonably necessary to prevent damage to public or private property or to prevent
the operation from being conducted in a manner hazardous to life or property or in a manner
likely to create a nuisance. Such conditions may include but shall not be limited to:
Limitations on the period of the year in which the work may be performed.
Restrictions as to the size and type of equipment.
Designation of routes upon which materials may be transported.
The place and manner of disposal of excavated materials.
Requirements as to the laying of dust, the cleaning of streets, the prevention of noise and
other results offensive or injurious to the neighborhood, the general public or any portion
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 240/505
(6)
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
2.
thereof.
Regulations as to the use of streets in course of the work.
Backfilling and Restoring Opening.
[Amended by Ord. 1002, 5/5/2015]
All pavement cuts, openings and excavations shall be properly made, back-filled and
temporarily surfaced by the permittee under the supervision and with the approval of the
Borough Manager.
The Borough Manager must be notified by the permittee during the forty-eight-hour period
preceding beginning of backfilling of the date and approximate time at which backfilling will
begin.
The work of final restoration, including both paving surface and paving base, shall be
performed by the permittee under Borough inspection and according to Borough
specifications. The Borough shall be given 24 hours' notice prior to final restoration.
All excavations will be commenced and completed by the use of a reasonable work force
working around the clock, or in the alternative, all excavated material will be removed and at
the cessation of work suitable steel plates will be placed over the excavation or trenches will
be backfilled for protection and to allow traffic to resume. No excavation shall be left open and
unattended.
The Borough Manager shall make such inspections as he may deem necessary of all work
authorized by a permit. The Borough Manager is empowered to provide a full-time inspector if
necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this Part.
All backfilling, temporary patch and final restoration shall be performed under current
specifications as currently approved by the Borough of Stroudsburg Council resolution. The
Street Department shall establish the standards for paving, backfilling and associated work,
which can be obtained prior to excavation work from that department.
All inspection costs shall be borne by the permittee. Such costs shall be based on a schedule
of charges on file in the office of the Borough Manager.
The permittee shall notify the Borough Manager, in writing, upon completion of all work
accomplished under the provisions of the permit. A certificate of final inspection shall be
issued by the Borough Manager to each permittee no sooner than one year (with the
exception of § 21-106, Subsection 1A) after the permanent restoration of the excavation has
been made, provided that the work authorized by the permit has been performed according to
Borough specifications. Prior to the issuance of a certificate, the Borough Manager shall make
final inspection of the restoration to determine whether Borough specifications have been
adhered to.
If any settlement in a restored area occurs within the period stated in the
restoration/degradation option chosen, any expenses incurred by the Borough in correcting
such settlement shall be paid by the permittee or recovered from his bond, unless the
permittee submits proof satisfactory to the Borough Manager that the settlement was not due
to defective backfilling.
In no case shall any opening made by a permittee be considered in the charge or care of the
Borough or any of its officers or employees, and no officer or employee is authorized in any
way to take or assume any jurisdiction over any such opening, except in the exercise of the
police power, when it is necessary to protect life and property.
When 50% or more of one travel lane is disturbed, full lane width restoration shall be required.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 241/505
L.
M.
N.
3.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
When two travel lanes are disturbed, if 25% of both lanes are affected, both lanes shall have
full width restoration.
When two or more openings have been made within 100 linear feet of pavement, the
permittee shall overlay traffic lanes in which the openings were made, for the entire length of
the roadway between the openings, in a manner authorized by the Borough.
When four or more emergency openings have been made by the same permittee within 100
linear feet of pavement, the permittee shall overlay traffic lanes in which the openings were
made, for the entire length of the roadway between the openings, in a manner authorized by
the Borough.
Test Holes and Vent Holes. A street opening permit shall be obtained for any test hole or vent
hole. No test hole or vent hole shall be made in or upon a greater surface of the highway than as
specified in such permit, and no excavation, test hole or vent hole shall interfere with any water
line, sewer, drain or any other underground utility service. All test or vent holes shall be backfilled
with temporary patch and final restoration as per technical specifications sheet passed by current
resolution.
§ 21-105. Deposits.
[Ord. 782, 12/15/1999]
Permit Fees. The permit fee, in an amount set by Council resolution, shall include the
administrative fee for issuance of the permit, up to four hours of inspection of the backfilling
process, one inspection of the temporary patch and one inspection of the final restoration. Hours
spent on inspection or maintenance of the patch beyond these specified amounts shall be
deducted from the deposit.
Computation of Deposit. The Borough Manager, upon receipt of a properly completed application,
shall determine the amount of the deposit to be made by the permittee in accordance with a
schedule of charges provided by § 21-105, Subsection 5; provided, however, that the minimum
amount of the deposit shall be $50. The deposit shall be paid at the time the permit is received,
and the deposit shall be used to reimburse the Borough for the cost of any work and/or materials
furnished by it in connection with the work authorized by the permit, to cover all necessary
inspections of said work, and for any other purpose set forth in this Part 1A.
Form of Deposit. The deposit may be either in the form of a check or in lawful money of the United
States.
Insufficient Deposit. If any deposit is less than sufficient to pay all costs, the permittee shall, upon
demand, pay to the Borough an amount equal to the deficiency. If the permittee fails or refuses to
pay such deficiency, the Borough may institute an action to recover the same in any court of
competent jurisdiction. Until such deficiency is paid in full, no additional permits shall be issued to
such permittee.
Deposit and Cost Schedule. The Borough Manager shall establish and maintain a schedule of
charges for inspections, labor, materials and such other expenses as may be incurred by the
Borough in meeting the requirements of this Part 1A. In developing the schedule, the Borough
Manager shall be guided by the prevailing costs in the area of labor, materials and equipment. The
Borough Manager shall revise the schedule of charges periodically to reflect any increase or
decrease in costs used to establish such charges. The schedule of charges shall be opened to a
public inspection in the office of the Borough Manager upon demand.
Decision on Costs. The Borough Manager shall determine the cost of any work done or repairs
made by him or under his direction, pursuant to the provisions of this Part 1A.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 242/505
7.
8.
A.
1.
2.
3.
Refund of Deposit. Upon notification by the permittee that all work authorized by the permit has
been completed and after restoration of the opening, the Borough Manager shall refund to the
permittee his deposit less all costs incurred by the Borough in connection with said permit. In no
event shall the permit fee be refunded.
In the event a permittee disputes any amount charged by the Borough Manager in the course of
his permit, the Borough's governing body shall decide the amount due the Borough.
§ 21-106. Bond Requirements.
[Ord. 782, 12/15/1999]
Maintenance Bond Requirements. Each applicant, upon the receipt of a permit, shall provide the
Borough with an indemnity bond saving the Borough harmless of and from any and all losses,
damages, and liability arising out of injury and a surety bond conditioned for compliance with the
street opening specifications of the Borough and the provisions of this Part 1A. The Borough
Manager shall determine the amount of the bond, and it shall be in relation to the cost of restoring
the pavement cut to be made by the permittee; provided, however, that the minimum amount of
the bond shall be $1,000. The term of each such bond shall begin from the completion date of the
permanent restoration of the opening by the Borough and shall terminate upon the receipt by the
permittee of a certificate of final inspection from the Borough Manager. The amount of such bond
shall be in relation to the cost of restoring pavement cuts to be made by the permittee throughout
the year. In the event that the Borough does not restore the street opening, each applicant, upon
the receipt of a permit, shall provide the Borough with an acceptable surety bond to guarantee
faithful performance of the work authorized by a permit granted pursuant to this Part 1A. The
amount of the bond shall be 100% of the estimated cost of restoring the street opening. The term
of the bond shall begin upon the date of posting thereof and shall terminate upon the receipt by
the permittee of a certificate of final inspection from the Borough Manager.
[Amended by Ord. 1002, 5/5/2015]
All independent operating municipal authorities and public utility companies operating in the
Borough that own and maintain underground facilities may post a yearly bond in the amount
of not less than $25,000 (as determined by the Borough Manager or Council) in order to
secure all street opening permits taken out in its name for the required restoration period.
Such utilities shall notify the Borough Manager that permanent restoration has been
performed according to specifications and is ready for inspection per § 21-104, Subsection 2,
Backfilling and Restoring Opening, Subsections 2I and J. However, due to the placement of
the maintenance bond, the Manager or designated Borough Inspector shall make the
inspection and return all deposits within 30 days to said municipal authority or public utility
company, provided that said restoration is acceptable to the Borough. The bond shall
guarantee the continued maintenance and responsibility of these excavation permits for the
required period.
Default in Performance. Whenever the Borough Manager shall find that a default has occurred in
the performance of any term or condition of the permit, written notice thereof shall be given to the
principal and to the surety on the bond. Such notice shall state the work to be done, the estimated
cost thereof and the period of time demand by the Borough Manager to be reasonably necessary
for the completion of the work.
Completion of Work. After receipt of such notice, the surety must, within the time therein specified,
either cause the required work to be performed or, failing therein, indemnify the Borough for the
cost of doing the work as set forth in the notice.
§ 21-107. Liability Coverage.
[Ord. 782, 12/15/1999]
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 243/505
1.
2.
1.
2.
3.
A.
1.
Liability Insurance Requirements. Each applicant, upon the receipt of a permit, shall provide the
Borough with an acceptable certificate of insurance indicating that he is insured against claims for
damages for personal injury as well as against claims for property damage which may arise from
or out of the performance of the work, whether such performance be by himself, his contractor, or
anyone directly or indirectly employed by him. Such insurance shall cover collapse, explosive
hazards, and underground work by equipment on the street and shall include protection against
liability arising from completed operations. The amount of the insurance shall be prescribed by the
Borough Manager, in accordance with the nature of the risk involved; provided, however, that the
liability insurance for bodily injury in effect shall not be less than $10,000 for each person and
$20,000 for each accident, and for property damages not less than $5,000, with an aggregate of
$20,000 for all accidents. In the event that the excavation exceeds 120 square feet in area, the
liability insurance for bodily injury in effect shall not be less than $100,000 for each person and
$300,000 for each accident, and for property damages not less than $50,000, with an aggregate of
$100,000 for all accidents.
Workers' Compensation Insurance Requirements. The permittee shall provide proof of workers'
compensation coverage for all employees at the site of the excavation. The permittee is
responsible for obtaining proof of coverage from contractors or subcontractors and providing proof
to the Borough. Coverage must be in accordance with state requirements.
§ 21-108. Openings in New Streets.
[Ord. 782, 12/15/1999]
Notice of Improvements. When the Borough shall improve or pave any street, the Borough
Secretary shall give notice to all persons owning property abutting on the street about to be paved
or improved and to all public utilities and municipal authorities operating in the Borough, and all
such persons, public utilities and municipal authorities shall make all connections as well as any
repairs thereto which would necessitate excavation of the street, within 120 days from the giving of
such notice. The time shall be extended if permission is requested in writing and approved by the
Borough Secretary after consultation with the Borough Manager and Engineer.
Restrictions upon Opening New Streets. No permit shall be issued by the Borough Manager which
would allow an excavation or opening in a paved and improved street surface less than five years
old unless the applicant can clearly demonstrate that public health or safety require that the
proposed work be permitted or unless an emergency condition exists.
Penalty for Opening New Streets. If a permit is issued to open any paved and improved street
surface less than 10 years old, a degradation fee shall be charged for the opening. The
degradation charge shall be on a sliding scale and shall be set by resolution and available for
public inspection by request in the office of the Borough Manager or Street Superintendent. The
Borough requires prepayment of the estimated degradation fee at the time the permit is issued.
§ 21-109. General Provisions; Penalties.
[Ord. 782, 12/15/1999]
Street List Requirements.
Every person owning, using, controlling or having an interest in pipes, conduits, ducts or other
structures under the surface of any street used for the purpose of supplying or conveying gas,
electricity, communication impulses, water or steam to or from the Borough, or to or from its
inhabitants, or for any other purposes, shall file with the Borough Manager, within 120 days
after the adoption of this subpart, a written statement containing the names of the Borough's
streets wherein the aforementioned facilities owned by such a person are located. In the
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 244/505
B.
A.
B.
C.
2.
A.
B.
C.
D.
3.
4.
5.
6.
alternative, a copy can be submitted of the map maintained by the utility and shall be provided
on media acceptable to the Borough.
Within 90 days after the first day of January of each and every year, such person shall notify
the Borough Manager, in writing, of the changes necessary to maintain the street list required
in Subsection 1A above.
Abandoned Facilities.
Whenever any pipe, conduit, duct, tunnel or other structure located under the surface of any
street, or the use thereof, is abandoned, the person owning, using, controlling or having an
interest therein shall, within 30 days after such abandonment, file with the Borough Manager
a statement, in writing, giving in detail the location of the structure so abandoned.
Whenever there are manholes or tunnels associated with abandoned underground facilities,
such manholes or tunnels shall be filled in at the time of abandonment and the Borough
Manager notified thereof in writing.
When the Borough plans to pave or improve streets in which there are abandoned facilities,
the owners of such facilities shall be required to remove them if, in the opinion of the Council,
their removal is in the best interest of the Borough. If the owner shall refuse to remove such
facilities, the Borough shall remove the abandoned facilities, and the owner shall reimburse
the Borough for such removal.
Street Opening Permit Notices.
If the work to be undertaken by the permittee is such that it will affect the use of properties
abutting or adjoining the project, the permittee shall notify the affected property owners and/or
tenants 48 hours prior to commencing work. When a stoppage of work has occurred for more
than five days, the affected property owners and/or tenants shall be renotified 48 hours prior
to resuming work.
[Amended by Ord. 1043, 9/19/2017]
If the work to be undertaken by a permittee will affect other subsurface installations in the
vicinity of the proposed opening, the permittee shall notify the owners of such facilities of the
proposed work.
The Borough Manager shall notify, in writing, the Borough Police and Fire Departments of all
street opening permits he grants. Such notification shall state the nature of the work to be
done, proposed beginning and completion dates, and the location of such projects.
The permittee shall notify the Borough Manager and Monroe County Control Center prior to
closing any street with the total estimated closure time.
[Added by Ord. 1043, 9/19/2017]
The permittee shall notify, in writing, all public transportation systems of all street openings which
might affect, interrupt or restrict traffic flow.
Any new utility installations are subject to right of the Borough of Stroudsburg to require relocation
or removal at utility's expense based on the Borough's future construction schedule.
Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part 1A shall,
upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000, together with costs of
prosecution, or to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days. Every day that a violation of this
Part 1A continues shall constitute a separate offense.
B.. Deposit of Snow or Debris on Public Streets.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 245/505
1.
2.
§ 21-121. Deposit of Snow or Debris on Public Streets
Regulated.
[Ord. 529, 12/6/1972, § 1; as amended by Ord. 964, 2/6/2013]
No person, firm or corporation shall deposit, or cause to be deposited, in any public street, alley, rightof-
way, or roadway in the Borough of Stroudsburg, snow, ice, or debris taken or removed from property
privately owned or occupied, excluding snow taken or removed from public sidewalks upon or
alongside any street in the Borough of Stroudsburg that has parking meters located at the street line.
§ 21-122. Penalties.
[Ord. 529, 12/6/1972, § 6; as amended by Ord. 599, 12/19/1983; and by Ord. 964, 2/6/2013]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part 1B shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600 and any cost incurred by the Borough of
Stroudsburg in removal of said snow, ice or debris, together with costs of prosecution, or to
imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days. Every day that a violation of this Part 1B continues
shall constitute a separate offense.
Part 2. SIDEWALKS
A.. Snow Removal.
§ 21-201. Snow Removal from Sidewalks Required Within
Certain Time.
[Ord. 510, 5/6/1970; as amended by Ord. 599, 12/19/1983; by Ord. 703, 4/10/1991; by Ord. 909,
11/4/2009; by Ord. 1021, 10/4/2016; and by Ord. 1035, 7/18/2017]
The occupant/owner of every property fronting upon or alongside any streets in the Borough of
Stroudsburg shall remove snow and ice from the entire length and width of the sidewalk within 24
hours after the same shall have ceased to fall or to form. If ice cannot be cleared without damage
to the sidewalk, it is required that it be strewn with antiskid, such as sand, salt or similar
substance.
The occupant/owner of every property fronting upon or alongside any street in the Borough of
Stroudsburg that has parking meters located at the street line shall remove all snow from the
entire length and width of the sidewalk and curb and deposit the snow/ice in the street adjacent to
the curb. All snow/ice shall be cleared from the sidewalk and curb and deposited into the street no
later than 9:00 p.m. on the day the snow has fallen. If ice cannot be cleared without damage to the
sidewalk, it is required that it be strewn with antiskid, such as sand, salt or similar substance.
§ 21-202. Borough May Remove Snow and Charge Expenses.
[Ord. 510, 5/6/1970; as amended by Ord. 909, 11/4/2009; and by Ord. 1035, 7/18/2017]
In any case where the owner, occupant or tenant shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any of the
provisions of § 21-201 within the time limit prescribed, the Borough authorities may proceed
immediately to clear all snow and/or ice from the sidewalk and to collect all expenses for the snow
removal.
§ 21-203. Penalties.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 246/505
1.
2.
3.
1.
2.
[Ord. 510, 5/6/1970; as amended by Ord. 599, 12/19/1983; by Ord. 909, 11/4/2009; by Ord. 1033,
7/18/2017; and by Ord. 1035, 7/18/2017]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part 2A shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $300, together
with the costs of prosecution, or to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days. Every day that
a violation of this Part 2A continues shall constitute a separate offense. In the event the Borough
causes the snow or ice to be removed, the costs of such removal will be charged in addition to any
fines or penalties.
Notice and Payment of Violation. Upon the discovery of any violation under the terms of this Part,
the municipality shall, through its authorized agents, give notice to the owner of a violation
hereunder, either by personal delivery to such owner, by United States mail directed to the lastknown
address of such person or persons, as shown in the real estate registry records of the
municipality, or by leaving the same on the premises where such violation occurs.
If such person shall, within seven days after the delivery, mailing or leaving of such notice, pay to
the Treasurer of the municipality the sum of $25 for the violation, the same will constitute full
satisfaction for the violation noted in said notice. If two or more violations are issued for the same
property during a calendar year, the second and subsequent violations' payment shall increase an
additional $25 per subsequent violation to a maximum of $300. The failure of such person to make
payment, as aforesaid, within seven days shall render such owner subject to the penalties as
provided hereinabove.
B.. Use of Sidewalk for Display or Advertising; Obstructions.
§ 21-221. Use of Sidewalks for Display or Advertising Regulated.
[Ord. 734, 1/18/1995, § 1; as amended by Ord. 920, 5/20/2010; by Ord. 941, 5/4/2011; by Ord. 965,
2/20/2013; and by Ord. 972, 7/3/2013]
No person may place any obstruction, including but not limited to goods, merchandise or
advertising signs, on a sidewalk in the Borough of Stroudsburg. No owner or occupant of a
property improved by a sidewalk shall allow any obstruction or impediment to pedestrian traffic to
remain upon that sidewalk in the Borough of Stroudsburg, except in accordance with § 21-222.
Definitions.
ESTABLISHMENT SIDEWALK FRONTAGE
The contiguous portion of sidewalk located directly in front of the licensed eating and drinking
establishment.
LICENSED EATING AND DRINKING ESTABLISHMENTS
Retail food facilities that provide food or drink for immediate consumption. This may include,
but is not limited to: eat-in or take-out restaurants, caterers, bakery shops, coffee shops, tea
rooms, bed and breakfasts, bars/clubs, fair concessionaires, grocery stores selling immediate
consumption food/drinks, or convenience stores selling immediate consumption food/drinks.
PROPERTY OWNER
The holder of title to a parcel of real estate.
SEASONAL OUTDOOR CAFE DINING AREA
Any covered patio area or unenclosed portion of a licensed eating and drinking establishment
that provides an outdoor dining area with seating for patrons on a sidewalk that is contiguous
to the property lot lines.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 247/505
A.
B.
C.
D.
3.
A.
B.
C.
D.
(1)
E.
4.
SEASONAL OUTDOOR CAFE DINING LICENSE
Any and all licensed eating and drinking establishments may obtain an annual license from
the Borough of Stroudsburg for the limited calendar time period from March 1 through and
including November 1 for a table service time period of 6:00 a.m. until 12:00 a.m. (midnight) a
seasonal outdoor cafe dining area. Although table service shall end at 12:00 a.m., the
seasonal outdoor cafe dining area furniture shall be removed from the sidewalk area by 2:00
a.m.
General Requirements.
Seasonal outdoor cafe dining for table service only, restricted to use of sidewalks contiguous
to property lines in excess of six feet in width minimum from the building line to street line,
and the use for seasonal outdoor cafe dining shall leave a minimum of five feet of usable,
safe, clear walk area of the sidewalk. The outdoor dining area shall leave no less than five
unobstructed feet of sidewalk width at every point which is clear and unimpeded for
pedestrian traffic. In the event that five feet is not obtainable, the applicant may request to the
Codes Officer a reduction in the minimum feet of usable, safe, clear walk area of the
sidewalk, but not less than 48 inches. The request shall only be granted under special
consideration and shall not be detrimental to pedestrian traffic.
[Amended by Ord. 1030, 6/20/2017]
No building entrance or egress may be blocked at any time. The outdoor cafe dining area
shall not be permitted within 10 feet of any driveway or alley. The location of outdoor dining
may not use driveways or areas that are used for off-street parking.
Seasonal outdoor cafe dining area shall be adjacent to the property line and shall not extend
further than 10 feet from the property line. All tables and seating shall be contiguous to the
property line.
When the proposed seasonal outdoor cafe dining area extends past the establishment's
sidewalk frontage, written authorization to use the extended area shall be provided by the
property owner.
Umbrella and Barricade Requirements.
[Amended by Ord. 1030, 6/20/2017]
Umbrellas for the purpose of shielding patrons from weather and such elements shall be
affixed to outdoor tables in a manner which prevents the umbrellas and/or tables and/or
chairs from tipping. Head clearance of 80 inches is required over any portion of a pedestrian
right-of-way or aisleway for sidewalk cafe or building entrances or egresses. Signage applied
to an umbrella by the umbrella manufacturer or a retail vendor, such as (but not limited to)
food or drink products, is exempt from a sign permit. The total signage on an awning or
umbrella shall not exceed 20% of the area of the umbrella.
Barricades are permitted in the seasonal outdoor cafe dining area, provided they meet the
design standards and setback of outdoor dining distances of five feet (to trash receptacles,
bike racks, planters, lighting devices, tree wells, etc.).
Barricades are required for licensed eating and drinking establishments where the seasonal
outdoor cafe dining areas contain nine or more seats. The barricades shall meet the seasonal
outdoor cafe dining area setback distances per Subsection 3A.
Barricades shall delineate the outdoor dining area. Barricades need not be interconnected
and shall not be more than 48 inches apart.
Signage is permitted on the barricade(s), provided the following requirements are met:
Signage is not to exceed 33% of the fabric area of the barricade.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 248/505
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
D.
5.
6.
7.
A.
B.
8.
A.
B.
9.
Signage applied to the barricade shall only contain the name and/or the logo of the
licensed eating and drinking establishment which has an approved seasonal outdoor cafe
dining license and is placed within the establishment sidewalk frontage.
Proposed signage shall be submitted for review by the Historical and Architectural
Review Board and the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness by the Borough
Council.
Material of Tables, Chairs, Umbrellas and Barricades.
[Amended by Ord. 1030, 6/20/2017]
Tables and chairs shall be of wood or metal and shall be treated with a weather resistant
finish. Picnic-style tables are prohibited.
Umbrella fabric shall be of a material suitable for outdoor use, and must be cloth or canvastype.
No plastic fabrics, plastic/vinyl-laminated fabrics, or any type of rigid materials are
permitted for use as umbrellas within an outdoor seating area.
Barricade material shall be a metal frame with a durable, weather-resistant, outdoor fabric in a
solid color. Rope, chain, PVC material, or chain-link material barricades are not permitted.
Barricade style, design, and dimensions shall meet the following requirements:
Barricades shall not contain fluorescent or metallic colors. Methods of electrification,
illumination, or glow in the dark are not permitted.
Barricades shall measure nine feet or less in overall length.
Barricades shall be permitted a maximum height of 36 inches, measured from the
sidewalk surface to the top of the frame of the barricade.
Removal of Outdoor Cafe Dining Furniture During Inclement Weather. In the event of heavy or
gust winds, appropriate measures must be taken to secure any object subject to such conditions.
In the event of below freezing temperatures, ice, or snow, sidewalks must be cleared of outdoor
cafe dining furniture.
Borough to Notify Licensee of Events. During Borough approved events, the Borough will
determine on an event-by-event basis, due to the concerns for the Borough citizens' health, safety
and welfare, if seasonal outdoor cafe dining may occur. Reasonable notice will be served to
license holders under this Part.
Outdoor Cafe Dining Seating Capacity.
The amount of outdoor cafe dining seats shall not exceed 12 seats or 25% of the indoor
seating whichever is the least restrictive of Part 3 of this chapter.
Any licensee desiring to change the permitted use, i.e., by increasing the size of the outdoor
dining area or by changing the use or arrangement or the occupancy, shall file a new
application in accordance with the outdoor cafe dining license.
Prohibitions.
All furniture other than tables, chairs, umbrellas, barricades, and a hostess podium are
prohibited. This includes, but is not limited to, serving stations, bar counters, shelves, racks,
sofas, televisions, trash receptacles, heaters and torches.
No heating or cooking of food or open flames shall be allowed on a sidewalk area.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 249/505
C.
D.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
(1)
L.
10.
It shall be prohibited from playing amplified music, whether live or recorded within the
licensed dining area.
It shall be prohibited for patrons and staff to be shoeless or shirtless when in the licensed
dining area.
License. Any food establishment intending to provide seasonal outdoor cafe dining table service
only is required to apply for and obtain a license. An application must be filed with the Borough to
secure a license. A fee of $75 must be paid with the filing of the application for licensed eating and
drinking establishments with outdoor dining seating of 15 seats or fewer; an additional application
fee of $5 is required for every additional seat over 15 seats. Such fee can be amended in the
future by resolution of the Borough Council. Such application shall be made upon forms provided
by the Borough and shall include the following:
[Amended by Ord. 1030, 6/20/2017]
Name and address of applicant.
Width of existing public right-of-way sidewalk intended to be used immediately adjacent to
property.
Proof of proper licenses for food establishment.
Dimensions of the area of sidewalk in which outdoor cafe dining is proposed.
Diagram to scale of actual intended equipment, tables and chairs for space on sidewalk and
proposed occupant load.
The written consent of the property owner.
Certificate of insurance demonstrating coverage for intended sidewalk use.
Indoor seating capacity of food establishment.
No action shall be taken on any application for a license under this subsection until the
application has been completed in its entirety and the application fee, as required by a
schedule of fees established and amended from time to time by resolution of Borough
Council, has been paid in full. The schedule of fees shall be kept on file at the Municipal
Building. There shall be no prorating of fees under this subsection.
The applicant shall well and truly save, indemnify, defend and keep harmless the Borough of
Stroudsburg, its officers, employees and agents from and against any and all actions, suits,
demands, payments, costs and charges for and by reason of the existence of the restaurantcafe
and all damages to persons or property resulting from or in any manner caused by the
presence, location, use, operation, installation, maintenance, replacement or removal of such
restaurant-cafe or by the acts or omissions of the employees or agents of the applicant in
connection with such restaurant-cafe.
The applicant shall maintain the restaurant-cafe in accordance with all Borough ordinances
and state and federal laws, as well as rules and regulations promulgated and adopted by the
Borough which pertain to this use of restaurant-cafes.
The applicant shall remove the outdoor portion of the restaurant/cafe immediately after written
notice if the Borough or the Code Enforcement Officer determines that the restaurant-cafe is
detrimental to the health, safety and general welfare of the Borough or its citizens;
Due to pedestrian traffic changes, the restaurant-cafe narrows the sidewalk to the extent
that pedestrian traffic is impeded;
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 250/505
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
M.
N.
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
D.
1.
The restaurant-cafe interferes with the maintenance or installation of an underground
utility structure;
The restaurant-cafe is no longer being used as such;
The restaurant-cafe has been temporarily or permanently closed for violation of any
Borough, state or federal law and/or regulation; or
The restaurant-cafe is operated in violation of any ordinance, rule or regulation of the
Borough of Stroudsburg.
In the event that the applicant fails to remove the restaurant-cafe immediately after written
notice, the Borough may proceed to remove and restore the area and charge the applicant for
the cost thereof. Should the restaurant-cafe be removed by the Borough, the applicant shall
be entitled to a return of the equipment, furnishings or appurtenances so removed only after
the payment of all costs due to the Borough and by requesting the return in writing. The
responsibility for removal under the provisions of this subsection shall be the sole
responsibility of the applicant without any obligation or cost assessed against the Borough.
The Borough may, from time to time, promulgate whatever rules or regulations it deems
necessary or desirable to effectuate the purposes of this subsection, and the same shall be
approved by the Borough Council.
§ 21-222. Exceptions.
[Ord. 787, 7/5/2000; as amended by Ord. 965, 2/20/2013]
The following are exceptions to the prohibition of obstructions in § 21-221:
Construction by the Borough of Stroudsburg or other agency of state or local government
acting within its authority.
Temporary obstruction needed for construction or repair of the sidewalk or the property on
which the sidewalk is constructed.
Reasonable obstruction, not to exceed one hour, when necessary to transport goods or
services to the property on which the sidewalk is constructed.
The following exceptions shall be allowed, provided that at all times a minimum of three feet
of clear, unobstructed pedestrian walkway shall be maintained with a five-foot square
turnaround provided not more than 200 feet apart:
Curb lights on a light pole, meters and benches approved by the Borough Council.
Poles needed by public utility companies to provide necessary services.
Flags and other decorations during holiday periods or on other suitable days approved by
Borough Council.
Shade and ornamental trees and other ornamental plants, whether in containers or
planted in soil.
Existing supports for existing marquees.
§ 21-223. Penalties.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 251/505
[Ord. 787, 7/5/2000]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part 2B shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $300, together with cost of prosecution, or
imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days. Every day that a violation of this Part 2B continues
shall constitute a separate offense.
C.. Laying and Repair of Sidewalks, Curbs and Gutters.
§ 21-241. Required Materials.
[Ord. 204, 9/4/1935, § 1]
All sidewalks, curbing and gutters hereafter laid or relaid on or along any Borough street or alley shall
be of concrete unless, by express authorization, Council allows the use of other material.
§ 21-242. Borough Engineer to Provide Specifications.
[Ord. 204, 9/4/1935, § 2]
It shall be the duty of the Borough Engineer to furnish, without cost, to any property owner who is
about to lay or relay sidewalks, curbing or gutters the respective proper grades, locations and widths of
the same by appropriate markings upon the ground.
§ 21-243. Borough Engineer to Set Grade of Gutters;
Requirements.
[Ord. 204, 9/4/1935, § 3]
The grade of all gutters shall be set by the Borough Engineer at the time of laying or relaying of the
same, said grade to provide for proper flow of surface waters to sewer or other appropriate outlets.
§ 21-244. Grade of Sidewalk and Curb.
[Ord. 204, 9/4/1935, § 4]
The grade of curbs and sidewalks shall be that set by the particular ordinance establishing the same
for any street or alley.
§ 21-245. Width and Location of Sidewalks, Curbs and Gutters.
[Ord. 204, 9/4/1935, § 5]
The width and location of sidewalks, curbing and gutters shall be that set by the particular ordinance
establishing the same for any street or alley.
§ 21-246. Notice to Conform to Specifications; Borough May Do
Work and Collect Costs.
[Ord. 204, 9/4/1935, § 6]
Any property owner who shall lay or relay or cause or allow to be laid or relaid any sidewalk, curbing or
gutter contrary to the provisions of § 21-241 to 21-245 of this Part 2C shall, by direction of Council, be
given by notice 30 days within which to conform to the provisions of said sections. Upon neglect of any
property owner to comply with said provisions within the 30 days as aforesaid, the Council may direct
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 252/505
the necessary work to comply with said provisions to be done at the cost of such owner. The cost of
such necessary work, together with 10% additional, and all charges and expenses, shall be collected
from the said owner, either by municipal claim or action in assumpsit in the manner provided by law.
§ 21-247. Notice to Lay or Relay Sidewalks, Curbs and Gutters.
[Ord. 204, 9/4/1935, § 7]
Ordained sidewalks, curbs or gutters shall be laid or relaid by the property owners upon notice from the
Council within 60 days after receipt of such notice.
§ 21-248. Notice to Repair Sidewalks, Curbs and Gutters.
[Ord. 204, 9/4/1935, § 8]
Repairs to sidewalks, curbing or gutters, unless the same be deemed emergency repairs, as
hereinafter provided, shall be made by property owners upon notice from the Council within 30 days
after receipt of said notice.
§ 21-249. Emergency Repairs in Charge of Borough Manager.
[Ord. 204, 9/4/1935, § 9]
Emergency repairs to sidewalks shall be in charge of the Borough Manager. The Manager shall file a
certificate with the Borough Secretary, setting forth the necessity, place and character of said repairs,
whereupon notice shall be served to make repairs within 48 hours.
§ 21-250. Emergency Repairs.
[Ord. 204, 9/4/1935, § 10]
Emergency repairs to sidewalks shall be made where a dangerous condition exists and the cost of
doing repair work does not exceed $25. The certificate of the Manager of the Council shall be
conclusive evidence of the existence of the emergency justifying the repairs.
§ 21-251. Service of Notices.
[Ord. 204, 9/4/1935, § 11]
All notices required by the terms of this Subpart 2C shall be served upon the owner of the premises to
which the notice refers, if such owner is a resident of the Borough. If the owner is not a resident, then
the notice may be served upon the agent or tenant of the owner or upon the occupant of such
premises. If the owner has no agent or tenant or there is no occupier of such premises, service shall
be by printed or written notice posted upon the premises.
§ 21-252. Borough May Do Work and Collect Costs and
Additional Amount.
[Ord. 204, 9/4/1935, § 12]
In the event of failure of any property owner to lay, relay, repair or make emergency repairs to curbing,
sidewalks or gutters within the time required by the terms of this Subpart 2C, the Council shall direct
that said work be done at the cost of the said owner and shall collect the cost thereof, and 10%
additional, together with all charges and expenses, from such owner, either by municipal claim or
action in assumpsit in the manner provided by law.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 253/505
§ 21-253. Owner Desiring Alteration to File Drawings With
Council for Approval.
[Ord. 204, 9/4/1935, § 13]
Every owner who shall desire to alter the location, width or grade of any sidewalk, curbing or gutter for
the purpose of opening a driveway or for any other purpose shall, before beginning such alteration, file
with the Council a detailed drawing showing the full nature and extent of such proposed alteration. The
Council shall, at or before the next regular meeting, express its assent or dissent to said proposed
plan. If the Council does not approve the plan, the reason therefor shall be entered upon the minutes.
§ 21-254. Penalty for Alteration Without Approval of Council.
[Ord. 204, 9/4/1935, § 14; as amended by Ord. 599, 12/19/1983]
Any person who shall alter or cause to be altered the location, width or grade of any sidewalk, curbing
or gutter without filing the drawing as aforesaid or without securing permission of the Council for said
alteration shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $300, together
with costs of prosecution, or to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days.
§ 21-255. Owner Required to Restore Alterations if Not in
Conformance With Drawings.
[Ord. 204, 9/4/1935, § 15]
Any owner making or allowing an alteration of curbing, sidewalk or gutter not in conformity to drawings
filed as aforesaid, or without the consent of Council, shall, in the discretion of Council, restore said
sidewalk, curbing or gutter to the location, width or grade existing before said alteration. Upon failure of
restoration, at the direction of the Council, said owner shall be given 30 days' notice, as hereinbefore
provided, to complete the said restoration. At the expiration of the said 30 days, the Council may direct
that said work be done at the cost of the said owner, as provided in § 21-252.
§ 21-256. Council May Require Reconstruction and Conformance
to Established Specifications.
[Ord. 204, 9/4/1935, § 16]
Whenever any departure from established grade, location or width of sidewalk, curbing or gutter exists
by reason of driveway or other construction and such is, in the opinion of the Council, no longer
necessary or practical, the owner shall, after notice, as provided in § 21-247 hereof, reconstruct the
same to conform to the established width, location or grade; and in default thereof by the owner, the
work shall be done at the cost of the owner as provided in § 21-252 hereof.
§ 21-257. Council May Pay Portion of Construction Costs.
[Ord. 204, 9/4/1935, § 17]
Any property owner desiring, or directed by Council, to construct curbing and gutters may make
application to the Council to bear a portion of the costs of construction. The Council may, in its
discretion, pay not more than one-half of the costs of construction and the grading incident thereto
from general Borough funds.
§ 21-258. Responsibility of Sidewalks, Curbs and Gutters.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 254/505
[Ord. 204, 9/4/1935; as added by Ord. 743, 5/1/1996]
The adjacent property owner shall be required to repair and maintain all sidewalks, curbs and gutters
as set forth in subsequent sections of this Part. Any work completed by the Borough and accepted by
the property owner shall be considered to be work done by the property owner, who shall be
responsible for all further maintenance of said work.
D.. Sweeping and Cleaning of Sidewalks.
§ 21-261. Responsibility of Property Owners, Tenants, or
Lessees.
[Ord. 863, 8/16/2006]
All property owners, their tenants, or lessees in the Borough of Stroudsburg shall have the duty to keep
the sidewalks adjoining their properties free and clear of dirt, litter, and debris.
§ 21-262. Time Frame for Sweeping.
[Ord. 863, 8/16/2006]
Said property owners, their tenants, or lessees shall sweep said sidewalks and remove all dirt, litter,
and debris on or before 10:00 a.m. of each day of the week, excluding Sundays.
§ 21-263. Disposal of Dirt, Litter, and Debris.
[Ord. 863, 8/16/2006]
Such dirt, litter, and debris shall not be placed on the cartway of any street in the Borough of
Stroudsburg but instead shall be placed in a container by the property owner, his tenants, or lessees
and disposed of in the same manner as he/she disposes of his/her other waste materials, at the sole
cost and expense of said property owner, his tenants, or lessees.
§ 21-264. Violations and Penalties.
[Ord. 863, 8/16/2006]
Any property owner, tenant, or lessee who shall violate the provisions of this Subpart D shall be liable
to pay a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $600, plus costs of prosecution, for each offense, and
in default of payment of such fine and costs, to imprisonment for not more than 30 days, for each
offense. Each day's continuance of the offense shall constitute a new offense.
Chapter 22. Subdivision and Land Development
ATTACHMENTS
Attachment 1 - Minimum Design Standards for Streets
Attachment 2 - Development Agreement Sample Form
Part 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 22-101. Title.
[Ord. 714, 11/13/1991, § 101]
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 255/505
1.
2.
1.
2.
This is a chapter providing for the regulation of land subdivisions and land developments within the
Borough of Stroudsburg, Monroe County, Pennsylvania. It shall be known and may be cited as "The
1991 Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of Stroudsburg Borough."
§ 22-102. Legislative Authority.
[Ord. 714, 11/13/1991, § 102]
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority conferred by the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, Act No. 247 of 1968, as amended by Act 170 of 1988.
§ 22-103. Applicability.
[Ord. 714, 11/13/1991, § 103]
All Subdivision and Land Developments Included. This chapter shall apply to all subdivisions and
land developments (wholly or partially) located within the Borough limits which are subdivided,
developed and/or submitted after the effective date of this chapter. This chapter shall also apply to
all subdivisions previously approved by the Borough when the required improvements and other
approved or required aspects of the subdivision in accordance with the terms of such approval
have not been substantially completed within five years of their preliminary plan approval date.
No subdivision or land development of any lot, tract or parcel of land shall be made; no street,
sanitary sewer, storm sewer, water main or other facilities in connection therewith shall be laid out,
constructed, opened or dedicated for public use or travel, or for the common use of occupants of
buildings abutting thereon, except in strict accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 22-104. Purpose.
[Ord. 714, 11/13/1991, § 104]
This chapter has been adopted for the purpose of providing for conditions favorable to the health,
safety, morals, general welfare, convenience, economy and preservation of the environment for the
citizens of the Borough through regulations that will insure the harmonious development of the
community. Borough growth should be orderly and consistent with the overall Stroudsburg Borough
Comprehensive Plan.
§ 22-105. Conflict and Severability.
[Ord. 714, 11/13/1991, § 105]
Conflict with Other Ordinances. Whenever there is a difference between minimum standards or
dimensions specified herein and those contained in a Zoning Ordinance [Chapter 27] or other
official regulations, the highest and most restrictive standards shall apply.
Severability. If any article, section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this chapter is for
any reason held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portions of this chapter.
§ 22-106. Modifications.
[Ord. 714, 11/13/1991, § 107]
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 256/505
A.
B.
C.
1.
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
1.
The provisions of this chapter in their interpretation and application shall be held to be the
minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare.
Upon written request of an applicant the Borough Council, after review and recommendation
by the Planning Commission, may grant a modification of requirements of provisions of this
chapter if the literal enforcement will exact undue hardship because of peculiar conditions
pertaining to the land in questions; provided, that such modification will not be contrary to the
public interest and that the purpose and intent of the chapter is observed.
The Borough Council may, upon review and recommendation of the Planning Commission,
require more restrictive requirements necessary, in their judgment, to secure to the public
interest the objectives and intent of this chapter under peculiar or unique site or design
conditions.
All requests for modification of any standards and requirements of this chapter shall be in
writing and shall accompany and be a part of the application for development. The request
shall state in full the grounds and facts of unreasonableness of hardship on which the request
is based, the provision or provisions of the ordinance involved and the minimum modification
necessary. Requests for the minimum modification shall be referred to the planning agency
for advisory comments before action by the Borough Council. The Borough Council and the
planning agency shall keep a written record of all action on all requests for modifications.
§ 22-107. Amendments.
[Ord. 714, 11/13/1991, § 108]
The Borough Council may, after public hearing, amend the provisions of this chapter pursuant to the
provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.
§ 22-108. Remedies (Penalties).
[Ord. 714, 11/13/1991, § 109]
Preventative Remedies.
In addition to other remedies, the Borough may institute and maintain appropriate actions by
law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate violations, to prevent unlawful construction, to
recover damages and to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises. The
description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document used in the
process of selling or transferring shall not exempt the seller or transferor from such penalties
or from the remedies herein provided.
The Borough may refuse to issue any permit or grant any approval necessary to further
improve or develop any real property which has been developed or which has resulted from a
subdivision of real property in violation of any ordinance adopted pursuant to this chapter.
This authority to deny such a permit or approval shall apply to any of the following applicants:
The owner of record at the time of such violation.
The vendee or lessee of the owner of record at the time of such violation without regard
as to whether such vendee or lessee had actual or constructive knowledge of the
violation.
The current owner of record who acquired the property subsequent to the time of
violation without regard as to whether such current owner had actual [or] constructive
knowledge of the violation.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 257/505
(4)
C.
2.
A.
B.
The vendee or lessee of the current owner of record who acquired the property
subsequent to the time of violation without regard as to whether such vendee or lessee
had actual or constructive knowledge of the violation.
As an additional condition for issuance of a permit or the granting of an approval to any such
owner, vendee or lessee for the development of any such real property, the Borough may
require compliance with the conditions that would have been applicable to the property at the
time the applicant acquired an interest in such real property.
Enforcement Remedies. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated the
provisions of any subdivision or land development ordinances, the Municipalities Planning Code,
or prior enabling laws shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding
commenced by a municipality, pay a judgment of not more than $500 plus all court costs, including
reasonable attorney fees incurred by the municipality as a result thereof. No judgment shall
commence or be imposed, levied or be payable until the date of the determination of a violation by
the district justice. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the municipality
may enforce the judgment pursuant the applicable rules of civil procedure. Each day that a
violation continues shall constitute a separate violation, unless the district justice determining that
there has been a violation further determines that there was a good faith basis for the person,
partnership or corporation violating the ordinance to have believed that there was no such
violation, in which event there shall be deemed to have been only one such violation until the fifth
day following the date of the determination of a violation by the district justice and thereafter each
day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation. The court of common pleas,
upon petition, may grant an order of stay, upon cause shown, tolling the per diem judgment
pending a final adjudication of the violation and judgment.
Part 2. DEFINITIONS
§ 22-201. Inclusions.
[Ord. 714, 11/13/1991, § 201]
As used in these regulations, words expressed in the singular include their plural meanings and words
expressed in the plural include their singular meanings. The word "person" includes a corporation,
unincorporated association, and a partnership, as well as an individual. The words "building" and
"street" are used generally and shall be construed as if followed by the phrase "or part thereof." The
word "may" is permissive, the words "shall" and "will" are mandatory.
§ 22-202. Definitions.
[Ord. 714, 11/13/1991, § 202]
The following words or phrases, when used in these regulations, shall have the meaning ascribed to
them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ACCESS
The means by which vehicles or pedestrians obtain entrance or entry into a parcel, lot or building,
or into a subdivision or land development.
EASEMENT OF ACCESS
An easement granted for use by the public for the purpose of providing vehicular and/or
pedestrian access to a parcel, lot, building, subdivision or land development.
RIGHT-OF-ACCESS
The right of the public to have vehicular and/or pedestrian access over a specifically
designated area, easement or property.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 258/505
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
AGENT
Any person other than the subdivider who, acting for the subdivider, submits subdivision plans to
the Commission and Board for the purpose of obtaining approval thereof.
ALLEY
A public or private right-of-way having a right-of-way width of 20 feet or less, which affords a
secondary means of access to the rear or side of abutting property and is not intended for general
traffic circulation. Regardless of whether an alley is given a street name, no main or principle
building shall have its frontage on an alley. An alley may also be known as a court, place or lane.
APPLICANT
A landowner or developer, as hereinafter defined, who has filed an application for development,
including his heirs, successors and assigns.
BERM OR SHOULDER
That portion of a roadway between the outer edge of the traveled way or pavement and the point
of intersection of the slope lines at the outer edge of the roadway, for the accommodation of
stopped vehicles and for lateral support.
BLOCK
A tract of land or a lot or group of lots bounded by streets, public parks, railroad rights-of-way,
watercourses, bodies of water, boundary lines of the Borough, or by any combination of the above.
BOROUGH
Stroudsburg Borough, Monroe County, Pennsylvania.
BONA-FIDE BID
A bid secured by the subdivider, from a contractor or contractors, for the purpose of establishing
the estimated cost to complete the required improvement or maintenance which is the
responsibility of the subdivider to provide under the terms of this chapter. Said bona-fide bid shall
include all costs and activities, as determined by the Borough which will guarantee the completion
of all of the required improvements or maintenance, without any obligations to be assumed by the
Borough in the case of a default by the subdivider or the contractor. Said guarantees shall be
included in the contract between the subdivider and the contractor which shall include the
following provisions and stipulations:
The contract shall include a clause which states that the contract may be assigned to the
Borough in the event of a default on the part of the subdivider. This clause should indicate
that the Borough will not incur any obligations or liabilities of the contractor, other than to
tender payment for work satisfactorily completed in accordance with the specifications of this
chapter.
The contract should contain a "not-to-exceed" total contract price.
An estimated rock excavation quantity should be included where applicable.
The bid price must also include the cost and provision of a performance bond.
The contract should include a "waiver of right to file mechanics lien" which shall be duly filed
with the appropriate courts.
The contractor must provide and maintain an acceptable level of comprehensive liability
insurance.
All material and work submitted as part of the "bona-fide bid" must comply with the
appropriate Borough specifications.
BOROUGH COUNCIL
The Borough Council of the Borough of Stroudsburg.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 259/505
A.
B.
BOROUGH ENGINEER
A professional engineer licensed as such by the commonwealth and appointed or hired on a
consultant basis to provide engineering advice and services to the Borough of Stroudsburg.
BUILDING
A structure formed of any combination of materials which is erected on the ground and
permanently affixed thereto, and designed, intended or arranged for the housing, shelter,
enclosure or structural support of persons, animals, or property of any kind. A multi-family
building divided by unpierced masonry walls extending from the ground to the underside of
the roof shall not be deemed to be more than one building for the purpose of this chapter.
Any structure such as, but not limited to, those having a roof supported by columns, piers, or
walls including tents, lunch structures, mobile homes, trailers, dining cars, camp cars, or other
structures on wheels, or having other supports; and, any unroofed platform, terrace or porch
having vertical face higher than three feet above the level of the ground over or upon which
said structure is located.
CAMPGROUND
A planned development, under single ownership, for rental, license or lease only, of sites for use
as tent and/or recreational vehicle camping, on a temporary basis only, with recreational and
service facilities, including central water and sewage.
CAMPSITE
A lot within a recreational land development used for tent camping or as a site for recreational
vehicles; or a tract of land otherwise offered by the developer or operator through sale, lease, rent,
membership or other means, for camping purposes.
CARTWAY
Includes the portion of the entire right-of-way of a street which contains an improved travel way for
vehicles, including space for shoulders and/or parking lanes.
CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE
An area of unobstructed vision at a street intersection(s), defined by lines of sight between points
at a given distance from the intersecting street right-of-way lines.
CLUSTER SUBDIVISION
A subdivision approach in which several houses are grouped together on a tract of land. Each
cluster of houses serves as a module which is set off from other clusters by open space.
COMMISSION
The Stroudsburg Borough Planning Commission.
COMMONWEALTH
The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and any of its departments or agencies.
COMMON OPEN SPACE
A parcel or parcels of land or an area of water, or a combination of land and water, within a
development site and designed and intended for the use or enjoyment of residents of the
development. It does not include streets, rights-of-way or similar public facilities.
COMMON PROPERTY
All of the land and improvements part of a subdivision or land development which is to be jointly
owned and maintained by the lot owners, lessees and/or members of the development and
identified as such by the subdivider on any plan offered to the Borough for approval.
COUNTY
The County of Monroe, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and its Planning Commission.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 260/505
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
CUL-DE-SAC
A local street having one end open to traffic and being permanently terminated by a vehicular turnaround.
DEDICATION
The deliberate appropriation, by its owner, of land for any general or public uses. This shall not be
construed as acceptance by the Borough of responsibility for maintenance and/or ownership of
such land and attendant facilities, except where appropriate legal documents specifically relating
to the same have been executed.
DER
The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources.
DEVELOPER
Any landowner, agent of such landowner or tenant with the permission of such landowner, who
makes or causes to be made a subdivision of land or a land development. The term "developer" is
intended to include the term "subdivider."
DISTRICT
Monroe County Conservation District.
DRIVEWAY
A defined private access from an individual lot to a public or approved private right-of-way.
DWELLING
Any building, vehicle, or portion thereof designed or used exclusively as the residence or sleeping
place of one or more persons as further defined below. The term "dwelling" shall not be deemed to
include automobile court, rooming house, tourist home, bed and breakfast accommodation, hotel,
motel, hospital, nursing home, dormitory, fraternity, sorority house or other group residence.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY
A detached building designed for and occupied exclusively by one family, except for a mobile
home as defined below.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY
A detached or semi-detached building where not more than two individual family dwelling
units are entirely separated by vertical walls and/or horizontal floor.
DWELLING, MOBILE HOME
A transportable, single-family dwelling intended for permanent occupancy, contained in one
unit, or in two units designed to be joined into one integral unit capable of again being
separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site complete and ready for occupancy
except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations, and constructed so that
it may be used without a permanent foundation. Prefabricated homes or sections thereof,
which when assembled or combined are 20 feet or more in width, and which are placed on a
permanent foundation shall be classified according to dwelling type by the number and
arrangement of dwelling units contained therein, and shall not be classified as mobile homes.
DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY
A building containing three or more dwelling units per building and being designed for
occupancy of families living independently of each other.
DWELLING UNIT
One or more rooms, including a kitchen (or kitchenette) and sanitary facilities in a dwelling
structure, designed as a unit for occupancy by not more than one family for living and
sleeping purposes.
EASEMENT
A limited right of use granted in private land for public or quasi-public purpose.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 261/505
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
(1)
C.
ENGINEER
A professional engineer licensed by the State of Pennsylvania.
EROSION
The removal of soil or soil material by the action of wind or water.
FLOODPLAIN
A relatively flat or low land area adjoining a river, stream or water course which is subject to partial
or complete inundation or flooding. Floodplain boundaries have been delineated for floods having
recurrence intervals of 100 years and 500 years by FEMA.
FUTURE RIGHT-OF-WAY
The right-of-way width required for expansion of existing streets to accommodate anticipated
future traffic loads.
A right-of-way established to provide future access to or through undeveloped land.
GROUP RESIDENCES
All structures, except rooming houses, used primarily for the housing of persons non-related by
blood or marriage shall be considered group residences. Such group residences shall include, but
not be limited to, dormitories, fraternities and sororities, and, also all other structures occupied by
groups of non-related persons sharing a dwelling.
HALF OR PARTIAL STREET
A street parallel and adjacent to a property line having a lesser right-of-way width than required for
satisfactory improvement and use of the street.
HIGHWAY
Same as "street."
LAND DEVELOPMENT
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or parcels of land for any
purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings, whether proposed initially
or cumulatively, or a single-nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the
number of occupants or tenure; or,
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or cumulatively, between or
among two or more existing or prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of
streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other features.
A subdivision of land.
The following shall be excluded from review and approval as a land development under this
chapter:
The addition of the first accessory building on a lot or lots subordinate to an existing
principal residential building on a residential use lot.
LANDOWNER
The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land including the holder of an option or contract to
purchase, a lessee if he is authorized under the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner, or
other persons having a proprietary interest in the land.
LOT
A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or otherwise as permitted by law
and to be used, developed or built upon as a unit.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 262/505
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
C.
LOT AREA
The area of land contained within the limits of the property lines bounding that lot. Any portion
of a lot included in a street right-of-way shall not be included in calculating lot area.
LOT WIDTH
The average of the widths of a lot at the building setback line and the rear lot line.
LOT DEPTH
The average horizontal distance between the front lot line and rear lot line.
CORNER LOT
A lot situated at and abutting the intersection of two streets having an interior angle of
intersection not greater than 135°.
LOT COMBINATION
A subdivision which involves the combination of existing contiguous lots of record shown on a map
on file with the Monroe County Recorder of Deeds and which does not involve the creation of any
new lot lines.
[Added by Ord. 1013, 12/15/2015]
LOT IMPROVEMENT
The realignment of lot lines or the transfer of land to increase the size of an existing lot, provided
the grantor’s remaining parcel complies with all provisions of the Borough Zoning Ordinance
[Chapter 27] and no new resulting lots are created.
[Added by Ord. 1013, 12/15/2015]
LOT LINE
FRONT
That boundary of a lot which is along an existing or proposed right-of-way. The lesser
dimension of two along rights-of-way in the case of corner lots.
REAR
That boundary of a lot most distant from and most nearly parallel to the front line.
SIDE
Any boundary of a lot not a front or rear lot line.
LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL
Includes developments having a net project density of up to three dwelling units per acre.
MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL
Includes residential developments having a net project density of more than three dwelling units
per acre. This generally defines the more urbanized or built-up area of the Borough requiring
higher development standards and improvements than those which are located in the low density
residential area.
MOBILE HOME
A transportable, single-family dwelling intended for permanent occupancy, contained in one unit,
or in two or more units designed to joined into one integral unit capable of again being separated
for repeated towing, which arrives at a site complete and ready for occupancy except for minor
and incidental unpacking and assembly operations, and constructed so that it may be used
without a permanent foundation. Prefabricated homes or sections thereof, which when assembled
or combined are 20 feet or more in width, and which are placed on a permanent foundation shall
not be classified as mobile homes. The term mobile home shall not include recreational vehicles
or any unit less than 40 feet in length or 10 feet in width.
MOBILE HOME LOT
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 263/505
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
A parcel of land in a mobile home park, improved with the necessary utility connections and other
appurtenances for the erection thereon of mobile homes.
MOBILE HOME PARK
A parcel or contiguous parcels of land which has been so designed and improved that it contains
two or more mobile home lots for the placement thereon of mobile homes.
NET PROJECT DENSITY
The net project density of a proposed residential subdivision or land development measured in
residential units per acre shall be equal to the total number of residential dwelling units divided by
the total net residential land in acres. The total net residential land is equal to the total project area
minus the land in the project which is not used for residential purposes or related residential yard
areas (such as street rights-of-way, open space and other nonresidential uses).
OPEN SPACE
Land which is usually undeveloped and is devoted to plantings, patios, walkways and recreation
areas, etc., but excludes areas covered by dwelling units, commercial buildings, industrial
buildings, garages, carports, driveways, or street rights-of-way. In terms of ownership, there are
basically three types of open space: private, common and public.
PRIVATE OPEN SPACE
Generally a small parcel of land located immediately adjacent to an individual dwelling unit
owned and maintained by its residents and reserved for their exclusive use. Traditionally, this
would include the front, rear, side yards and patio.
COMMON OPEN SPACE
Generally a larger parcel of land reserved primarily for the leisure, recreational use and
appreciation of a group of residents and owned and maintained in common by them generally
through a homeowners' association.
PUBLIC OPEN SPACE
This differs from common open space only in terms of legal ownership. Public open space is
dedicated in fee simple to the Borough Council and is operated and maintained by them.
PERSON
Any individual, firm, trust, partnership, public or private association or corporation, or other entity.
PLAN OR PLOT
Map or chart indicating the subdivision or re-subdivision of land, which in its various stages of
preparation can include the following:
SKETCH PLAN
An informal plan, identified as such with the title "Sketch Plan" on the map, indicating salient
existing features of the tract and its surroundings and the general layout of the proposed
subdivision or land development, to be used as a basis for consideration by the Borough.
PRELIMINARY PLAN
A complete plan prepared by registered professional engineer or registered surveyor,
identified as such with the wording "Preliminary Plan" in the title, accurately showing
proposed streets and lot layout and such other information as required by this chapter.
FINAL PLAN
A complete and exact plan, identified as such with the wording "Final Plan" in the title, with
professional engineer's or registered surveyor's seal affixed, and prepared for official
recording as required by this chapter, to define property rights and proposed streets and other
improvements.
PLANNING COMMISSION
The Stroudsburg Borough Planning Commission.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 264/505
A.
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER
A person registered and licensed to practice engineering with the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania. The "Borough Engineer" shall be an engineer officially retained by the Borough
Council.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE
A vehicular unit primarily designed as temporary living quarters for recreational camping or travel
use, which either has its own motive power or is mounted on, or drawn by, another vehicle. The
basic entities are travel trailer, camping trailer, truck camper, and motor home.
RIGHT-OF-WAY
Land reserved for use as a street, alley, interior walk, or for other public purpose.
ULTIMATE RIGHT-OF-WAY
The maximum width to which an existing or proposed right-of-way may be widened in
accordance with the comprehensive plan or plans of the Borough or the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation, or other appropriate official agency.
SECRETARY
The Stroudsburg Borough Secretary to the Borough Council.
SET BACK OR BUILDING LINE
The line within a property defining the required minimum distances between any structure and the
adjacent right-of-way or property line of any lot. The setback shall be measured from the edge of
the right-of-way bordering the property.
SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM
CENTRALIZED SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM
A publicly or privately owned and operated utility system or other system designed to collect,
centrally treat with a sewage treatment plant, and dispose of sewage from users in
compliance with regulations of the appropriate state agency and of the Borough.
COMMUNITY SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM
A publicly or privately owned and operated utility system or other system designed for the
collection of sewage from two or more lots and for the treatment and disposal of the sewage
on one or more lots or at any other site, by on-site subsurface (into the soil) disposal systems
an techniques in compliance with regulations of the appropriate state agency and of the
Borough.
INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM
A utility system or other system designed for the collection, treatment and disposal of sewage
from a single lot into the soil or into the waters of the commonwealth or for conveyance to
another site for final disposal.
SIGHT DISTANCE
The length of street, measured along the center line, which is continuously visible from any point
3 3/4 feet above the center line to an object six inches above the road surface at the center line.
STREET
A strip of land designed for use by the public, including the entire right-of-way intended for use as
a means of vehicular and pedestrian circulation.
PUBLIC STREETS
Streets offered for dedication to the Borough and accepted by the Borough to insure
permanent public ownership and maintenance by the Borough.
PRIVATE STREETS
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 265/505
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
C.
A.
B.
C.
Streets not offered for dedication, or not accepted by the Borough, which remain in the private
ownership of a group of designated users or owners and which are maintained by said private
owners.
CLASSES OF STREETS
According to use, function and width shall be as designated in the Comprehensive Plan or if
not so designated, shall conform with the following:
MAJOR STREETS
Those streets which serve internal Borough movements and provide connections
between traffic generators serving or anticipated to serve unlimited traffic volumes at a
design speed of 60 miles per hour.
COLLECTOR STREETS
Those which intercept local streets, provide access to abutting properties and serve
individual neighborhoods or areas, and their function is to collect and distribute traffic to
the local streets and to feed traffic into the major streets. They are anticipated to serve an
average daily traffic volume of 5,000 vehicles and shall have a design speed of 50 miles
per hour.
LOCAL STREETS (also called MINOR STREETS)
Those used primarily to provide access to abutting property and to feed into the collector
streets. They are anticipated to serve up to an average daily traffic volume of 2,000
vehicles and shall have a design speed of 35 miles per hour.
NONRESIDENTIAL STREETS
Streets designed to serve and give access to commercial, industrial, public and other
nonresidential uses.
MARGINAL ACCESS STREET
Parallel and adjacent to major traffic streets, providing access to abutting properties and
control of intersections with major traffic streets.
STRUCTURE
Any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary location on or in land or water, whether
or not affixed to the land.
SUBDIVISION
The division or re-division of a lot, tract or parcel of land by any means into two or more lots,
tracts, parcels or other divisions of land including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs or devisees,
transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided, however, that the subdivision by
lease of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new
street or easement of access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBDIVISION, MINOR
Subdivision of land under any of the following conditions:
A subdivision which contains no more than two lots which have frontage on an existing public
road or approved private street and involves no new street or extension of water and sewer
lines.
A subdivision of any parcel of land to create a single lot which involves no new road or street
or improvement of an existing road or street other than a private access drive as defined by
this chapter.
A division of any parcel of land for the purpose of joining or annexing a lot to an adjacent
existing lot, parcel or tract of land providing a covenant running with the parcel to be
conveyed joins it with and makes it an inseparable part of the parcel to which it is joined.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 266/505
A.
B.
C.
1.
SUBDIVISION, MAJOR
Any subdivision or land development not herein defined as a minor subdivision and in all cases
where a new street or road is created, an existing street or road is extended or the extension of
sewer or water lines is required.
SURVEYOR
A professional surveyor licensed by the State of Pennsylvania.
TRAVELWAY
That portion of a street or road which is intended for vehicular traffic.
WATERCOURSE
A discernible, definable natural course or channel along which water is conveyed ultimately to
streams and/or rivers at lower elevations. A watercourse may originate from a lake or underground
spring(s) and be permanent in nature, or it may originate from temporary sources such as runoff
from rain or melting snow.
WATER FACILITY
Any water works, water supply works, water distribution system or part thereof, designed, intended
or constructed to provide or distribute potable water.
YARD
An open space on the same lot with a building or group of buildings which lies between the
principal building or group of buildings and the nearest lot line and which open space is
unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as herein permitted. Where a street
right-of-way abuts or is located within a lot or parcel, the yard shall be measured from the nearest
edge of the street right-of-way to the nearest point of the building or structure. Yards shall not
include any area within any existing or proposed or required future width of any public or private
street right-of-way.
YARD, FRONT
A yard extending the full width of the lot between a building and the front lot line or abutting
street right-of-way.
YARD, REAR
A yard extending the full width of the lot between a building and a rear lot line.
YARD, SIDE
A yard extending from the front yard to the rear yard between a building and the nearest side
lot line.
ZONING ORDINANCE
Any appropriate ordinance officially adopted by the Stroudsburg Borough Council as a Borough
Zoning Ordinance and any and all amendments thereto [Chapter 27].
Part 3. PLAN SUBMISSION AND REVIEW PROCEDURES
§ 22-301. General Procedures.
[Ord. 714, 11/13/1991, § 301]
Required Plans. Preliminary and final plans and required fees and supporting data for all proposed
subdivisions and land development of land lying within Stroudsburg Borough limits shall be
submitted by the applicant for review. Submission of a sketch plan is encouraged but shall not be
considered a required plan. A preliminary plan shall not be required for minor subdivisions and
minor land developments.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 267/505
2.
3.
4.
1.
2.
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
C.
1.
Submission Requirements. All plans, applications and supporting data shall be submitted by
certified mail or delivered in person to the Borough Zoning Officer.
Submission Date. The date of submission of any preliminary or final subdivision or land
development plan shall be the regular meeting date of the Commission next following the date of
receipt of complete plans by the Borough Zoning Officer excepting that should the next regular
meeting occur more than 30 days following receipt of the plans, the submission date shall be the
30th day following the day of receipt by the Borough Zoning Officer.
Fees. Preliminary and final subdivision and land development plans shall be accompanied by an
application fee as shall be set in a fee schedule as adopted by resolution of the Stroudsburg
Borough Council. The applicant shall also be required to pay to the Borough the actual costs of
any reasonable and necessary charges by the Borough's professional consultants or engineer for
plan review and report thereon to the Borough.
§ 22-302. Sketch Plan Submission and Review.
[Ord. 714, 11/13/1991, § 302]
The developer may, at his option, submit a sketch plan to the Borough Planning Commission
before submitting preliminary or final plans. It is recommended that the subdivider or developer
submit 11 copies of the sketch plan including the items of information required in Part 4 to allow
prompt review. The purpose of a sketch plan is to allow the applicant an opportunity to informally
discuss in advance his overall objectives and the extent to which the plan conforms with this
chapter and any pending changes to this chapter. The sketch plan procedure is intended to be a
fast and inexpensive method for the applicant to make preliminary determinations on the feasibility
of his plan in terms of this chapter. Sketch plan review and comment does not constitute formal
submittal of a proposed development or subdivision nor any approval or disapproval of the
proposed project.
There shall be no fee charged for the Commission's review of a sketch plan. The Commission will
normally comment on the sketch plan during the meeting at which it is presented or not later than
the next regularly scheduled meeting if questions of legal or engineering interpretation require
longer deliberation.
§ 22-303. Preliminary Plan Submission and Review.
[Ord. 714, 11/13/1991, § 303]
Preliminary Plan Submission.
Applicants shall submit 11 copies of the preliminary plan and application. The preliminary plan
submission shall include all items of information and supporting data required in Part 4. The
preliminary plan submission shall be accompanied by any required review fees.
All applications shall be submitted to the Borough Zoning Officer by certified mail or delivered
in person to the Borough office at least 10 days prior to the date of the regularly scheduled
meeting of the Borough Planning Commission.
The applicant shall concurrently submit copies of the proposed preliminary plan and
applicable supporting data and any required fees to:
Monroe County Planning Commission.
Monroe County Conservation District.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 268/505
(3)
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
2.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
3.
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation (if applicable).
The applicant shall provide evidence of submission of the plans, supportive data and any fees
to these parties to the Borough Planning Commission at its first meeting following submission
of the plans.
Referrals.
Upon receipt of any preliminary plan and supporting data the Planning Commission shall refer
the plan and appropriate supporting data as follows:
One copy to the Borough Manager.
One copy to the Planning Commission Chairman.
One copy to the Borough Engineer.
Within five days following the submission date (the first Commission meeting following receipt
of a complete plan) the Commission may direct the plan and supportive date be referred to
the following, if appropriate:
One copy to the Borough Solicitor.
One copy to the Water Authority.
One copy to the fire company.
One copy to others as applicable.
Planning Commission Review.
Preliminary subdivision and land development plans and supporting data submitted to the
Borough shall be considered at the Planning Commission's next regularly scheduled meeting
for completeness of submission. If the plans and supporting data, as submitted, are
incomplete in that they do not meet the preliminary plan requirements specified in Part 4 of
this chapter, the Planning Commission shall have authority to disapprove, and shall
disapprove, the plan as incomplete and advise the Zoning Officer to return the plan to the
applicant with a list of required items or supportive materials missing from the submission.
Resubmission of a disapproved incomplete plan shall be considered and treated as a new
submission requiring adherence to full submission procedures.
The Planning Commission, upon determining that a preliminary plan submission is complete
shall issue a submission receipt to the applicant specifying the submission date of the
complete plan.
Upon receipt of a complete preliminary plan and issuance of a submission receipt, the
Planning Commission shall review the preliminary plan to ascertain whether it complies with
the standards and criteria of this chapter. It shall consider the comments of the above referral
agencies if received on a timely basis and may request additional information of the applicant
if necessary for review.
The Planning Commission shall recommend to the Borough Council approval, approval
subject to modification, or disapproval of the plan within 45 days from the submission date.
The recommendation shall be in letter form. The Planning Commission should also submit
five signed copies of the preliminary plan and accompanying planning module for land
development to the Borough Council. The Planning Commission shall retain a copy of the
recommendation and all pertinent documentation.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 269/505
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
4.
A.
1.
Borough Council Review.
The Borough Council shall review the preliminary plan for compliance with the standards and
criteria of this chapter and shall consider the recommendations of the Planning Commission
and comments of any referral agency if received on a timely basis.
After such review, the Council shall determine the extent to which the plan complies with this
chapter and shall make a decision whether to approve the plan entirely, approve the plan
conditionally, or disapprove the plan.
In those instances where the Borough Council approves a preliminary plan with specific
conditions or required changes, the applicant shall communicate his acceptance or rejection
of the subject conditions or required changes in writing to the Borough Office within seven
calendar days of receipt of the decision of the Council. Failure of the applicant to submit
written notice of acceptance of the subject conditions or required changes within seven
calendar days following receipt of the Council's written decision shall result in the automatic
rescinding of the Council's approval of the preliminary plan.
In those instances where a preliminary plan is approved with conditions or required changes
or disapproved the Council shall, in communicating its decision to the applicant, specify the
defects found in the application and describe the requirements which have not been met and
shall, in each case, cite to the provisions of this chapter relied upon.
The Council shall make its review, render its decision and communicate it to the applicant not
later than 90 days following the submission date. The decision of the Council shall be in
writing and shall be communicated to the applicant personally or mailed to him at his last
known address not later than 15 days following the decision. If the decision is communicated
by mail, the decision shall be deemed to be communicated when postmarked.
Failure of the Council to render a decision and communicate it to the applicant within the time
and in the manner required herein shall be deemed an approval of the application in terms as
presented unless the applicant has agreed in writing to an extension of time or change in the
prescribed manner of presentation of communication of the decision, in which case, failure to
meet the extended time or change in manner of communication shall have like effect.
The Council shall concurrently make its decision with respect to the planning module for land
development to revise or supplement its official plan and, if approval is granted, said revision
or supplement will promptly be forwarded to DER. Preliminary approval shall be conditional
upon DER acceptance of the proposed revision or supplement.
No preliminary plan (or portions of such plan) shall remain valid for development of final plans
after a period of five years from preliminary approval and no final plans will be accepted for
any subdivision or land development for which DER has not approved the necessary revision
to the Official Wastewater Disposal Plan.
§ 22-304. Final Plan Submission and Review.
[Ord. 714, 11/13/1991, § 304]
Final Plan Submission.
Applicants shall submit 11 copies of the final plan and application for major subdivisions and
land developments or 11 copies of the final plan and application for minor subdivisions and
land developments. The final plan submission shall include all items of information and
supportive data and documents required in Part 4 of this chapter and shall be accompanied
by any required review fees. The applicant shall provide two reproducible prints of the
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 270/505
B.
2.
3.
A.
B.
C.
4.
A.
B.
5.
1.
approval final plan on stable base mylar for signatures by the Borough for recording
purposes.
All applications and plans shall be submitted to the Borough Zoning Officer by certified mail or
delivered in person to the Zoning Officer at least 10 days prior to the date of the Planning
Commission's regularly scheduled meeting.
Submission by Stages. If requested by the applicant, the Borough Planning Commission, at their
discretion, may permit the undertaking of the required improvements and of the preparation of final
plans to be completed in a series of sections or stages, each covering a portion of the proposed
subdivision as shown on the preliminary plan. If the final plan is submitted in sections or stages;
each section or stage shall relate logically to provide continuity of access, extension of utilities and
availability of amenities. The Council shall approve both the boundaries and configuration of
stages or sections of a development.
Referrals. Upon receipt of any final plan and supportive data, referrals thereof shall be made by
the applicant and Planning Commission in a manner similar to referrals of preliminary plans.
Review by Planning Commission.
The Planning Commission shall review the final plan application to determine that it conforms
in all important respects with the approved preliminary plan and incorporates modifications
and revisions specified by the Council in its approval of the preliminary plan. Otherwise, the
plan shall be considered as a revised preliminary plan.
The final plan and supporting data shall comply with the provisions of Part 4 of this chapter.
The plan shall comply with any zoning ordinances or other applicable regulations adopted by
the Borough.
The Commission shall review the recommendations of plan referral agencies. The Planning
Commission shall review final plans of subdivisions and land developments and make its
recommendations in writing to the Borough Council within 45 days of the submission date.
Review and Action by the Borough Council.
The Borough Council shall review and make final decision on all final plans for land areas
located within Stroudsburg Borough. The Council shall consider the recommendations of the
Commission and other referral agencies in making its decision to approve or disapprove final
plans. The Council shall complete its review and communicate its decision to the applicant
within 15 days of making its decision and within 90 days following final plan submission date.
Failure of the Council to render a decision within the time set forth above and in the manner
specified shall be deemed an approval of the final plan as presented unless the applicant has
agreed in writing to an extension of time or change of the prescribed manner of notification.
The Council shall not sign any final plan until all required improvements have been installed
or until the applicant has entered into a development agreement with the Borough Council
specifying the time and manner in which required improvements will be completed and
deposit with the Borough Council a suitable financial security in an amount sufficient to cover
the costs of the required improvements.
§ 22-305. Procedure for Installation of Guarantee of Required
Improvements.
[Ord. 714, 11/13/1991, § 305]
Improvements to be Provided by Applicant.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 271/505
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
2.
A.
B.
C.
D.
3.
In all cases the subdivider or land developer shall be responsible for the installation of all
required and developer-promised improvements in the manner specified below.
All required permits shall be secured and copies shall be provided to the Borough Council
prior to signature of the final plans an prior to initiation of installation of any improvements or
any site alterations.
The Borough Engineer or the Borough's designee shall make such inspections of the required
improvements, and at such intervals, as may be reasonably necessary to assure compliance
with the provisions of this chapter. The reasonable cost of such inspections shall be borne by
the subdivider or land developer. The required improvements and the design standards for
constructing them are set forth in this chapter.
Method of Providing Improvements.
No final subdivision plan or land development plan will be approved for signature by the
Borough Council unless the streets shown on the plan have been improved to a mud-free and
permanently passable condition. As used herein, the phrase "mud-free" and "permanently
passable condition" shall refer to the street design standards of § 22-502, Subsection 8, Table
1, and the street construction standards of § 22-603 referred to therein; provided, however,
that phrase shall not refer to the obligation under § 22-603 to install surface course road
paving.
Nor shall any final plan (land development, major or minor subdivision) be approved for
signature unless all other required improvements (including the surface course road paving)
and promised improvements have been installed to the satisfaction of the Borough Council;
provided, however, in lieu of completion of the improvements mentioned in the preceding
clause of this sentence, the Borough Council will accept federal or commonwealth chartered
lending institution irrevocable letters of credit and restricted or escrow accounts in such
financial institutions or other financial security acceptable to the Borough Council (hereafter
referred to as performance guarantee) accompanied by a signed development agreement in a
satisfactory form.
Where submission of a final plan by sections or stages has been approved, Borough Council
may require construction of, or guarantee of, improvements in future sections or stages
before granting final approval to the plan under consideration, if such future improvements are
essential for the protection of the stage or section under consideration.
Performance Guarantee.
It shall provide for, and secure to the public, the completion of any improvements which may
be required on or before the date fixed in the Council's formal action of approval or in the
executed developers agreement for completion of the improvements.
The amount of financial security to be posted shall be equal to 110% of the cost of completion
estimated as of 90 days following the date scheduled for completion by the developer.
Annually the Borough may adjust the amount of the financial security by comparing the actual
cost of the improvements which have been completed and the estimated cost for the
completion of the remaining improvements as of the expiration of the 90th day after either the
original date scheduled for completion or a rescheduled date of completion. Subsequent to
said adjustment, the Borough may require the developer to post additional security in order to
assure that the financial security equals said 110%. Any additional security shall be posted by
the developer in accordance with this subsection.
The obligation shall be in favor of, and enforceable by, the Borough Council of Stroudsburg
Borough and the ultimate grantees, lessees or licensees of the developer.
Security of Credit.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 272/505
(1)
(2)
(1)
(2)
E.
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
B.
4.
The guarantee shall be secured by the credit of any of the following: a qualified corporate
surety; the unconditional letter of credit of a lending institution; a restrictive or escrow
account in a lending institution; or other escrow account in a lending institution; or other
financial security acceptable to the Borough Council.
The precise form of the security acceptable as a performance guarantee will depend
upon what improvements have not been completed when the final plan is submitted; their
anticipated cost; whether they are required or promised improvements; and the Council's
evaluation of the financial risk of nonperformance.
Amount of Financial Security.
The amount of financial security required shall be based upon an estimate of the cost of
completion of the required improvements, submitted by an applicant or developer and
prepared by a professional engineer licensed as such in this commonwealth and certified
by such engineer to be a fair and reasonable estimate of such cost. The Borough, upon
the recommendation of the Borough Engineer, may refuse to accept such estimate for
good cause shown. If the applicant or developer and the Borough are unable to agree
upon an estimate, then the estimate shall be recalculated and recertified by another
professional engineer licensed as such in the commonwealth and chosen mutually by the
Borough Council and the applicant or developer. The estimate certified by the third shall
be final estimate. In the event that a third engineer is so chosen, fees for the services of
said engineer shall be paid equally by the Borough and the applicant or developer.
If the party posting the financial security requires more than one year from the date of
posting of the financial security to complete the required improvements, the amount of
financial security may be increased by an additional 10% for each one-year period
beyond the first anniversary date from posting of financial security or to an amount not
exceeding 110% of the cost of completing the required improvements as re-established
on or about the expiration of the preceding one-year period by using the above bidding
procedure.
Development Agreement.
All applicants proposing any subdivision or land development requiring the installation of
improvements upon the plot map, shall be required to enter into a legally binding development
agreement with the Borough of Stroudsburg guaranteeing the installation of the improvements
in accordance with all Borough requirements prior to final plan approval for signature.
The development agreement (a form of which is attached as Appendix A) shall be in a form
suitable for execution by the Borough Council and it shall consist of the following, where
applicable:
The construction depicted upon the plan in itemized format.
Construction of streets with related curbs, street signs, drainage facilities and related
improvements.
Installation of utility lines.
Dedication of streets, transfer of water and sewer lines and easements. In the event
public water or sewer lines are offered for transfer to the Borough or a Borough authority,
there shall be no charge, cost or payment of any nature imposed upon the Borough or
Borough authority. In the event streets are offered for dedication to the Borough, the
developer shall bear all reasonable cost of the Borough's inspection before acceptance
of the offer of dedication and all costs of document preparation and recording.
Prevention of erosion, sedimentation and water damage to the subject and adjacent
properties.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 273/505
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
A.
B.
C.
5.
6.
Developer's responsibilities for damage to other property.
A work schedule setting forth the beginning and ending and such other details as the
Borough deems fit and appropriate for the improvements covered by the development
agreement.
The estimated cost of the improvements not yet completed, including a detailed
breakdown in a form acceptable to the Borough Council, and the amount of the
performance guarantee.
Security, in the form of a maintenance bond or escrow deposit, for the repair or
reconstruction of improvements which are found by the Borough Engineer to be defective
within one year from the date on which the engineer certified them to have been
completed, shall be included together with provisions for disbursement thereof.
The developer shall provide the Borough with a set of reproducible "as built" plans
prepared by and certified by a professional engineer of all storm and sanitary sewers and
water distribution facilities.
Provisions for remedy of any violation of the development agreement.
That developer shall secure or maintain public liability insurance for the duration of
improvements construction. A copy or other evidence of coverage shall be submitted to
the Borough.
A save harmless clause to protect the Borough from liability.
Following construction, the developer shall provide the Borough with a certified statement
prepared by a professional engineer to the effect that the sanitary sewers, sewage
treatment facilities, and water supply and distribution facilities comply with the approved
plans and have been constructed in accordance with all applicable rules and regulations.
The developer shall be responsible for all reasonable engineering and legal costs and
expenses for inspections, consultations, and preparation of agreements, to the extent
that such costs and expenses exceed the moneys paid by the developer in accordance
with the Stroudsburg Borough fee schedule.
Method of Approving Required Improvements.
The developer shall notify the Borough Council, with a copy thereof to the Borough Engineer,
by certified or registered mail, that the required improvements have been made. Within 10
days of receiving this notice, the Borough Council shall direct the Engineer to inspect all of the
aforesaid improvements. The Engineer shall make his inspection and file a report to the
Borough Council, the Planning Commission and the developer within 30 days of the date
which the developer's notification was received by the Borough Council. If the Engineer finds
any or all improvements to be not as required, he shall include a statement of reasons for
their rejection in his report to the Council and to the developer.
Where appropriate, the Borough may require that periodic inspection be made of the
aforesaid improvements, in which case the developer's failure to comply with the schedule of
inspections shall be grounds for disapproval. The developer shall notify the Borough of the
progress of construction to enable the Borough Engineer to make such inspections.
The Borough Council shall consider the Engineer's report and recommendations of the
Planning Commission and render a decision to the developer by certified or registered mail
within 15 days of receipt of the engineer's report.
Maintenance Bond.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 274/505
A.
B.
1.
A.
B.
2.
A maintenance bond or other suitable security shall accompany final plan being submitted to
the Commission. Said maintenance bond shall be in the form approved by the Borough, to
guarantee maintenance and repair of the streets and other improvements in the subdivision
for one year after completion of construction and acceptance thereof by the Borough. The
amount of said maintenance bond or security shall be determined by the Borough but will
generally not exceed 10% of the estimated costs of all required improvements. After the
expiration of one year from the date of formal acceptance of said improvements, the Borough
shall release said maintenance bond or security to the subdivider or developer or party
posting said maintenance bond or security.
Where the Borough Council accepts dedication of any improvement following completion, the
Borough Council shall require posting of a maintenance bond or other suitable security to
secure structural integrity of the dedicated improvements in the amount of 15% of the actual
cost of installation for a period of 18 months from date of dedication.
§ 22-306. Approval of Final Plan for Recording.
[Ord. 714, 11/13/1991, § 306]
Following review and approval of the final plan submission and completion of required improvements
or deposit of satisfactory guarantee and arrangement of development agreement for completion of
required improvements, the final plan reproducible drawings submitted shall be approved for recording
by the signatures of all members of the Borough Council.
§ 22-307. Recording of Final Plan.
[Ord. 714, 11/13/1991, § 307]
Upon the signing of an approved final plan, the applicant shall, within 90 days of such approval, unless
an extension has been granted in writing by the Borough Council, record such plan in the Office of the
Recorder of Deeds of the County. Any approved subdivision plans not filed in accordance with the
provisions stated herein become null and void.
§ 22-308. Records, Revisions and Resubdivisions.
[Ord. 714, 11/13/1991, § 308]
Revisions and Resubdivisions. A revision or resubdivision of a recorded plan of an approved final
plan shall be considered as a new subdivision and shall come under the jurisdiction of this
chapter. (A submission to correct erroneous data or omissions on recorded plans shall not be
construed to be a revision or resubdivision.)
Borough Records.
The Planning Commission shall make a record of its findings, decisions and
recommendations relative to all subdivision plans recommended for action by the Borough
Council. Such records shall be open to the public for review.
The Secretary of the Borough Council shall also keep a record of the findings, decisions and
recommendations relative to all subdivision plans filed for action by the Borough Council.
Part 4. PLAN REQUIREMENTS
Preliminary and final plans submitted for approval shall meet the requirements outlined in the following
sections. (Note: Sketch plans are optional. They do not have to prepared by an engineer or surveyor.
The following criteria is suggested to make the sketch plan review meaningful.)
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 275/505
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
1.
A.
B.
C.
2.
§ 22-401. Submission of Sketch Plans.
[Ord. 714, 11/13/1991, § 401]
The sketch plan should show:
Proposed subdivision name, location, land owner and developer's name and address. Names
and addresses of corporation officers and major shareholders or partners. Designation of
zoning district. Location map at scale of one inch equals 2,000 feet. Show major roads, points
of interest and Borough boundaries within 500 feet. Give name under which the subdivision is
to be recorded. Identify the plan as sketch plan.
North arrow, true or magnetic, graphic scale (one inch equals 50 feet or one inch equals 100
feet preferred) and date.
Names of adjoining property owners including those across adjacent roads.
Proposed and existing streets, water/sewer, gas, power and other utility lines existing and
proposed buildings and lot layout on immediately adjoining tracts, including name and rightof-
way widths that fall within 200 feet distance from the project boundary lines.
Watercourses, lake and wetland locations and names (if any), rock outcrops and stone fields
or any hazardous features. Give location and description of any certified historical site or
structure or certified natural feature.
Location of permanent and seasonal high water table areas and one-hundred-year flood
zones.
Lot layout and existing topography (general). Lot width, depth and area (typical). Lot layout,
lot width, depth and area and lot identification by number system. Street lines and names, lot
lines, rights-of-way, easements, community or public areas and areas to be dedicated.
Site data: acreage, number of lots, average lot size, lineal feet of new roads.
Proposed uses of the various areas of the proposed subdivision or land development.
Location and extent of various soil types from U.S. SCS Soil Survey.
Location and type of rights-of-way, easements or other restrictive covenants which might
affect development.
The following supportive information should be submitted with the sketch plan:
The latest USGS Quadrangle map or portion thereof with the perimeter of the development
accurately plotted thereon.
A map of the entire contiguous holdings of owner or developer showing sketch plan for roads
and the location of the portion to be subdivided or developed.
The Planning Commission shall, at its discretion, require that evidence be presented
indicating the manner in which the environmental protection requirements described in § 22-
502 are to be met.
§ 22-402. Submission of Preliminary Plan.
[Ord. 714, 11/13/1991, § 402]
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 276/505
1.
A.
B.
C.
D.
(1)
(2)
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
2.
Preliminary plans for major subdivisions and major land developments shall be drawn at a scale of
one inch equals 50 or 100 feet provided all bearings, distances and other information can be
legibly and accurately presented on the plan. Plans shall be prepared on standard sheet of twelve
inch by eighteen inch, eighteen inch by twenty four inch, twenty-four inch by thirty six inch, except
when the Commission approves other size plans. Identify the plan as preliminary plan. Preliminary
plans shall be prepared by a professional engineer or registered surveyor as defined in Part 2 of
this chapter. Preliminary plans are not required for minor subdivisions and minor land
developments.
Preliminary plans shall show:
Proposed subdivision name, location, land owner and developer's name and address. Names
and addresses of corporation officers and major shareholders or partners. Designation of
zoning district. Location map at scale of one inch equals 2,000 feet. Show major roads, points
of interest and Borough boundaries within 500 feet. Give name under which the subdivision/is
to be recorded. The name shall not duplicate any other recorded subdivision in Monroe
County.
North arrow, true or magnetic, graphic scale (one inch equals 50 feet or one inch equals 100
feet preferred) and date.
Names and tax parcels numbers of adjoining property owners including those across adjacent
roads.
Proposed and existing streets, proposed and existing buildings and lot layout on immediately
adjoining tracts, including name and right-of-way widths that fall within 300 feet distance from
the project boundary lines.
Watercourses and Wetlands.
Watercourse, lake and other surface water bodies, rock outcrops and stone fields. Give
location and description of any certified historic site or structure or certified natural
feature. Wetland area locations as delineated by a trained and competent professional or
as certified by the appropriate state and federal agencies.
In the event that the Borough questions the accuracy of the delineation of wetlands
provided by the applicant, the Borough shall have the right to require the applicant to
provide a judicial determination (or similar official confirmation) from the appropriate
federal or state regulatory agency.
Location and permanent and seasonal high water table areas, one-hundred-year flood zones
and proposed drainage easement.
Lot layout, lot width, depth and area (typical). Lot identification by number system. Street lines
and names, lot lines, rights-of-way, easements, community or public areas and areas to be
dedicated.
Site Data. Acreage, number of lots, average lot size, lineal feet of new roads.
Tract boundaries with bearings in degrees, minutes and seconds and distances in feet and
hundredths. These boundaries shall be determined by accurate field survey, with an error of
closure not to exceed one in 5,000 and balanced.
Location and extent of various soil types, locations and log of soil test pits and soil percolation
tests results (if applicable).
Location, purpose and nature of any existing right-of-way or other easement. Location,
purpose and nature and width of proposed easements. Location of existing sanitary sewers,
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 277/505
L.
M.
N.
O.
P.
Q.
R.
S.
T.
U.
V.
W.
X.
Y.
Z.
AA.
BB.
A.
B.
3.
public water mains, storm sewers, electric power and transmission lines, gas lines and all
other utility facilities above or below ground with direction of flow and pressure.
Dimensions of streets, lots and proposed community areas. Sufficient bearings, lengths of
lines, radii, arc lengths, street widths, rights-of-way, easements and community or public
areas, to accurately and completely reproduce each and every course on the ground.
Proposed street names, road profiles, including grades, points of vertical curvature and
tangency and length of vertical curve; typical cross-sections and specifications for streets.
Proposed areas for location of wells and subsurface sewage disposal fields (if appropriate).
Designs for sanitary sewer systems, water systems and stormwater system improvements.
Building setback lines and lot width at the front building setback line.
A place on the plan for approval by the Planning Commission, Borough Council including a
space for the date of approval. Space reserved for noting plan revisions.
All applicable zoning data. Zoning district and use classification.
Approximate final grades in areas of cut or fill.
Any lots designated for use other than residential shall be indicated.
Parcels to be dedicated to the public or reserved for their use, or to be reserved by covenant
for residents shall be shown and marked as such.
Contour lines at an interval of two to five feet from a competent survey. In the event contour
lines at a closer interval are available, such contours shall be shown. The Borough reserves
the right to request greater detail when the scope or nature of the development demands the
same.
Designs and location of proposed bridges and road culverts.
Any proposed landscaping including trees and other plantings and screening or buffer areas.
The seal and signature of the professional engineer or registered surveyor responsible for
preparation of the plan.
A contour grading plan of all site alterations and improvements including ground and
basement floor elevations of all buildings may be required if deemed necessary by the
Borough Engineer to properly establish grading and drainage patterns. Where buildings are
proposed to be developed by the subdivider, such a plan may be required to indicate building
ground floor and basement floor elevations.
Floor plans and elevations of all existing and proposed structures along with floor areas and
proposed uses.
Location and dimensions of parking areas and parking spaces.
The following supportive documents and information shall be submitted with preliminary plans for
land development or major subdivisions:
Copies of the proposed deed restrictions, protective and restrictive covenants referenced to
the drawing.
Proposed offers of dedication and reservation of rights-of-way and land areas with conditions
attached.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 278/505
C.
D.
E.
(1)
(2)
(3)
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
(1)
K.
If the developer proposes to install private amenities or facilities (for example, private roads,
recreation facilities, open spaces, central sewer or water system, etc.), the developer shall
submit a narrative description of the type of organization or legal entity which will be
responsible for the future operation and maintenance of such amenities and how
responsibility for maintenance and care and ownership of those amenities or facilities will be
transferred to the persons or organization which will own them. If the developer proposes to
dedicate all or some portion of the amenities or facilities to the Borough at some future date,
the developer must submit a narrative description of how responsibility for maintenance and
care of these amenities or facilities will be handled during the period before the offer of
dedication to the Borough. In no event will the Borough accept a dedication of such amenities
or facilities if, at the time of the dedication, they do not meet the then existing standards of the
Borough.
Certification of Central Water Supply System. All new or expanded or renovated subdivisions
and land developments shall be served by the Stroudsburg Municipal Authority or its
successor. The developer or applicant shall submit two copies of a letter from the Authority
which states that the Authority can adequately serve the proposed development.
Certification of Central Sewage Disposal System. Wherever possible all new, expanded or
renovated subdivisions and land developments shall be connected to and served by the
Stroudsburg sewer system.
Certification of On-Lot Sewage System. When the subdivision or development is to be served
by individual on-lot sewage disposal systems upon approval of Borough Council of a written
request for modification by the applicant:
The developer shall submit four copies of a completed planning module for land
development concurrent with the preliminary plan.
The approval of the subdivision shall be conditioned upon the receipt by the Borough of
the approval of land planning module by the appropriate agencies.
Failure to submit the approvals of the land planning modules by the appropriate agencies
shall render any conditional preliminary plan approval null and void.
The Planning Commission or Council may, at its discretion, require the evidence be presented
indicating the manner in which the environmental protection requirements described in § 22-
502 are met. Soil erosion and sedimentation control plans shall be prepared in cooperation
with the County Soil Conservation District and submitted with the preliminary plan application.
Map of entire contiguous holdings and all other holdings of the owner within 2,000 feet,
indicating area of proposed subdivision. A sketch plan of the proposed road system will be
required for any contiguous area not included in the preliminary plan.
A stormwater drainage plan consisting of location, type, size and character of storm sewers,
culverts, natural watercourse, drainage easements, impoundment areas, existing and
proposed topographic contours shall be prepared in compliance with the requirements of any
local stormwater management ordinances adopted by the Borough.
A properly executed application on a form provided by the Borough.
State Highway Access Permit.
In those cases where proposed subdivision roads or proposed lots abut or access
directly to state highways the applicant shall submit an application to PennDOT for a
state highway access permit at or prior to the time preliminary subdivision or land
development plans are submitted to the Borough. A copy of this application shall be
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 279/505
(2)
1.
A.
B.
C.
D.
(1)
(2)
E.
F.
G.
H.
2.
submitted to the Borough with the preliminary plans along with evidence of submission of
the application to PennDOT.
PennDOT approval of an access permit, where applicable, shall be a requirement or
condition for preliminary plan approval.
§ 22-403. Submission of Final Plans for All Subdivisions.
[Ord. 714, 11/13/1991, § 403]
Final plans for subdivisions and land developments shall be drawn at a scale of one inch equals
50 or 100 feet provided all bearings, distances and other information can be legibly and accurately
presented on the plan. Plans shall be prepared on a standard sheet of 12 inches by 18 inches, 18
inches by 24 inches, or 24 inches by 36 inches, except when the Commission approves other size
plans. The plan for recording shall be a clear, legible, reproducible original or print on stable base
mylar or comparable quality material. Identify the plan as final plan. Final plans shall be prepared
by a professional engineer or registered surveyor as defined in Part 2 of this chapter.
The final plan for subdivision and land development shall show:
Proposed subdivision name, location, landowner and developer's name and address. Names
and addresses of corporation officers and major shareholders or partners. Designation of
zoning district. Location map at scale of one inch equals 2,000 feet. Showing major roads,
points of interest and Borough boundaries within 500 feet. Give name under which the
subdivision is to be recorded.
North arrow, true or magnetic, graphic scale (one inch equals 50 feet or one inch equals 100
feet preferred) and date.
Names of adjoining property owner including those across adjacent roads.
Proposed and existing streets, existing and proposed buildings and lot layout on immediately
adjoining tracts, including name and right-of-way width that fall within 300 feet distance from
the project boundary lines.
Watercourses and Wetlands.
Watercourse, lakes and other surface water bodies, outcrops and stone fields. Give
location and description of any certified historic site or structure or certified natural
feature. Wetland area locations as delineated by a trained and competent professional or
certified by the appropriate state and federal agencies.
In the event that the Borough questions the accuracy of the delineation of wetlands
provided by the applicant, the Borough shall have the right to require the applicant to
provide a judicial determination (or similar official confirmation) from the appropriate
federal or state regulatory agency.
Location of permanent and seasonably high water table areas and one-hundred-year flood
zones.
Lot layout, lot width, depth and area and lot identification by number system. Street lines and
names, lot lines, rights-of-way, easements, community or public areas and areas to be
dedicated.
Site Data. Acreage, number of lots, average lot size, lineal feet of new roads.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 280/505
I.
J.
K.
L.
M.
N.
O.
P.
Q.
R.
S.
T.
U.
V.
W.
X.
Y.
Z.
AA.
Tract boundaries with bearings in degrees, minutes and seconds and distances in feet and
hundredths. These boundaries shall be determined by accurate field survey, with an error of
closure not to exceed one in 5,000 balanced.
Location and extent of various soil types, location and log of soil test pits and soil percolation
tests results (if applicable).
Location, purpose and nature of any existing right-of-way or other easement. Location,
purpose and nature and width of proposed easements, utilities and improvements, with
calculations.
Dimensions of streets, lots and proposed community areas. Sufficient bearings, lengths and
rights-of-way, easements and community or public areas, to accurately and completely
reproduce each and every course on the ground.
Proposed areas for location of wells and subsurface disposal fields (if appropriate).
Designs for sanitary sewer systems, water systems and storm water system improvements,
with calculations.
Building setback lines.
A place on the plan for approval signatures of the Planning Commission and Borough Council
including a space for the date of approval. A space to note plan revisions. A place for notation
of review by the Monroe County Planning Commission.
Contour lines, at an interval of two to five feet from a competent survey. In the event contour
lines at a closer interval are available, such contours shall be shown.
Designs and locations of proposed bridges and road culverts.
Excepted parcels or sections shall be marked "not included in this plat" and their boundary
completely indicated by bearings and distances.
The total tract boundary lines of the area being subdivided, with accurate distances to
hundredths of a foot and bearings to one second of arc. These boundaries shall be
determined by accurate survey in the field; provided, however, that the boundary(s) of
adjoining additional unplatted land of the subdivider (for example, between separately
submitted final plan sections) are not required to be based upon field survey, and may be
calculated.
Block and lot numbers.
Location and type of permanent monuments and markers which have been set in place.
Lot area, size of each lot in square feet or acres.
The deed book volume and page number, as entered by the County Recorder, reference to
the latest source of title to the land being subdivided.
The seal and signature of the professional engineer or registered surveyor responsible for
preparation of the plan.
Proposed landscaping including trees and other plantings and screening or buffer areas.
Zoning district and type of use.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 281/505
BB.
CC.
DD.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
3.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
4.
A contour grading plan of all site alteration and improvements including ground and basement
floor elevations of all buildings may be required if deemed necessary by the Borough
Engineer to properly establish grading and drainage patterns. Where buildings are proposed
to be developed by the subdivider, such a plan may be required to indicate building ground
floor and basement floor elevations.
Location and dimensions of parking areas and parking spaces.
Floor plans and elevations of all existing and proposed structures along with floor areas and
proposed uses.
The following items shall be on all final plans in the form of protective covenants:
Building setbacks.
Corner lot sight easements.
Utility, drainage and slope easements.
In the event the subdivision qualifies under Subsection C of the definition of "minor
subdivision" in this chapter, the following: "Lot number __________ shall be joined to and
become an inseparable part of lands of __________ as recorded in Deed Book Volume
__________, Page __________, and cannot be subdivided or conveyed separately or apart
therefrom without Borough approval."
Subdivision and land development final plans requiring access to a highway under the
jurisdiction of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation shall contain the following
notice: "The plan requires access to a highway under the jurisdiction of the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation and a highway occupancy permit is required pursuant to § 420
of Act of June 1, 1945 (P.L. 1242, No. 428), known as the "State Highway Law," before any
driveway access to a state highway is permitted." Final plans shall also be noted to indicate
that access to the state highway shall be provided only as authorized by a highway
occupancy permit.
The following information shall supplement the final plan:
Final profiles, cross-section and specifications for street improvements. Final designs of
bridges and road culverts.
Final plans of drainage, storm sewer, sanitary sewer and water distribution system.
Final grading and finish contours for proposed developments which grading shall be
consistent with § 22-502.
Approval by the appropriate agencies for the water supply, sewage, stormwater runoff, and
soil and erosion control plans.
Proof of the formation of any property owners association, similar organization or other legal
entity which is to assume responsibility for maintenance and care of the amenities and
facilities along with bylaws and/or articles of incorporation. Also, a narrative description of how
control of the owners association will pass to the lot purchasers.
A final version of all restrictions and covenants, if any, the developer intends to place in the
deeds to the lots in the subdivision. If no such restrictions or covenants are to be imposed, a
statement to that effect shall be included.
Evidence of actual arrangements and legal agreements with utility companies or authorities
for providing services to each lot in the subdivision or to the land development.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 282/505
H.
I.
J.
5.
A.
B.
1.
A.
B.
2.
In those cases where final plans propose water supply to be provided by means other than by
private wells owned and maintained by the individual owners of lots within the subdivision or
development, applicants shall provide evidence with the final plan that the subdivision is to be
supplied by a certified public utility, a bona fide cooperative association of lot owners, or by a
municipal corporation, authority or utility. A copy of a certificate of public convenience from the
Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission or an application for such certificate, a cooperative
agreement or a commitment or agreement to serve the area in question, whichever is
appropriate, shall be acceptable evidence.
In those cases where subdivision or land development roads or proposed lots abut or access
directly to state highways, the applicant shall secure from PennDOT a state highway access
permit as a requirement for final plan approval. A copy of the approved permit shall be
submitted to the Borough with the final plan.
An affidavit or notarized statement that the applicant is the owner or equitable owner of the
land proposed to be subdivided and that the subdivision or land development as shown on
the final plan is made with his or her free consent and that it is desired to record the same.
After all signatures have been affixed to the reproducible print of the final plan, the developer shall
supply one reproducible mylar copy and four black line or blue line prints to the Borough. The
developer or subdivider shall also provide one reproducible mylar copy and one print to the
Recorder of Deeds office.
§ 22-404. Submission of Land Development Plans.
[Ord. 714, 11/13/1991, § 404]
Minor Land Development Plans.
Land development plans proposing new construction or change of use residential
developments of five dwelling units or less or for other residential and nonresidential uses
involving 2,500 square feet of gross building floor space or less or any proposed changes of
use of plan not involving any buildings or structures shall meet all applicable requirements of
§ 22-403 for the submission of final plans, for all subdivisions.
These land development plans shall be identified in the plan title block as minor land
development plans.
Major Land Development Plans.
Land development plans submitted for residential developments of six dwelling units or more
and for public services, commercial and/or industrial uses involving in aggregate more than
2,500 square feet of gross building floor space shall meet all applicable requirements of
§§ 22-402 and 22-403 for preliminary and final plans for major subdivisions.
These land development plans shall be identified in the plan title block as major land
development plans.
Part 5. DESIGN STANDARDS
§ 22-501. Application.
[Ord. 714, 11/13/1991, § 501]
The design standards and requirements set forth in this Part shall be observed as minimums by the
subdivider or developer of each subdivision and land development within Stroudsburg Borough. Table
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 283/505
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
D.
E.
1.
2.
5-1, at the end of this Part, is a part of the design standards within this Part 5. The Borough may
require more restrictive standards where necessary to protect health, safety and welfare of the public
and where unique site or design conditions so dictate.
§ 22-502. Design Standards Applicable to All Types of
Development.
[Ord. 714, 11/13/1991, § 502; as amended by Ord. 716, 4/1/1992, § 1]
General Standards.
Land shall be suited to the purpose of which it is to be subdivided. Land subject to hazards
against life, health or property shall not be subdivided or developed unless adequate
safeguards are provided as approved by the Commission and the Borough Council.
Zoning Ordinance and Comprehensive Plan.
The subdivision or development shall fully comply with the provisions of the Stroudsburg
Borough Zoning Ordinance [Chapter 27] and conform to the Borough Comprehensive
Plan.
In addition to the Zoning Ordinance [Chapter 27] and Comprehensive Plan, information
for determining and evaluating potential hazards may include references to historical
records, soil evaluations, engineering studies, expert opinions, established standards
used by licensed insurance companies, and federal, state or local policies such as, but
not limited to, established floodplain lines.
All portions of a tract being subdivided shall be taken up in lots, streets, public land, or other
proposed uses, so that remnants and land-locked areas shall not be created. The layout of a
subdivision shall also be planned with consideration to exiting nearby developments or
neighborhoods, so that the development is coordinated in terms of traffic movement,
drainage, and other reasonable considerations.
Solar orientation and energy conservation should be encouraged. All developers are required
to use recognized solar design principles and features to the greatest extent possible. Such
solar principles include the following:
Layout of streets to provide a maximum number of sites with a southern orientation to
maximize solar heat gain.
Minimum use of north facing building exposures.
Protection of solar access.
Landscaping to complement use and to promote control in the summer.
Protection of trees.
Shading for summer solar exposures. Application of these principles will enhance
passive solar heat gain, enhance active solar heat and photo voltaic electric potentials,
as well as making the living environment brighter, airy and in tune with the environment.
Wherever possible, lot lines shall follow municipal and County boundary lines rather than
cross them, and reserve strips controlling access to lots, public rights-of-way, public land or
adjacent private lands are prohibited.
Land Requirements.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 284/505
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
C.
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
3.
Minimum lot or parcel area and dimensional requirements for residential and nonresidential
subdivisions and land developments shall be as set forth in the Stroudsburg Borough Zoning
Ordinance [Chapter 27].
In the case of irregularly shaped lots, the minimum lot width specified in the district shall be
measured at the minimum required front yard; provided, that in no case shall the lot frontage
measured at the street right-of-way line be less than 70% of the minimum lot width except in
the following situations: on culs-de-sac or courts or street center line curves of less than 150
feet radius where the lot frontage measured at the street right-of-way line shall not be less
than 40% of the minimum lot width.
Street or Road Rights-of-Way.
Areas within public or private street or road rights-of-way shall not be included in the
calculations of, or used to meet the minimum lot sizes for any proposed residential or
nonresidential use.
The minimum required lot area shall generally be designed an plotted as a contiguous
area of land not separated or interrupted by permanent drainage or utility rights-of-way or
street rights-of-way. Separation or interruption of this required minimum contiguous lot
area by drainage or utility rights-of-way or street rights-of-way shall be avoided wherever
possible and shall be permitted in all subdivisions and land developments only upon
grant of a modification by the Borough Council upon written request by the applicant.
Natural and Historic Feature Preservation. The Planning Commission and the Borough Council
shall, at their discretion, require that the design and development of all subdivisions and land
developments shall preserve insofar as possible, all natural, scenic, and historic features, which
will add attractiveness by providing parks, adequate open space for recreation, light and air by
proper distribution of population thereby creating conditions favorable to the health, safety, morals
and general welfare of the citizens and for the harmonious development of the Borough. Some of
these features are the natural terrain and natural drainage, large trees or groves, watercourses
and falls, historic areas and structures, exceptional scenic views and landmarks, and other
community assets. Land subject to hazardous conditions such as open quarries, unconsolidated
fill, floods, excessive erosion, precipices, and water supply which does not meet state and local
adequacy requirements or the U.S. Public Health Service standards, shall not be subdivided until
the hazards have been eliminated or overcome by the subdivision and proper construction.
Soil Protection.
If required by regulations of the Department of Environmental Resources, a developer
shall submit with the preliminary plan an erosion and sedimentation control plan prepared
by a person trained and experienced in erosion and sedimentation control methods and
techniques as provided for under Title 25, "Rules and Regulations," Chapter 102, issued
by the Department of Environmental Resources. Such plans shall be submitted by the
applicant to the Monroe County Soil Conservation District for review and
recommendation of the District directors. Three copies of the erosion and sedimentation
control plan with any required approval or permit by the appropriate agency shall be
submitted to the Borough Planning Commission with the preliminary plan.
In those cases where site grades, concentrations of surface water runoff, etc., exist, the
Borough Codes Officer and/or the Borough Engineer may recommend, and the Planning
Commission or Borough Council may require that site development plans and stormwater
drainage plans be prepared and certified by a registered engineer competent and well
versed in stormwater management methods.
Uninhabitable Land. Land subject to flooding or subsidence, hazardous excessive erosion,
precipices and land deemed by the Commission or the Borough Council to be uninhabitable
for other reasons shall not be plotted for residential occupancy, nor for such other uses as
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 285/505
C.
A.
B.
C.
4.
5.
A.
B.
6.
may increase danger to health, life or property, or aggravate the flood hazard; but, such land
within a plan shall be set aside for such uses as will not be endangered by periodic or
occasional inundation, or will not produce unsatisfactory living conditions; such land may be
incorporated as additional areas in plotted lots.
Water and Wetland Areas. Damming, filling, relocating or other interference with the flow of
surface water along any surface water drainage channel or natural watercourse or wetland
shall not be permitted except with the approval of the Borough and, where appropriate, the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources.
Water Supply and Sewage Disposal Requirements.
All subdivision and land developments shall be connected to and served by the municipal
water supply and sewage systems. Facilities proposed within the development to provide
connection to these systems shall be acceptable to the Municipal Authority, Borough Council
and Pennsylvania Department of Environment Resources.
Plans and specifications for central water and/or sewage systems shall be prepared by a
registered professional engineer well versed in the design of such systems and duly licensed
to practice within the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. A minimum of four complete sets of
preliminary plans for such systems shall be submitted to the Planning Commission with the
application for review of preliminary plans. A minimum of four complete sets of approved
plans and specifications shall be submitted to the Planning Commission with the application
for review of the final plan.
Four copies of a completed planning module for land development shall be submitted
concurrent with the preliminary plan. The Borough Council will submit copies of the module
and necessary documentation to the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources
(DER) for review. DER approval of the module and any required Borough Official Sewage
Facilities Plan revision or supplement will be required prior to final plan approval.
On-Lot Sewer System. Where connection to a centralized sewer system is not required, on-lot
sewer systems shall be constructed in accordance with criteria set forth by the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Resources. The Borough Engineer's site and soils investigation and
favorable report is required prior to unconditional preliminary plan approval. An adequate number
of test pits and soil percolation tests, as determined by the Borough Engineer, shall be undertaken
to determine the general suitability of soils throughout the subdivision or development for on-lot
subsurface sewage disposal.
Stormwater Drainage. The applicant shall furnish three copies of a stormwater drainage plan and
associated calculations to the Commission for review and analysis. Said plan shall conform with
the requirements of the Pennsylvania Stormwater Management Act (P.L. 864), as amended.
Proposed stormwater drainage plans for development throughout the Borough of Stroudsburg
shall conform to the standards and requirements for the watershed which the developed is located
in. The application shall conform with the requirements of the McMichaels Creek Watershed
Stormwater Management Plan or the Brodheads Creek Watershed Stormwater Management Plan
until such time as management plans are adopted for other watersheds within the Borough by
Borough Council. Following are additional stormwater drainage planning requirements:
Lots shall be laid out and graded to prevent cross lot drainage and to provide possible
drainage away from proposed building areas. Natural drainage courses shall be maintained.
If it can reasonably be anticipated that there will be an increase in the flow of water onto the
property of some other person as a result of development action, a drainage release shall be
submitted with the application. The drainage releases will be obtained, by and at the expense
of the applicant, from all property owners over the land additional drainage will flow. All
drainage releases shall be notarized and recorded, by and at the expense of the applicant, in
the County Office of the Recorder of Deeds.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 286/505
C.
D.
E.
(1)
(2)
(3)
F.
G.
H.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
7.
No stormwater runoff or natural drainage water shall be so diverted as to overload existing
drainage systems, or create flooding or the need for additional drainage structure on other
private properties or public lands, with complete approval of provisions being made by the
developer properly handling such conditions, including water runoff impoundments, if
necessary.
Storm drainage facilities should be designed not only to handle the anticipated peak
discharge from the property being subdivided, but also the anticipated increase in runoff that
will occur when all the property at a higher elevation in the same watershed is fully developed.
Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse there shall be provided a drainage
easement conforming substantially to the line of such watercourse of such width as will be
adequate to preserve the unimpeded flow of natural drainage.
Storm sewers, culverts and related installations shall be provided:
To permit unimpeded flow of natural watercourses.
To insure adequate drainage of all low points along the line of streets.
To intercept stormwater run-off along streets at intervals reasonably related to the extent
and grade of the area drained.
Storm drainage systems shall be designed separately from any sanitary sewer systems and
such storm systems shall be installed in accordance with sound and established engineering
practices as determined by the Borough Council. Such storm systems shall be designed to
accommodate any storm discharges from the property being subdivided and shall consider
run-off which may occur from higher elevations within the same watershed when it is fully
developed. Such storm systems shall not overload existing storm drainage systems or create
flooding hazards.
Facilities such as bridges, culverts, dams and other drainage facilities affecting the flow of
water in a a watershed shall meet the requirements and be approved by any state and/or
federal agency having jurisdiction over such facilities.
Easements.
Easements with a minimum width of 10 feet plus the width of any physical improvement, or
with the minimum width of any natural swale shall be provided as necessary for utilities and
drainage facilities.
Above ground utilities shall be placed along the rear or side lot lines unless they are existing
along the street prior to the submission of the preliminary plan to the Borough Manager for
Borough Council consideration.
Easements for installation of underground conduits for electric power, telephone and
television cable lines shall be provided so that each lot or leased unit can be practically
served.
To the fullest extent possible, easements shall be centered on or adjacent to rear or side lot
lines.
Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, there shall be provided a drainage
easement or right-of-way conforming substantially with the line of such watercourse and of
such width as well be adequate to preserve natural drainage.
When utility easements are established, the Council may give consideration to the
requirements and objectives of the appropriate utility company.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 287/505
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(3)
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
C.
8. Streets.
Classification of Ownership of Streets. All streets shall be classified as "major," "collector,"
"local," "nonresidential," or "marginal access" streets as defined herein.
All streets shall be "public streets" suitable for dedication to the Borough except for the
following which may be designed as "private streets":
Industrial park, office park or shopping center nonresidential streets, specifically
permitted as "private streets" by Borough Council.
Other streets specifically designed and permitted as "private streets" by the Borough
Council based on individual consideration in each case of the special factors
involved.
In all cases where "private streets" are permitted, responsibility for improvement and
continuing maintenance shall be the responsibility of the subdivider and the owner of
each abutting parcel and the Borough does not imply any acceptance of responsibility for
improvement or maintenance of "private streets."
In all cases where private streets are permitted, a note shall be added to the plan
indicating the following:
Who owns the streets.
Who is responsible for construction and for continued maintenance.
That the Borough has no responsibility for ownership, construction or continued
maintenance of said streets.
Design Standards for Streets. Street dimensions and design standards for all streets shall be
in accordance with Table 1.
Street System Layout.
Proposed streets shall be properly related to such street plans or parts thereof as have
been officially prepared and adopted by the Borough and they shall further conform to
such state, road and highway plans as have been prepared, adopted and/or filed as
prescribed by law.
The proposed street layout shall provide for the continuation or projection of existing
streets in the surrounding area unless the Borough Council deems such extension
undesirable for specific reasons of topography or design.
Streets shall be logically related to the topography to produce usable lots and reasonable
grades.
Minor streets shall be laid out to discourage through traffic, but provision for street
connections into and from adjacent areas will generally be required.
Proposed streets shall be extended to provide access to adjoining property where
necessary.
Adequate street rights-of-way shall be provided as necessary where lots in the proposal
are large enough to permit resubdivision, or if a portion of the tract is not subdivided.
New half or partial streets or new alleys will not be permitted, except where essential to
reasonable subdivision of a tract in conformance with other requirements, and standards
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 288/505
(8)
(9)
(10)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
D.
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
E.
contained herein and where, in addition, satisfactory assurance for dedication of the
remaining part of the street or alley can be secured.
Wherever a tract to be subdivided borders an existing half or partial street, the other part
of the street shall be plotted within such tract.
Dead-end streets shall be permitted only when they are designed as stubs for temporary
use to permit future street extension into adjoining tracts, or when they are designed as
culs-de-sac to serve residential areas.
New reserve strips, including those controlling access to streets, shall be prohibited.
Street Intersections.
Streets shall be laid out to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles. No street shall
intersect another at an angle of less than 50°.
Multiple intersections involving junction of more than two streets shall be avoided. Where
this proves impossible, such intersections shall be designed with extreme care for both
pedestrian and vehicular safety.
Clear sight triangles shall be provided at all street intersections within which no
obstruction to vision shall be permitted between a height of two to 10 feet above the
center line grade of each street. Such clear sight triangles shall be established from the
point of intersection of the center lines of the intersecting streets for a distance of 75 feet
where both streets are local streets, 100 feet where one or both streets are collector, and
150 feet where one or both streets are major streets.
To the fullest extent possible, intersections with major traffic streets shall be located not
less than 800 feet apart, measured from center line to center line.
Two streets intersecting a third street from opposite sides shall be laid out directly
opposite one another or with a minimum center line off-set of 125 feet when all streets
are local streets, or with a minimum center line off-set of 300 feet when one or more of
the streets is a collector street or a major traffic street.
Minimum curb radii at street intersections shall be 15 feet for intersections involving only
local streets, 35 feet for intersections involving collector streets and 50 feet for
intersections involving major traffic streets.
Where the grade of any street at the approach to an intersection exceeds 7%, a leveling
area shall be provided having not greater than 5% grades for a distance of 35 feet
measured from the nearest right-of-way lines of the intersecting street.
Uses Fronting on Major Streets.
Service Streets. Where a subdivision fronts or abuts a major street as defined in Part 8,
the Borough Council may require any of the following measures:
A service street approximately parallel to the major street at a distance suitable for
the appropriate use of the intervening land.
Marginal access street, rear service alleys, reverse frontage lots or such other
treatment as will provide protection for abutting properties, reduction in the number
of intersections with the major street and separation of local and through-traffic.
Controlled Access. Driveway and parking lot entrances and exits to nonresidential
subdivisions from a major street shall be designed so as not to interfere with through
traffic. In general, such entrance and exit points shall not be located closer to one
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 289/505
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
9.
1.
A.
B.
2.
A.
B.
C.
D.
3.
another than 200 feet except when such entrance or exit points are one-way in or out, in
which case they may be located no closer than 100 feet to one another. Such entrances
or exists shall not exceed 24 feet in width at any such point.
Other Utilities.
A plan for providing all necessary utility services to the proposed subdivision and land
development shall be prepared by the developer in cooperation with the appropriate public
utility companies and governmental agencies.
Fire hydrants shall be required throughout the Borough. Spacing of hydrants shall be such
that no residential structures shall be farther than 500 feet and no nonresidential structure
shall be farther than 400 feet from a hydrant and shall be reviewed by the Fire Chief of the
Borough. Additional standards published by the Insurance Services Office of Pennsylvania
may also be applied by the Borough Council.
In accordance with a Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission order of July 8, 1970, all electric
utility distribution lines shall be installed underground in subdivisions or land developments of
five or more dwelling units. Wherever practicable, telephone and cable TV utilities shall also
be installed underground.
Wherever practicable, in accordance with good engineering practice, utility easements and
trenches shall be occupied jointly by compatible utilities.
All public and/or private utilities and facilities, including gas and electric, shall be elevated or
floodproofed up to the regulatory flood elevation.
§ 22-503. Residential Design Standards.
[Ord. 714, 11/13/1991, § 503]
Application. All subdivision and land developments proposed for residential use shall conform with
the provisions of this section.
Blocks.
Residential blocks shall not normally be less than 400 feet in length nor exceed 800 feet in
length.
Blocks normally shall be of sufficient width to permit two tiers of lots except where access is
limited by virtue of adjoining arterial or connector streets or by virtue of topographic
limitations.
Lots. The minimum lot sizes, lot widths and yard requirements shall be as set forth in the
Stroudsburg Borough Zoning Ordinance [Chapter 27] and further shall conform to the following:
All lots shall front on a public street or on a private street approved under provisions of this
chapter and constructed in accordance with the standards of this chapter.
Side lines of lots shall be at right angles to straight streets and on radial lines to curved
streets. At the discretion of the Commission some variation from this rule will be permitted but
pointed or very irregular lots shall be avoided.
Double frontage lots shall ordinarily not be platted.
If remnants of land other than rights-of-way or buffer strips exist after subdividing, they shall
be incorporated in existing or proposed lots unless proposed and suitable for common open
space or recreation uses.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 290/505
E.
F.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
1.
A.
2.
The building site on each residential lot shall be accessible from the existing or proposed
street by means of a driveway or private access drive having a maximum grade of 15%.
Pedestrian interior crosswalks may be required where necessary to assist circulation or
provide access to community facilities. Such crosswalks shall have a right-of-way width of not
less than 10 feet and a paved walk of not less than four feet.
Cul-de-Sac Streets.
Cul-de-sac streets, permanently designed as such, within residential developments shall not
exceed 800 feet in length. The length of a cul-de-sac street shall be measured from the point
of center line intersection with an approved through road that has an alternate access to an
existing public road to the center line point of radius of the cul-de-sac turnaround curve.
Cul-de-sac streets shall terminate in a circular right-of-way with a minimum diameter of 120
feet, and 100 feet diameter to the outer pavement edge or curb line.
The circular right-of-way of the cul-de-sac shall be connected to the approach right-of-way by
an easement arc having a radius of not less than 30 feet.
The circular paving of the cul-de-sac shall be connected to the approach paving any an
easement arc having a radius of not less than 40 feet.
The Borough recognizes that geometric configurations other than that set forth in the
subsections above may function satisfactorily and, upon recommendation of the Planning
Commission, will consider a request for a modification of the requirements under appropriate
circumstances.
Off-Street Parking. Every type of residential land development or subdivision shall provide for offstreet
parking space as required in the Stroudsburg Borough Zoning Ordinance [Chapter 27].
Driveways. Driveways and location of their access points to public streets and shall be subject to
review and permit by the Borough and, where applicable by the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation through issuance of a highway occupancy permit.
Private Access Drives. Private access drives may be utilized to provide access to residential lots
in a minor subdivision which does not abut or have frontage on a public or approved private road.
A private access drive may serve a maximum of two dwelling units. Private access drives shall
have a minimum right-of-way width of 20 feet. A private access drive shall not exceed 500 feet in
length or 15% in grade. Use of private access drives shall be avoided whenever possible in major
subdivisions and only permitted upon grant of a waiver by the Borough upon written request by the
applicant.
Setbacks or Yards. Minimum yards as set forth in the Borough Zoning Ordinance [Chapter 27]
shall be provided for all single-family and two-family residential lots.
§ 22-504. Commercial and Industrial Development Standards.
[Ord. 714, 11/13/1991, § 504]
Application. All commercial and industrial subdivisions and developments shall conform with the
Schedule of Required Improvements, Table 6-1, and the requirements of the Borough Zoning
Ordinance [Chapter 27].
Size. Approval of lot or parcel size will be determined by the following factors:
Requirements of the Stroudsburg Borough Zoning Ordinance [Chapter 27].
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 291/505
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
3.
4.
5.
6.
The total lot area shall be sufficient to provide adequate space for required yards, proposed
buildings, off-street parking and loading, landscaping, sewer and water systems, and other
facilities; but in no case less than required by the Zoning Ordinance [Chapter 27].
Whenever possible, commercial parcels should include enough land to, provide for a group of
commercial establishments, planned developed, and operated as a unit. Narrow, highway
ribbon developments should be avoided.
Street System.
Traffic movements in and out of commercial and industrial areas should not interfere with
external traffic, nor should it create hazards for adjacent residential areas. The plan shall
indicate ingress and egress points to existing public roads in conformance with Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation regulations and standards.
The design of streets, service drives and pedestrian ways should provide for safe and hazard
free internal circulation.
Streets and service drives shall be designed in accordance with Table 5-1 and § 22-502,
Subsection 8, of this chapter.
Block Layout. Block layout shall conform with due consideration of site conditions, best possible
sewer and water system service, traffic parking circulation, and pick-up and delivery services. In
no case shall block length be less than 800 feet.
Off-Street Parking. Adequate off-street parking shall be provided in conformance with the
Stroudsburg Borough Zoning Ordinance. [Chapter 27].
Setbacks. Minimum yards or setbacks for all commercial and industrial development shall be as
set forth in the Borough Zoning Ordinance [Chapter 27]. Additional yard widths and buffer strips
and screening may be required by the Commission and Borough Council in cases where deemed
appropriate and necessary to protect adjacent development.
Part 6. REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS AND
CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
§ 22-601. Application.
[Ord. 714, 11/13/1991, § 601]
The minimum improvements required for all subdivisions and land developments which shall be
provided and installed by the subdivider as a condition for final approval of any plan shall be as set
forth in this Part. Alternate improvement standards may be permitted if the Borough Council deems
them equal or superior in performance characteristics to any specified improvements. All
improvements are subject to the review, approval, advice and inspection of the Borough Council.
Additional or higher type improvements may be required in specific cases where the Borough Council
finds them to be necessary to create conditions essential to the public health, safety and general
welfare of the citizens of the Borough.
§ 22-602. Summary of Required Improvements.
[Ord. 714, 11/13/1991, § 602]
Minimum improvements to be required of the subdivider, where applicable, shall include the following:
Table 6-1
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 292/505
1.
A.
B.
C.
2.
Type of Improvement Required
Medium Density Residential
and Nonresidential Areas (a)*
Low Density Residential
(b)
Table 6-1
Type of Improvement Required
Medium Density Residential
and Nonresidential Areas (a)*
Low Density Residential
(b)
Improved street X X
Curbs X —
Gutters (d) (d)
Adequate drainage and/or storm sewers X X
Sidewalks X (c)
Monuments and markers X X
Street name signs X X
Street lighting X X
Fire hydrants X X
Electric and telephone X X
Central water and sewer X X
NOTES:
(a) Medium density includes development having a net project density of more than three units per
acre.
(b) Low density includes development having a net project density of up to three units per acre.
(c) Sidewalks will not normally be required except where needed to facilitate traffic to school,
shopping, park or other uses which generate pedestrian traffic, or to facilitate pedestrian safety,
or in developments having a net project density of three or more units per acre.
(d) Sod, bituminous paving, stone or concrete gutter shall be provided in accordance with sound
design and maintenance standards, where required to adequately control stormwater.
X indicates that the improvement is required.
§ 22-603. Street and Shoulder Construction Standards.
[Ord. 714, 11/13/1991, § 603]
Streets (and alleys where provided) shall be graded, surfaced and improved to the grades and
dimensions shown on the plans, profiles and cross-sections submitted by the subdivider and
approved by the Borough Council.
Surfaces.
Entire cartway width shall be graded to the approved cross section, plus any additional
portion of the right-of-way as required by Borough Council to facilitate adequate drainage,
vehicular and pedestrian circulation. All trees, stumps and other material deemed unsuitable
by the Borough Council shall be removed to a depth of two feet below subgrade and the
excavation shall be backfilled and suitably compacted.
The finished road surface, both tangent and curve, shall be crowned at 1/4 inch per foot away
from the center line. A proper superelevation shall be required on major traffic streets and
collector streets when the curb radii are less than 1,200 feet on major streets and less than
600 feet on collector streets.
Prior to placing the street surface, the subgrade shall be graded parallel to the finished crown
to permit the proper drainage of the subbase. The subbase shall be properly outletted.
Adequate subsurface drainage for the streets and all subsurface utilities as acceptable to the
Borough Council shall be provided or installed by the subdivider.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 293/505
D.
A.
B.
C.
3.
A.
B.
C.
4.
5.
6.
A.
B.
C.
1.
Minimum slopes of banks measured perpendicular to the center line of the street shall be
three to one for fills, and two to one for cuts.
Material.
A portion of cartway required to be paved shall be provided by the subdivider with a suitable
base and subbase material placed on a well compacted and prepared subgrade. A surface
course will be provided on all streets. The base, subbase and surface course shall conform
with PennDOT requirements contained in their publication entitled "Guidelines for Design of
Local Roads and Streets, Publication 70" or shall have an equivalent paving strength.
Subbase material shall be native gravel, or an equivalent strength of crushed stone, as per
the specifications of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation and approved by the
Borough Council.
If the subgrade material has adequate bearing capacity and is well drained, the subbase may
be omitted, if approved by the Borough Council.
The portion of the cartway designated as a shoulder shall be improved as follows:
In medium density areas, shoulders may not be used.
In very low density and low density residential and in nonresidential areas, all shoulders shall
be constructed of native crushed stone or gravel or other equivalent material at least six
inches thick, except that Borough Council may require shoulder areas to be fully paved if
warranted by street requirements, traffic, or other functional requirement.
Slopes of shoulders shall be one inch per foot in fill areas and 1 1/2 inch per foot in cut areas.
In all respects in which standards for required improvements are not set forth herein or specified
by the Borough Council, the applicable standard requirements of the Pennsylvania State
Department of Transportation shall govern, performed in the manner prescribed in the standard
specifications for road construction of said Department for the type of construction under
consideration.
Driveway entrances or aprons within the street right-of-way shall be improved to their full width.
§ 22-604. Curbs and Gutters.
[Ord. 714, 11/13/1991, § 604]
Curbs where required shall be vertical cement, vertical stone or rolled curb and gutter as follows:
Plain cement concrete curb, six inches at the top, eight inches at the bottom and 18 inches in
height from top to bottom with the slope to the street side.
Rolled cement concrete curb and/or valley type cement concrete gutter, 24 inches wide by 12
inches from top to bottom.
Gutters, where required, shall be of sod, bituminous paving stone or concrete in accordance
with sound design and maintenance criteria. All curbs and gutters shall be in conformance
with good engineering practice and subject to the approval of the Borough Council.
§ 22-605. Sidewalks and Crosswalks.
[Ord. 714, 11/13/1991, § 605]
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 294/505
1.
2.
3.
1.
2.
A.
B.
C.
1.
1.
Sidewalks where required shall be located within the street right-of-way and shall not be closer
than one foot from the right-of-way line, nor closer than three feet from the curb or shoulder line.
Sidewalks and crosswalks shall be a minimum of 42 inches wide and shall be constructed of
concrete four inches thick in residential areas and six inches thick in commercial and industrial
areas, places on a suitable subbase. Sidewalks at driveway crossing shall be at least eight inches
thick.
All sidewalks shall be designed in accordance established engineering practice and subject to the
approval of the Borough Council.
§ 22-606. Street Lights.
[Ord. 714, 11/13/1991, § 606]
Street lights, where required, shall be installed with underground lines wherever possible and the
subdivider shall provide or make arrangements for a complete energy efficient street lighting
system within the subdivision.
Such systems shall provide a safe level of illumination and shall be reviewed by the appropriate
utility company.
§ 22-607. Sewer and Water Facilities.
[Ord. 714, 11/13/1991, § 607]
Sewer and water facilities shall meet the requirements of § 22-502, Subsection 4, and shall also
conform with the following:
Public water lines and sanitary sewer lines shall be required in all cases.
Sanitary sewers shall have a minimum inside diameter of eight inches and a minimum grade
of 0.4% unless pressure sewers are used. Manhole spacing shall meet the regulations of the
appropriate agency. The manhole frames, covers and steps shall be designed in accordance
with accepted specifications approved by the Borough Council.
Where a subdivision is provided with a complete water main supply system, fire hydrants shall
also be installed in accordance with the requirements of the Insurance Services Office of
Pennsylvania, subject to approval by the Borough Council.
§ 22-608. Storm Drainage and Other Utility Facilities.
[Ord. 714, 11/13/1991, § 608]
Storm drainage and other utility facilities shall be provided as required in Part 5 of this chapter and in
accordance with sound engineering practice and subject to the approval of the Borough Council.
§ 22-609. Monuments and Markers.
[Ord. 714, 11/13/1991, § 609]
Monuments shall be of concrete or stone with a minimum size of four inches by four inches by 36
inches and shall be marked on top with 1/2 inch round brass pin, or a drilled hole. Markers shall
consist of iron pipes or iron or steel bars at least 24 inches long, and not less than 3/4 inch in
diameter.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 295/505
2.
3.
A.
B.
C.
D.
4.
5.
1.
Monuments and markers shall be placed so that the scored or marked point shall coincide exactly
with the intersection of lines to be marked, and shall be set so that the top of the monument or
marker is level with the surface of the surrounding ground and the elevation permanently recorded
on at least one monument using the U.S.C. & G.S. datum.
Monuments shall be set in readily accessible locations at all corner and angle points of the
boundary of the original tract being subdivided and at a minimum of two points of intersection of
the right-of-way lines and at all street intersections so as to permanently locate or provide
reference for all property lines.
Markers shall be set:
At the beginning and end of all curves along street property lines.
At all points where lot lines intersect curves, either front or rear.
At all angles in property lines of lots.
At all other lot corners.
Any monuments or markers that are removed shall be replaced by a registered land surveyor at
the expense of the person removing them.
§ 22-610. Bridges and Stream Crossings.
[Ord. 714, 11/13/1991, § 610]
Bridges and other stream crossing structures which are part of the proposed street system shall be
designed and constructed in according with current PennDOT standards and specifications. Evidence
of compliance with and approval of the Division of Dams and Encroachments, Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Resources, shall be provided, if applicable.
§ 22-611. Street Name Signs.
[Ord. 714, 11/13/1991, § 611]
The developer shall provide the subdivision or land development with adequate street signs at the
intersections of all streets. Sign style and characteristics, i.e., color and lettering, shall be acceptable to
the Borough Council.
§ 22-612. Traffic Signals and Signs.
[Ord. 714, 11/13/1991, § 612]
Traffic signals and signs may be required where traffic studies determine them necessary to provide
safe traffic circulation. Such traffic signals and signs shall meet the design standards as established by
the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation in PennDOT Bulletin #42 or latest edition.
§ 22-613. Landscaping.
[Ord. 714, 11/13/1991, § 613; as amended by Ord. 824, 9/10/2002]
In an attempt to preserve and enhance the environment of Stroudsburg Borough, all new
construction should be carried out in a manner that would preserve the desirable natural growth of
the construction site. Where a residential subdivision or residential land development will be
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 296/505
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(a)
(10)
A.
cleared and made substantially void of trees, the subdivider shall be required to plant shade trees
adjacent to all street rights-of-way.
Commercial subdivision or commercial land development shall provide landscaping in
accordance with the applicable standards below:
Compliance. The plan shall comply with the provision of this section, including the
number, type, location and size of trees.
Plant Species. The plan shall include plant species that are suitable for local soil and
Climate conditions, are reasonably resistant to disease, insects and road salt and are in a
healthy condition when planted.
Sight Distance Requirements. The plan shall comply with the sight distance requirements
of this chapter, including intersections of public streets and access drives of commercial,
industrial and multifamily developments. The Borough may permit some landscape
material to be placed in the clear sight triangle when it determines that the type of
material and its location will not create a hazard to motorists or conflict with utility
locations.
Ground Cover. The plan shall show natural year-round ground cover on at least 15% of
the lot. This natural ground cover shall be capable of preventing soil erosion and the
emanation of dust during dry weather.
Topsoil Protection. Topsoil shall not be permanently removed from a lot except from
areas that will covered with buildings or paving. This shall not prohibit the temporary
movement and storage of topsoil during construction.
Healthy Trees Over six Inches. Existing healthy trees over six inches in trunk diameter
shall be preserved insofar as possible, as determined by the Planning Commission and
Borough Council. Existing healthy trees shall be protected during construction by a
protection barrier located at least 12 feet from the tree in all directions.
Tree Removal. All desirable trees six inches or more in diameter shall not be removed as
part of or in preparation for a subdivision or land development unless they are located
within 10 feet of a proposed cartway or within a utility corridor, stormwater detention
basin, parking area, loading or unloading area, sidewalk portion of the right-of-way,
driveway, on-site sewage system or within 20 feet of the foundation area of a new
structure, or unless these trees are diseased or are (as determined by the Planning
Commission and Borough Council) excessive in number and thinning will promote and
enhance the healthy development of the remaining trees.
Tree Measurements. Unless otherwise noted, all measurements of tree diameter shall be
taken 4 1/2 feet above natural grade level.
Number of Trees Required for Each Building Site. Each building site shall include a
minimum of 12 deciduous or evergreen trees for each one acre. Each deciduous tree
shall be 3 1/2 inch caliper or greater, and each evergreen tree shall be six to seven feet
in height or greater. As an alternate, 10 trees for each one acre shall be required if
deciduous trees are four inches in caliper or greater and evergreen trees are eight to 10
feet in height or greater. Five shrubs 2 1/2 feet in height or greater may be substituted for
one tree 2 1/2 inch caliper for a maximum of 20% of the tree requirement.
Paved Area Landscaping Size and Type of Trees.
A minimum of one tree shall be required for every 3,000 square feet of paved area
within a lot.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 297/505
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
(k)
(l)
(a)
(11)
Shade trees shall be a minimum of 3 1/2 inch caliper and of a species approved by
the Borough.
Ornamental tress shall be a minimum of 3 1/2 inch caliper and of a species approved
by the Borough.
Evergreen trees shall be a minimum of six feet in height and of a species approved
by the Borough.
Shrubs shall be a minimum of 24 inches in height and of a species approved by the
Borough.
Trees required by this section shall be planted around the perimeter of the paved
area, along internal driveways and access drives and/or within the paved area. All
trees within the paved areas shall be shade trees as enumerated in the Borough
Shade Tree Ordinance.
Any lot with more the 20,000 square feet of paved area shall include shade trees
within islands within the paved area; these islands shall include an area equal to at
least 5% of the paved area. Such islands and curbing shall be used to carefully
channel vehicular traffic through the paved areas.
A maximum of 15 consecutive and continuous parking spaces in a row shall be
permitted without being separated by a shade tree.
All landscaping materials required by this section shall be installed in accordance
with the approved landscape plan.
Newly planted tress that die, become diseased or pest-ridden shall be replaced by
the developer until the developer sells an individual lot to a private property owner.
The owner will then be responsible for the tree.
Trees within the street right-of-way are under the control of the Borough of
Stroudsburg, and all other required plantings shall not be removed without a permit
from the Zoning Officer, except for trees removed by the Borough or the state and for
trees approved to be removed under this chapter.
No prohibited vegetation shall be planted. The Zoning Officer shall maintain a list of
prohibited vegetation.
Credit for Existing Trees.
If healthy, existing trees are to be preserved that will generally meet the
requirements of this section, the Borough may, in its discretion, permit the existing
tree(s) to serve as a credit toward the number of shade trees required to be planted.
In addition, the Borough, in its discretion, may permit existing trees that would
otherwise be required to be maintained by this chapter to be removed in exchange
for the developer planting replacement trees in accordance with this section. The
following standards shall be used to determine the extent of credit:
Diameter of Tree Trunk of an Approved
Preserved Tree
(measured at 4 1/2 feet above the natural grade) Number of Credited Trees
Greater than 30 inches 6
15 to 29 inches 4
7 to 14 inches 2
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 298/505
(b)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(12)
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(2)
(3)
B.
Diameter of Tree Trunk of an Approved
Preserved Tree
(measured at 4 1/2 feet above the natural grade) Number of Credited Trees
2 to 6 inches 1
To be eligible for use as credit toward a required tree, a preserved tree shall be
maintained in such a manner that a minimum of 50% of the ground area under and
within the outer perimeter of the tree shall be maintained in natural ground cover and
at the existing natural ground level.
Buffer Strips.
See the requirements for buffer strips and evergreen screening in § 27-617 of the
Borough Zoning Ordinance [Chapter 27]. The required landscaping in this
subsection shall be in addition to the landscaping required within buffer yards.
Buffer strips shall be eight feet in width and shall be required to screen truck parking,
loading areas, outdoor storage, refuse containers or similar activities from view from
any surrounding street or abutting residential district.
Buffer strips shall include a dense screen planting of trees, shrubs or other plant
material to serve as a barrier to visibility and shall consist of evergreen plant
material.
Plant materials selected for buffer strips shall achieve a size greater than the height
of the activity to be screened.
Street Trees and Residential Subdivisions.
Street Trees. It is required that street trees are planted under this section within all land
developments and major subdivisions.
Size, Types, Planting and Maintenance. All required street trees shall meet the
requirements for trees as enumerated in the Borough Shade Tree Ordinance.
Within and abutting all land developments, along any public street or street intended
to become public, or along any private street or access drive, one deciduous street
tree shall be required for every 30 or 40 feet of total distance along each side of all
such streets.
The trees required within this section shall be generally, but not necessarily exactly,
evenly spaced apart. If trees are to be planted on both sides of a street,
consideration should be given to creating a pattern or interesting design by
examining the relationship of the trees on both sides of the street to each other, as
well as the trees on the adjacent property.
The distance that trees shall be planted from the curb, cartway or shoulder shall be
determined by the Borough in consideration of the particular development and types
of trees being planted. The Borough may require a specific location to match street
tree layout of adjoining properties or to ensure adequate sight distance or provide
adequate width for future street widening.
Residential Subdivisions. The Borough shall apply this section to residential
developments or subdivisions 1/2 acre or larger in size.
§ 22-614. Ground Cover Requirements.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 299/505
1.
2.
A.
B.
1.
2.
3.
[Ord. 714, 11/13/1991, § 614]
Exposed ground surface in all parts of the subdivision shall be paved or covered with stone screening,
or other solid material, or protected with a vegetative growth that is capable of preventing soil erosion
and the emanation of dust during dry weather. The vegetative cover shall not be poisonous in nature.
§ 22-615. Parking.
[Ord. 714, 11/13/1991, § 615]
Minimum dimensions of required parking spaces shall be 10 feet wide and 20 feet in depth. When
more than 10 parking spaces are provided on any one lot, 1/3 of the spaces may be a minimum of
nine feet wide and 18 feet deep. Aisle widths providing access to parking spaces shall be
adequate to provide for safe and convenient turns into and from parking spaces based upon
standard engineering practices. Minimum aisle widths shall be 12 feet for 0° angle (parallel)
parking, 11 feet for 30° angle parking, 13 feet for 45° angle parking, 18 feet for 60° angle parking
and 24 feet for 90° angle parking.
Handicapped parking spaces shall be provided as required by state and federal regulations.
§ 22-616. Flood-Prone Area Requirements.
[Ord. 714, 11/13/1991, § 616]
Floodplain Ordinance.
All subdivisions and land developments located in a designated flood-prone area shall
conform with the requirements and definitions of the Borough of Stroudsburg Ordinance No.
567 entitled "Floodplain Ordinance."
All such proposed development shall be designed in accordance with the floodplain
management principles and requirements of said ordinance.
As a basis for determining conformance with these requirements, the Borough Council may utilize
information provided by recognized applicable authorities or studies.
If the Borough Council determines that only a part of a proposed plan can be safely developed, it
shall limit development to that part and shall require that development proceed consistent with this
determination.
Part 7. MOBILE HOME PARK STANDARDS AND
REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
§ 22-701. Application.
[Ord. 714, 11/13/1991, § 701]
Applications for proposed development of mobile home parks shall meet all requirements and
standards for a single-family residence residential subdivision as set forth in this chapter.
§ 22-702. General Standards and Requirements.
[Ord. 714, 11/13/1991, § 702]
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 300/505
1.
2.
3.
4.
1.
2.
1.
2.
A.
B.
3.
A.
B.
4.
5.
6.
All mobile home parks shall have a total contiguous land area of not less than 10 acres.
The site of any proposed mobile home park shall not be located within or upon a one-hundredyear
frequency floodplain as defined by the Federal Flood Insurance Program.
The site of any proposed mobile home park shall not be subject to any hazard or nuisance, such
as excessive noise, vibration, smoke, toxic matter, radiation, heat, odor or glare.
Mobile home parks shall not be located on soil areas having a seasonal high water table or limiting
zone within 20 inches of the ground surface; the average natural slope of the area of the site
intended for development shall not exceed 15%.
§ 22-703. Submission of Application and Compliance.
[Ord. 714, 11/13/1991, § 703]
All provisions of Part 3 of this chapter shall apply with respect to submission, application and
approval. Fees shall be charged in accordance with the approved fee schedule.
The plans of the proposed mobile home park shall conform in content to the requirements for
preliminary plans and final plans as set forth in this chapter.
§ 22-704. Design and Improvement Installation Standards.
[Ord. 714, 11/13/1991, § 704]
General. All plans for proposed new mobile home parks or expansion of existing mobile home
parks shall meet the design standards applicable to all types of development contained in § 22-
502 of this chapter.
Lot Size. Each mobile home space shall meet the minimum lot area of a single-family detached
residential structure of the respective zoning district as set forth in the Stroudsburg Borough
Zoning Ordinance [Chapter 27].
Site Drainage Requirements.
The ground surface in all parts of every park shall be graded and equipped to drain all surface
water in a safe, efficient manner as required in this chapter.
Surface water collectors and other bodies of standing water capable of breeding mosquitoes
and other insects shall be eliminated or controlled in a manner approved by the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Resources and the Borough.
Soil and Ground Cover Requirements.
Exposed ground surfaces in all parts of every mobile home park shall be paved, or covered
with stone screenings, or other solid material, or protected with a vegetative growth that is
capable of preventing soil erosion and the emanation of dust during dry weather.
Park grounds shall be maintained free of vegetation growth which is poisonous or which may
harbor rodents, insects, or other pests harmful to man.
Park Areas for Nonresidential Uses. No part of any park shall be used for nonresidential purposes,
except that such uses that are required for the direct servicing well-being of park residents and for
the management and maintenance of the park.
Required Setbacks, Buffer Strips and Screening.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 301/505
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
C.
7.
8.
9.
10.
A.
11.
All mobile homes shall be located at least 75 feet from any park property boundary line
butting upon a public street or highway and at least 50 feet from other park property boundary
lines.
There shall be a minimum distance of 30 feet between individual mobile homes, and adjoining
right-of-way of a park street, or common parking area or other common areas and structures.
All mobile home parks shall be required to provide screening such as fences or plant
materials along the property boundary line separating park and such adjacent use. These
plantings shall provide an effective screen to a height of five feet at the time of planting and
an effective screen to a height of eight feet within five years. These buffer strips shall be
properly maintained at all times.
Accessory structures, including tool sheds, trash receptacles, patios, porches, garages and
bike racks, may be erected within required setback and buffer areas; provided, that a fire lane
of at least 10 feet in width is maintained, clear of all obstacles, on each side of each mobile
home. No structures of any kind may be erected within 15 feet of the mobile home lot line.
Streets.
All streets within proposed mobile home parks shall conform to the requirements for streets
as set forth in Parts 5 and 6 of this chapter. Right-of-way width shall be a minimum of 50 feet.
The Borough will not accept any street in a mobile home park which is offered for dedication.
All streets or roads providing access from the public highway system into and/or through a
proposed mobile home park shall conform to the requirements for streets as set forth in Parts
5 and 6 of this chapter. Street signs acceptable to the Borough Council shall be provided at all
intersections.
There shall generally be at least two points of ingress and/or egress in each mobile home
park but no more than two accesses to a mobile home park from any one public right-of-way
(emergency accesses excepted), and all driveways to individual units along a public right-ofway
shall front on an interior access drive. Accesses shall be separated by at least 150 feet
where they intersect with a public street.
Lot Frontage. Mobile home sites and parking spaces shall have direct access to and frontage on
the interior park street system. Mobile home sites and parking spaces shall not front or have
access directly to public roads or streets or to private roads or streets passing through the mobile
home park and providing access to other parcels or developments.
Illumination. Required illumination of park street systems. All parks shall be furnished with lighting
units so placed and equipped with luminaries placed at such mounting heights as will provide
adequate levels of illumination for the safe movement of pedestrians and vehicles at night.
Off-Street Parking. Off-street parking for two motor vehicles shall be provided at each mobile
home lot and off-street parking areas for additional vehicles of park occupants and guests shall be
provided where street rights-of-way are of insufficient width for such purposes. These spaces shall
be improved to a grade not greater than 5% and shall be paved with a minimum six inches depth
of select material approved by the Borough Engineer.
Walks.
General Requirements. All parks must provide safe, convenient, all-season pedestrian access
of adequate width for intended use, durable and convenient to maintain, between individual
mobile homes, the park streets and all community facilities provided for park residents.
Sudden changes in alignment and gradient shall be avoided.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 302/505
B.
C.
12.
A.
B.
C.
13.
14.
15.
A.
B.
C.
16.
Common Walk System. Where pedestrian traffic is concentrated, and a common walk system
is provided, such common walks shall have a minimum width of four feet.
Individual Walks. All mobile home lots shall be connected to common walks, or to streets, or
to driveways or parking spaces connecting to a paved street. Such individual walks shall have
a minimum width of two feet.
Recreational Areas. A common recreational area of land, consisting of 10% of the total area of the
park shall be maintained within the park for the common use of park residents only. This area shall
be of suitable configuration less than 10% grade and free of hazards to permit recreational use.
Fifty percent of this area shall be designed, equipped and properly maintained for active
recreational use in the mobile home park. Plans for development of the recreational area and
facilities shall be submitted to the Borough for their approval.
Landscaping and Outdoor Living Requirements.
Private Area. Private outdoor living and service space shall be provided for each mobile home
and shall be partially paved for garden furniture. The minimum area shall be not less than 300
square feet with a least dimension of 15 feet. The paved area shall not be less than 100
square feet with at least dimension of 10 feet.
Screen Planting. Screen plantings of evergreen shrubs and trees shall be provided of a width
and height adequate to immediately screen objectionable views effectively. Views to be
screened include laundry drying yards, garbage and trash collection stations, nonresidential
uses, and rear yards of adjacent properties.
Other Planting. Other plantings shall be adequate in size, quantity and character to provide an
attractive setting for the mobile homes and other improvements, to provide adequate privacy
and pleasant outlooks for living units, to minimize reflected glare and to afford summer shade.
Sewer and Water Systems. All mobile home lots and service buildings in proposed mobile home
parks shall be provided with connection to a public water supply system and a public sewer
system as required in this chapter.
Underground Utilities. All mobile home lots in proposed mobile home parks shall be provided with
underground electric, telephone and TV cable (if available) service. These service systems shall
be installed and maintained in accordance with local service company specifications regulating
such systems.
Mobile home Foundation. Each mobile home lot shall be improved to provide a permanent
foundation for the placement and tiedown of the mobile home thereby securing the structure
against uplift, sliding, rotation and overturning. Mobile homes shall not be considered placed on a
permanent foundation unless wheels have been removed and the home is resting on a foundation
of poured concrete, block construction or a concrete slab.
The mobile home site shall not heave, shift or settle unevenly under the weight of the mobile
home, due to frost action, inadequate drainage, vibration or other forces acting on the
superstructure.
The mobile home site shall be provided with anchors and tiedowns, such as cast-in-place
concrete "deadmen," eyelets embedded in concrete foundations or runways, screw augers,
arrowhead anchors or other devices securing the stability of the mobile home.
Anchors and tiedowns shall be placed at least at each corner of the mobile home site, and
each shall be able to sustain a minimum tensile strength of 2,800 pounds.
Mobile home park developers shall require that all mobile homes be enclosed from the bottom of the
mobile home to the ground or paving using industry approved fire resistant skirting material within 60
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 303/505
17.
1.
2.
3.
days of their placement.
Central Fuel System. Any central fuel supply systems and/or central fuel storage facilities shall be
installed underground.
§ 22-705. Exceptions.
[Ord. 714, 11/13/1991, § 705]
Mobile home Sales. None of the provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to the business of
mobile home sales; provided, that the mobile home on such sales lots shall not be occupied.
Storage of Recreation Vehicles. None of the provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to the
storage or garaging within a building or structure of recreational vehicles not being used for living
or sleeping purposes or to the storage of one unoccupied recreational vehicle on the premises
occupied as principal residence by the owner of such recreational vehicle; provided, however, that
such unoccupied recreational vehicle shall not be parked between the street line and the front
building line of such premises, but shall be parked within the lot, within the same setbacks as
required for accessory buildings in any Zoning Ordinance [Chapter 27].
Construction Project. None of the provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to a mobile home
located on the site of a construction project, survey project, or other work project and used solely
as a field office or work or tool house in connection with such project; provided, such mobile home
is removed from said site within 30 days after the completion of such project.
Chapter 23. (Reserved)
Chapter 24. Taxation, Special
Part 1. PER CAPITA TAX
§ 24-101. Levy of Tax.
[Ord. 481, 3/1/1967, § 1; as amended by Ord. 491, 5/1/1968, § 2]
A per capita tax of $5 per annum be, and the same is hereby levied and assessed upon each resident
or inhabitant, of the age of 21 years or over, within the limits of the Borough of Stroudsburg, for the
year ending December 31, 1967, and for each fiscal year thereafter, which tax shall be in addition to all
other taxes levied and assessed by the Borough of Stroudsburg pursuant to any other laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 24-102. Duty of Tax Collector.
[Ord. 481, 3/1/1967, § 2; as amended by Ord. 599, 12/19/1983]
Said tax shall be collected by the duly elected or appointed tax collector of borough taxes for the
Borough of Stroudsburg in the same manner and at the same time or times as other borough taxes are
collected, as provided by the "Local Tax Collection Law", of 1965, as amended and supplemented.
§ 24-103. Bond of Tax Collector.
[Ord. 481, 3/1/1967, § 3]
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 304/505
The said tax collector shall give bond secured and conditioned for the collecting, accounting for and
paying over of such taxes in the same manner as provided for other borough taxes.
§ 24-104. Tax Duplicate to Constitute Warrant for Collection.
[Ord. 481, 3/1/1967, § 4]
The entry of said per capita tax in the tax duplicate and issuance of said duplicate to the tax collector
shall constitute his warrant for the collection of the per capita tax hereby levied and assessed. Such
warrant shall remain in force until the complete settlement of all taxes in such duplicate as provided by
"Local Collection Law" of 1945, as amended and supplemented.
§ 24-105. Expenses of Collection.
[Ord. 481, 3/1/1967, § 5; as amended by Ord. 599, 12/19/1983]
The expenses of the collection of the per capita tax hereby levied and assessed shall be paid and
allowed as provided in the aforesaid "Local Tax Enabling Act" of 1965, as amended and supplemented.
The tax collector, as compensation for the collection of said taxes, shall receive the same commission
as fixed by the Borough of Stroudsburg for the collection of the other borough taxes.
§ 24-106. Notice to Taxpayers.
[Ord. 481, 3/1/1967, § 6; as amended by Ord. 599, 12/19/1983]
The tax collector shall give notice to every taxable person whose name appears on the tax duplicate at
the same time and in the same manner as provided by "Local Tax Enabling Act" of 1965, as amended
and supplemented. Failure to receive such notice shall not relieve any taxpayer from the payment of
the tax hereby levied and assessed, and such taxpayer shall be charged with the said tax as though he
had received notice.
§ 24-107. Additions to Tax Assessment List and Duplicates.
[Ord. 481, 3/1/1967, § 7]
In case the tax collector shall at any time find, within the limits of the Borough of Stroudsburg, any
resident or inhabitant of the age of 21 years or over, whose name does not appear upon the duplicate
of the Borough of Stroudsburg, he shall report the name of such person forthwith to the assessor of the
Borough. The assessor shall thereupon promptly certify the said name to the Borough of Stroudsburg,
which shall then promptly certify such name to the tax collector reporting such name. If the Council of
the Borough of Stroudsburg shall at any time find, within said Borough, any resident or inhabitant
above the age of 21 years whose name does not appear upon the duplicate of the Borough of
Stroudsburg, the Borough of Stroudsburg may, by resolution, determine that the name of such person
belongs on the tax assessment list and on the tax duplicate and certify the same to the tax collector
with the direction to collect the proper taxes from such person for the current year and for the
preceding year or the two preceding years, if he was liable for such taxes under existing law. The
Council of the Borough of Stroudsburg shall at the same time certify such name to the County Board
for the Assessment and Revision of Taxes or other authority charged with the duty of making the
assessment used by the Borough of Stroudsburg.
Upon receiving any name as aforesaid, the tax collector shall add the name and assessment of such
person to the duplicate of the Borough of Stroudsburg and proceed to collect the tax or taxes assessed
against such person as herein provided.
§ 24-108. Power of Tax Collector to Levy Delinquent Tax Plus
Penalty.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 305/505
[Ord. 481, 3/1/1967, § 8]
The tax collector shall have power, in case of the neglect or refusal of any resident or inhabitant within
the limits of the Borough of Stroudsburg to make payment of the tax hereby levied and assessed
against him, after two months from the date of the tax notice, to levy the amount of such tax, any
penalty due thereon, and costs, by distress and sale of the goods and chattels of such delinquent, in
accordance with the provisions of "Local Tax Collection Law" of 1945, as amended and supplemented.
§ 24-109. Power to Collect Tax From Employers.
[Ord. 481, 3/1/1967, § 9]
The tax collector is hereby authorized and empowered to demand, receive and collect the amount of
said tax from all corporations, political subdivisions, associations, companies, firms or individuals,
employing any person or persons owing the per capita tax hereby levied and assessed, or whose wife
owes such per capita tax, or having in possession unpaid commissions or earnings belonging to any
person or persons owing such per capita tax, or whose wife owes such per capita tax, upon the
presentation of a written notice and demand containing the name of the taxable or the husband
thereof, and the amount of tax due.
Upon the presentation of such written notice and demand, it shall be the duty of such corporation,
political subdivision, association, company, firm or individual to deduct from the wages, commissions or
earnings of such individual employees, then owing or that shall within 60 days thereafter become due,
or from any unpaid commission or earnings of any such taxable in its or his possession or that shall
within 60 days thereafter become due, or from any unpaid commission or earnings of any such taxable
in its or his possession or that shall within 60 days thereafter come into its or his possession, a sum
sufficient to pay the respective amount of per capita tax, and costs, shown upon the written notice and
demand, and to pay the same to the tax collector of the Borough of Stroudsburg within 60 days after
such notice shall have been given; such corporation, political subdivision, association, firm or individual
shall be entitled to deduct from the moneys collected from each employee the costs incurred from the
extra bookkeeping necessary to record such transaction, not exceeding 2% of the amount of money so
collected and paid over to the tax collector. Upon the failure of any such corporation, political
subdivision, association, company, firm or individual to deduct the amount of such taxes or to pay the
same over to the tax collector, less the cost of bookkeeping involved in such transaction, as herein
provided, within the time hereby required, such corporation, political subdivision, association, company,
firm or individual shall forfeit and pay the amount of such tax for each such taxable whose taxes are
not withheld and paid over or that are withheld and not paid over, together with a penalty of 10% added
thereto to be recovered by an action of assumpsit in a suit to be instituted by the tax collector on behalf
of the Borough of Stroudsburg, as debts of like amount are now by law recoverable, except that such
persons shall not have the benefit of any stay of execution or exemption law.
§ 24-110. Tax Collector to Keep Records; Remit Taxes to
Treasurer.
[Ord. 481, 3/1/1967, § 10]
The tax collector shall keep a correct account of all moneys collected by him under the authority of this
ordinance. He shall mark "paid" on each duplicate at the name of each taxable person, and the date on
which payment was made. The tax collector shall remit said taxes to the treasurer of the Borough of
Stroudsburg by a separate statement at the same time as other taxes are remitted to the said
treasurer.
§ 24-111. Discount; Penalty.
[Ord. 481, 3/1/1967, § 11]
All taxpayers subject to the payment of the per capita tax hereby levied and assessed shall be entitled
to a discount of 2% from the amount of such tax upon making payment of the whole amount thereof
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 306/505
within two months after the date of the tax notice. All taxpayers, who shall fail to make payment of the
per capita tax charged against them for four months after the date of the tax notice, shall be charged a
penalty of 5% which penalty shall be added to the taxes by the tax collector and be collected by him,
§ 24-112. Powers and Duties Imposed on Tax Collector by Law.
[Ord. 481, 3/1/1967, § 12; as amended by Ord. 599, 12/19/1983]
It is hereby expressly declared to be the intent of the Council to confer and impose upon the duly
elected or appointed assessors and tax collector of the Borough of Stroudsburg, in the assessment
and collection of the per capita tax hereby levied and assessed, all of the rights, powers, duties and
obligations which are conferred or imposed upon borough assessors or collectors of borough taxes by
any existing law or laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, together with such amendments and
supplements thereto as may be made from time to time, insofar as the same may relate to the said per
capita tax. It is further declared not to be the intent of this ordinance to limit the tax collector, in the
collection of the per capita tax hereby levied and assessed, to the provisions of "Local Tax Enabling
Act" of 1965, as amended and supplemented, but it is the intent to confer upon the tax collector all the
powers and rights, together with all the duties and obligations, conferred upon or granted to borough
tax collectors by any other law or laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
Part 2. REALTY TRANSFER TAX
§ 24-201. Imposition of Tax.
[Ord. 876, 9/5/2007]
The Borough of Stroudsburg adopts the provisions of Article XI-D of the Tax Reform Code of 1971 and
imposes a realty transfer tax as authorized under that Article, subject to the rate limitations therein. The
tax imposed under this Section shall be at the rate of 1%.
§ 24-202. Administration.
[Ord. 876, 9/5/2007]
The tax imposed under § 24-201 and all applicable interest and penalties shall be administered,
collected, and enforced under the Act of December 31, 1965 (P.L. 1257, No. 511), as amended, known
as the "Local Tax Enabling Act," provided that, if the correct amount of the tax is not paid by the last
date prescribed for timely payment, the Borough of Stroudsburg, pursuant to Section 1102-D of the Tax
Reform Code of 1971 (72 P.S. § 8102-D), authorizes and directs the Department of Revenue of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to determine, collect, and enforce the tax, interest, and penalties.
§ 24-203. Interest.
[Ord. 876, 9/5/2007]
Any tax imposed under § 24-201 that is not paid by the date the tax is due shall bear interest as
prescribed for interest on delinquent municipal claims under the Act of May 16, 1923 (P.L. 207, No.
153) (53 P.S. § 7101 et seq.), as amended, known as the "Municipal Claims and Tax Liens Act." The
interest rate shall be the lesser of the interest rate imposed upon delinquent Commonwealth taxes as
provided in Section 806 of the Act of April 9, 1929 (P.L. 343, No. 176) (72 P.S. § 806), as amended,
known as the "Fiscal Code," or the maximum interest rate permitted under the Municipal Claims and
Tax Liens Act for tax claims.
§ 24-204. Repealer.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 307/505
1.
2.
[Ord. 876, 9/5/2007]
All former ordinances or parts thereof conflicting or inconsistent with the provisions of this Part are
hereby repealed.
The repealed ordinances or parts thereof remain effective for documents that became subject to
tax prior to the effective date of this Part.
§ 24-205. Effective Date.
[Ord. 876, 9/5/2007]
The provisions of this Part shall become effective on and be applicable to any document made,
executed, delivered, accepted, or presented for recording on or after September 6, 2007.
Part 3. LOCAL SERVICES TAX
§ 24-301. Short Title.
[Ord. 882, 12/19/2007]
This Part 3 shall be known and may be cited as the "Borough of Stroudsburg Local Services Tax
Ordinance."
§ 24-302. Definitions.
[Ord. 882, 12/19/2007]
The following words and phrases, when used in this Part, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this Section, except where the context or language clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
BOROUGH OF STROUDSBURG OR BOROUGH
The area within the corporate limits of the Borough of Stroudsburg.
COLLECTOR
The person, public employee or private agency designated by the Borough of Stroudsburg to
collect and administer the tax herein imposed.
DCED
The Department of Community and Economic Development of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
EARNED INCOME
Compensation, as this term is defined in Section 13 (relating to earned income taxes) of the Local
Tax Enabling Act, the Act of December 31, 1965, P.L. 1257, § 13, as amended, 53 P.S. § 6913, as
amended.
EMPLOYER
An individual, partnership, association, limited liability corporation, limited liability partnership,
corporation, governmental body, agency or other entity employing one or more persons on a
salary, wage, commission or other compensation basis, including a self-employed person.
HE, HIS OR HIM
Indicates the singular and plural number, as well as male, female and neuter genders.
INDIVIDUAL
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 308/505
1.
A.
B.
C.
D.
2.
3.
4.
5.
Any person, male or female, engaged in any occupation, trade or profession within the corporate
limits of the Borough of Stroudsburg.
NET PROFITS
The net income from the operation of a business, profession, or other activity, as this term is
defined in Section 13 (relating to earned income taxes) of the Local Tax Enabling Act, the Act of
December 31, 1965, P.L. 1257, § 13, as amended, 53 P.S. § 6913, as amended.
OCCUPATION
Any trade, profession, business or undertaking of any type, kind or character, including services,
domestic or other, carried on or performed within the corporate limits of the Borough of
Stroudsburg for which compensation is charged or received, whether by means of salary, wages,
commission or fees for services rendered.
TAX
The local services tax at the rate fixed in § 24-303 of this Part.
TAX YEAR
The period from January 1 until December 31 in any year; a calendar year.
§ 24-303. Levy of Tax.
[Ord. 882, 12/19/2007]
For specific revenue purposes, an annual tax is hereby levied and assessed, commencing
January 1, 2008, upon the privilege of engaging in an occupation with a primary place of
employment within the Borough of Stroudsburg during the tax year. Each natural person who
exercises such privilege for any length of time during any tax year shall pay the tax for that year in
the amount of $52, assessed on a pro-rata basis, in accordance with the provisions of this Part.
This tax may be used solely for the following purposes, as the same may be allocated by the
Borough Council from time to time:
Emergency services, which shall include emergency medical services, police services and/or
fire services;
Road construction and/or maintenance;
Reduction of property taxes; or
Property tax relief through implementation of a homestead and farmstead exclusion in
accordance with 53 Pa.C.S.A., Chapter 85, Subchapter F (relating to homestead property
exclusion).
The Borough shall use no less than 25% of the funds derived from the tax for emergency services.
This tax is in addition to all other taxes of any kind or nature heretofore levied by the Borough of
Stroudsburg.
The tax shall be no more than $52 on each person for each calendar year, irrespective of the
number of political subdivisions within which a person may be employed.
§ 24-304. Exemptions and Refunds.
[Ord. 882, 12/19/2007]
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 309/505
A.
B.
1.
A.
B.
C.
D.
2.
Exemption. Any person whose total earned income and net profits from all sources within the
Borough is less than $12,000 for any calendar year in which the tax is levied is exempt from the
payment of the tax for that calendar year. In addition, the following persons are exempt from
payment of the tax:
Any person who has served in any war or armed conflict in which the United States was
engaged and is honorably discharged or released under honorable circumstances from active
service if, as a result of military service, the person is blind, paraplegic or a double or
quadruple amputee or has a service-connected disability declared by the United States
Veterans' Administration or its successor to be a total 100% disability.
Any person who serves as a member of a reserve component of the armed forces and is
called to active duty at any time during the taxable year. For the purposes of this subsection,
"reserve component of the armed forces" shall mean the United States Army Reserve, United
States Navy Reserve, United States Marine Corps Reserve, United States Coast Guard
Reserve, United States Air Force Reserve, the Pennsylvania Army National Guard or the
Pennsylvania Air National Guard.
Procedure to Claim Exemption.
A person seeking to claim an exemption from the local services tax may annually file an
exemption certificate with the Borough and with the person's employer affirming that the
person reasonably expects to receive earned income and net profits from all sources within
the Borough of less than $12,000 in the calendar year for which the exemption certificate is
filed. In the event the Borough utilizes a tax collection officer, it shall provide a copy of the
exemption certificate to that officer. The exemption certificate shall have attached to it a copy
of all the employee's last pay stubs or W-2 forms from employment within the Borough for the
year prior to the fiscal year for which the employee is requesting to be exempted from the tax.
Upon receipt of the exemption certificate and until otherwise instructed by the Borough or
except as required by Subsection 2B, the employer shall not withhold the tax from the person
during the calendar year or the remainder of the calendar year for which the exemption
certificate applies. Employers shall ensure that the exemption certificate forms are readily
available to employees at all times and shall furnish each new employee with a form at the
time of hiring.
With respect to a person who claimed an exemption for a given calendar year from the tax,
upon notification to an employer by the person or by the Borough that the person has
received earned income and net profits from all sources within the Borough equal to or in
excess of $12,000 in that calendar year or that the person is otherwise ineligible for the tax
exemption for that calendar year, or upon an employer's payment to the person of earned
income within the Borough in an amount equal to or in excess of $12,000 in that calendar
year, an employer shall withhold the local services tax from the person under Subsection 2C.
If a person who claimed an exemption for a given calendar year from the tax becomes subject
to the tax for the calendar year under Subsection 2B, the employer shall withhold the tax for
the remainder of that calendar year. The employer shall withhold from the person, for the first
payroll period after receipt of the notification under Subsection 2B, a lump sum equal to the
amount of tax that was not withheld from the person due to the exemption claimed by the
person under this subsection, plus the per-payroll amount due for that first payroll period. The
amount of tax withheld per payroll period for the remaining payroll periods in that calendar
year shall be the same amount withheld for other employees. In the event the employment of
a person subject to withholding of the tax under this subsection is subsequently severed in
that calendar year, the person shall be liable for any outstanding balance of tax due, and the
Borough may pursue collection under this Part.
Except as provided in Subsection 2B, it is the intent of this subsection that employers shall
not be responsible for investigating exception certificates, monitoring tax exemption eligibility
or exempting any employee from the local services tax.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 310/505
[1]
3.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
Refunds. The Borough Manager, in consultation with the collector and DCED, shall establish
procedures for the processing of refund claims for any tax paid by any person who is eligible for
exemption, which procedures shall be in accord with provisions of the general municipal law
relating to refunds of overpayments and interest on overpayments.[1] Refunds made within 75
days of a refund request or 75 days after the last day the employer is required to remit the tax for
the last quarter of the calendar year, whichever is later, shall not be subject to interest. No refunds
shall be made for amounts overpaid in a calendar year that do not exceed $1. The Borough
Manager or the collector shall determine eligibility for exemption and provide refunds to exempt
persons.
Note: With respect to refunds, see 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 8425; with respect to interest, see 53 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 8426.
§ 24-305. Duty of Employers to Collect.
[Ord. 882, 12/19/2007]
Each employer within the Borough of Stroudsburg, as well as those employers situated outside
the Borough of Stroudsburg but who engage in business within the Borough of Stroudsburg, is
hereby charged with the duty of collecting the tax from each of his employees engaged by him or
performing for him within the Borough of Stroudsburg and making a return and payment thereof to
the collector. Further, each employer is hereby authorized to deduct this tax from each employee
in his or her employ, whether said employee is paid by salary, wage or commission and whether or
not all such services are performed within the Borough of Stroudsburg.
A person subject to the tax shall be assessed by the employer a pro-rata share of the tax for each
payroll period in which the person is engaging in an occupation. The pro-rata share of the tax
assessed on the person for a payroll period shall be determined by dividing the combined rate of
the tax levied for the calendar year by the number of payroll periods established by the employer
for the calendar year. For purposes of determining the pro-rata share, an employer shall round
down the amount of the tax collected each payroll period to the nearest one-hundredth of a dollar.
Collection of the tax shall be made on a payroll-period basis for each payroll period in which the
person is engaging in an occupation, except as provided in Subsection 4 of this Section. For
purposes of this subsection, "combined rate" shall mean the aggregate annual rate of the tax
levied by the school district and the Borough.
No person shall be subject to the payment of the local services tax by more than one political
subdivision during each payroll period.
In the case of concurrent employment, an employer shall refrain from withholding the tax if the
employee provides a recent pay statement from a principal employer that includes the name of the
employer, the length of the payroll period and the amount of the tax withheld and a statement from
the employee that the pay statement is from the employee's principal employer and the employee
will notify other employers of a change in principal place of employment within two weeks of its
occurrence. The employee's statement shall be provided on the form approved by DCED.
The tax shall be no more than $52 on each person for each calendar year, irrespective of the
number of political subdivisions within which a person may be employed. The Borough shall
provide a taxpayer a receipt of payment upon request by the taxpayer.
No employer shall be held liable for failure to withhold the tax or for the payment of the withheld
tax money to the Borough if the failure to withhold taxes arises from incorrect information
submitted by the employee as to the employee's place or places of employment, the employee's
principal office or where the employee is principally employed. Further, an employer shall not be
liable for payment of the local services tax in an amount exceeding the amount withhold by the
employer if the employer complies with the provisions of Subsection 2 of § 24-304 of this Part and
this Section and remits the amount so withheld in accordance with this Part.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 311/505
7.
A.
B.
C.
1.
2.
Employers shall be required to remit the local services taxes 30 days after the end of each quarter
of the calendar year.
§ 24-306. Returns.
[Ord. 882, 12/19/2007]
Each employer shall prepare and file a return, showing a computation of the tax, on forms to be
supplied to the employer by the collector. If an employer fails to file the return and pay the tax, whether
or not the employer makes collection thereof from the salary, wages or commissions paid by him or her
to an employee, except as provided hereafter in this Part, the employer shall be responsible for the
payment of the tax in full as though the tax had been originally levied against the employer.
§ 24-307. Dates for Determining Tax Liability and Payment.
[Ord. 882, 12/19/2007]
In each tax year, each employer shall use his or her employment records to determine the number of
employees from whom such tax shall be deducted and paid over to the collector on or before the 30th
day following the end of each calendar quarter of each such tax year.
§ 24-308. Self-Employed Individuals.
[Ord. 882, 12/19/2007]
Each self-employed individual who performs services of any type or kind or engages in any occupation
or profession within a primary place of employment within the Borough of Stroudsburg shall be
required to comply with this Part and pay the pro-rata portion of the tax due to the collector on or
before the 30th day following the end of each quarter.
§ 24-309. Individuals Engaged in More Than One Occupation or
Employed in More Than One Political Subdivision.
[Ord. 882, 12/19/2007]
The situs of the tax shall be the place of employment on the first day the person becomes subject
to the tax during each payroll period. In the event a person is engaged in more than one
occupation, that is, concurrent employment, or an occupation which requires the person working in
more than one political subdivision during a payroll period, the priority of claim to collect the local
services tax shall be in the following order:
First, the political subdivision in which a person maintains his or her principal office or is
principally employed.
Second, the political subdivision in which the person resides and works, if the tax is levied by
that political subdivision.
Third, the political subdivision in which a person is employed and which imposes the tax
nearest in miles to the person's home.
In case of dispute, a tax receipt of the taxing authority for that calendar year declaring that the
taxpayer has made prior payment constitutes prima facie certification of payment to all other
political subdivisions.
§ 24-310. Nonresidents Subject to Tax.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 312/505
1.
2.
3.
1.
2.
[Ord. 882, 12/19/2007]
All employers and self-employed individuals residing or having their places of business outside of the
Borough of Stroudsburg but who perform services of any type or kind or engage in any occupation or
profession within the Borough of Stroudsburg do, by virtue thereof, agree to be bound by and subject
themselves to the provisions, penalties and regulations promulgated under this Part with the same
force and effect as though they were residents of the Borough of Stroudsburg. Further, any individual
engaged in an occupation within the Borough of Stroudsburg and an employee of a nonresidential
employer may, for the purpose of this Part, be considered a self-employed person; and in the event his
or her tax is not paid, the Borough shall have the option of proceeding against either the employer or
employee for the collection of this tax as hereinafter provided.
§ 24-311. Administration of Tax.
[Ord. 882, 12/19/2007]
The collector shall be appointed by resolution of the Borough Council. It shall be the duty of the
collector to accept and receive payments of this tax and to keep a record thereof showing the
amount received by him from each employer or self-employed person, together with the date the
tax was received.
The collector is hereby charged with the administration and enforcement of this Part and is hereby
charged and empowered, subject to Borough Council approval, to prescribe, adopt and
promulgate rules and regulations relating to any matter pertaining to the administration and
enforcement of this Part, including provisions for the examination of payroll records of any
employer subject to this Part, the examination and correction of any return made in compliance
with this Part and any payment alleged or found to be incorrect or as to which overpayment is
claimed or found to have occurred. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the collector shall
have the right to appeal to the Court of Common Pleas of Cumberland County as in other cases
provided.
The collector is hereby authorized to examine the books and payroll records of any employer in
order to verify the accuracy of any return made by an employer or, if no return was made, to
ascertain the tax due. Each employer is hereby directed and required to give the collector the
means, facilities and opportunity for such examination.
§ 24-312. Suits for Collection.
[Ord. 882, 12/19/2007]
In the event that any tax under this Part remains due or unpaid 30 days after the due dates above
set forth, the collector may sue for the recovery of any such tax due or unpaid under this Part,
together with interest and penalty.
If, for any reason, the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6% on the amount of such
tax shall be calculated, beginning with the due date of the tax, and a penalty of 5% shall be added
to the flat rate of such tax for nonpayment thereof. Where suit is brought for the recovery of this
tax or other appropriate remedy undertaken, the individual liable therefor shall, in addition, be
responsible and liable for the costs of collection.
§ 24-313. Violations and Penalties.
[Ord. 882, 12/19/2007]
Whoever makes any false or untrue statement on any return required by this Part, or whoever refuses
inspection of the books, records or accounts in his or her custody and control setting forth the number
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 313/505
1.
2.
of employees subject to this tax who are in his or her employment, or whoever fails or refuses to file
any return required by this Part shall be guilty of a violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600 and costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of
such fine and costs, to imprisonment for not more than 30 days. The action to enforce the penalty
herein prescribed may be instituted against any person in charge of the business of any employer who
shall have failed or who refuses to file a return required by this Part.
§ 24-314. Interpretation.
[Ord. 882, 12/19/2007]
Nothing contained in this Part shall be construed to empower the Borough of Stroudsburg to levy
and collect the tax hereby imposed on any occupation not within the taxing power of the Borough
under the Constitution of the United States and the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
If the tax hereby imposed under the provisions of this Part shall be held by any court of competent
jurisdiction to be in violation of the Constitution of the United States or of the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania as to any individual, the decision of the court shall not affect or
impair the right to impose or collect said tax or the validity of the tax so imposed on other persons
or individuals as herein provided.
Part 4. EARNED INCOME TAX
§ 24-401. Definitions.
[Ord. 493, 5/8/1968, Article 1]
The following words and phrases when used in this Part 4 shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
ASSOCIATION
A partnership, limited partnership, or any other unincorporated group of two or more persons.
BUSINESS
An enterprise, activity, profession or any other undertaking of an unincorporated nature conducted
for profit or ordinarily conducted for profit whether by a person, partnership, association or any
other entity.
CORPORATION
A corporation or joint stock association organized under the laws of the United States, the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or any other state, territory, foreign country or dependency.
CURRENT YEAR
The calendar year for which the tax is levied; provided, however, as used herein "current year"
shall during 1968 refer only to the period beginning July 1, 1968, and ending December 1, 1968.
DOMICILE
The place where one lives and has his permanent home and to which he has the intention of
returning whenever he is absent. Actual residence is not necessarily domicile, for domicile is the
fixed place of abode which, in the intention of the taxpayer, is permanent rather than transitory.
Domicile is the place in which a man has voluntarily fixed the habitation of himself and his family,
not for a mere special or limited purpose, but with the present intention of making a permanent
home, until some event occurs to induce him to adopt some other permanent home. In the case of
businesses, or associations, the domicile is that place considered as the center of business affairs
and the place where its functions are discharged.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 314/505
EARNED INCOME
Salaries, wages, commissions, bonuses, incentive payments, fees, tips, and other compensation
received by a person or his personal representative for services rendered, whether directly or
through an agent, and whether in cash or in property; not including, however, wages or
compensation paid to persons on active military service, periodic payments for sickness and
disability other than regular wages received during a period of sickness, disability or retirement of
payments arising under workmen's compensation acts, occupational disease acts and similar
legislation, or payments commonly recognized as old age benefits, retirement pay or pensions
paid to persons retired from service after reaching a specific age or after a stated period of
employment or payments commonly known as public assistance, or unemployment compensation
payments by any governmental agency or payments to reimburse expenses or payments made by
employers or labor unions for wage and salary supplemental programs; including, but not limited
to, programs covering hospitalization, sickness, disability or death, supplemental unemployment
benefits, strike benefits, social security and retirement.
INCOME TAX OFFICER OR OFFICER
A person, public employee or private agency designated by governing body to collect and
administer the tax on earned income and net profits.
EMPLOYER
A person, partnership, association, corporation, institution, governmental body or unit or agency,
or any other entity employing one or more persons for a salary, wage, commission or other
compensation.
GOVERNING BODY
The Borough Council of the Borough of Stroudsburg, Monroe County, Pennsylvania.
NET PROFITS
The net income from the operation of a business, profession, or other activity, except corporations,
after provision for all costs and expenses incurred in the conduct thereof, determined either on a
cash or accrual basis in accordance with the accounting system used in such business,
profession, or other activity, but without deduction of taxes based on income.
NONRESIDENT
A person, partnership, association, or other entity domiciled outside the taxing district.
PERSON OR INDIVIDUAL
A natural person.
PRECEDING YEAR
The calendar year before the current year.
RESIDENT
A person, partnership, association or other entity domiciled in the taxing district.
SUCCEEDING YEAR
The calendar year following the current year.
TAXING DISTRICT OR TAXING JURISDICTION
The Borough of Stroudsburg, Monroe County, Pennsylvania.
TAXPAYER
A person, partnership, association, or any other entity, required hereunder to file a return of
earned income or net profits, or to pay a tax thereon.
§ 24-402. Imposition and Rate of Tax.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 315/505
A.
B.
C.
D.
1.
2.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
[Ord. 493, 5/8/1968, Article 2]
A tax for general revenue purposes is hereby imposed at the rate of 1% on the following:
Earned income received in the current year by residents of the taxing district.
Earned income received in the current year within the taxing district by nonresidents thereof.
Net profits earned during the current year by residents of the taxing district.
Net profits earned during the current year within the taxing district by non-residents thereof.
The tax levied under this Part 4 shall be applicable to earned income received and to net profits
earned in the period beginning January 1, of the current year, and ending December 31, of the
current year or for taxpayer fiscal years beginning in the current year, except that taxes imposed
for 1968 shall become effective July 1, 1968, and the tax shall continue in force on a calendar year
or taxpayer fiscal year basis, without annual reenactment, unless the rate of the tax is
subsequently changed. Regardless of the fiscal year of any taxpayer, such taxpayer shall be liable
for payment of the tax hereby imposed from July 1, 1968. As used herein, the term "current year"
shall during 1968 refer only to the period beginning July 1, 1968 and ending December 31, 1968.
§ 24-403. Declarations, Payment of Tax and Returns.
[Ord. 493, 5/8/1968, Article 3]
Net profits. Except during 1968 every taxpayer making net profits shall on or before April 15 of the
current year, make and file with the officer on a form prescribed or approved by the officer, a
declaration of his estimated net profits during the period beginning January 1, and ending
December 31, of the current year, and pay to the officer in four equal quarterly installments the tax
due thereon as follows: the first installment at the time of filing the declaration, and the other
installments on or before June 15 of the current year, September 15 of the current year, and
January 15 of the succeeding year, respectively.
Except during 1968, any taxpayer who first anticipates any net profit after April 15 of the current
year, shall make and file the declaration hereinabove required on or before June 15 of the current
year, September 15 of the current year, or December 31 of the current year, whichever of these
dates next follows the date on which the taxpayer first anticipates such net profit, any pay to the
officer in equal installments the tax due thereon on or before the quarterly payment dates which
remain after the filing of the declaration.
For the year 1968, on or before September 15 every taxpayer making net profits shall make and
file with the officer on a form prescribed or approved by the officer a declaration of his estimated
net profits during the period beginning July 1, and ending December 31, 1968, and pay to the
officer in two equal installments the tax due thereon as follows: the first installment on or before
September 15, 1968, and the second installment on or before January 15, 1969.
For the year 1968, any taxpayer who first anticipates any net profits after September 15, 1968,
shall make and file the declaration hereinabove required on or before January 15, 1969, and pay
to the officer the tax due thereon on or before January 15, 1969.
Every taxpayer shall, on or before April 15 of the succeeding year, make and file with the officer on
a form prescribed or approved by the officer a final return showing the amount of net profits
earned during the period beginning January 1 of the current year, (July 1 in the year 1968) and
ending December 31 of the current year, the total amount of tax due thereon and the total amount
of tax paid thereon. At the time of filing the final return, the taxpayer shall pay to the officer the
balance of tax due or shall make demand for refund or credit in the case of overpayment.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 316/505
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
1.
2.
Any taxpayer may, in lieu of paying the fourth quarterly installment of his estimated tax, elect to
make and file with the officer on or before January 31 of the succeeding year, the final return as
hereinabove requested.
The officer is hereby authorized to provide by regulation for the making and filing of adjusted
declarations of estimated net profits, and for the payments of the estimated tax in cases where a
taxpayer who has filed the declaration hereinabove required anticipates additional net profits not
previously declared or finds that he has overestimated his anticipated net profits.
Every taxpayer who discontinues business prior to December 31, of the current year, shall, within
30 days after the discontinuance of business, file his final return as hereinabove required and pay
the tax due.
Earned income. Every taxpayer shall, on or before April 15, of the succeeding year, make and file
with the officer on a form prescribed or approved by the officer a final return showing the amount
of earned income received during the period beginning January 1, of the current year (July 1 in the
year 1968), and ending December 31, of the current year, the total amount of tax due thereon, the
amount of tax paid thereon, the amount of tax thereon that has been withheld pursuant to the
provisions relating to the collection at source and the balance of tax due. At the time of filing the
final return, the taxpayer shall pay the balance of the tax due or shall make demand for refund or
credit in the case of overpayment.
Except during 1968, every taxpayer who is employed for a salary, wage, commission, or other
compensation and who received any earned income not subject to the provisions relating to
collection at source, shall make and file with the officer on a form prescribed or approved by the
officer, a quarterly return on or before April 30, of the current year, July 31, of the current year,
October 31, of the current year and January 31, of the succeeding year, setting forth the
aggregate amount of earned income not subject to withholding by him during the three month
periods ending March 31, of the current year, June 30, of the current year, September 30, of the
current year, and December 31, of the current year, respectively, and subject to the tax, together
with such other information as the officer may require. Every taxpayer making such return shall, at
the time of filing thereof, pay to the officer the amount of tax shown as due thereon.
For the short year beginning July 1, 1968, and ending December 31, 1968, the aforesaid
requirements pertaining to the filing of quarterly returns and to the payment of tax due thereon, the
filing and payment of dates shall be October 31, 1968, and January 31, 1969.
§ 24-404. Collection at Source.
[Ord. 493, 5/8/1968, Article 4]
Every employer having an office, factory, workshop, branch, or warehouse or other place of
business within the taxing jurisdiction who employs one or more persons, other than domestic
servants, for a salary, wage, commission or other compensation, who has not previously
registered, shall, within 15 days after becoming an employer, or within 15 days after the effective
date of this ordinance, whichever shall first occur, register with the officer his name and address
and such other information as the officer may require.
Every employer having an office, factory, workshop, branch, warehouse, or other place of
business within the taxing jurisdiction who employs one or more persons, other than domestic
servants, for a salary, wage, commission, or other compensation, shall deduct at the time of
payment thereof, the tax imposed by this ordinance on the earned income due to his employee or
employees, and shall, on or before October 31, 1968, January 31, 1969, and thereafter on or
before April 30, of the current year, July 31, of the current year, October 31, of the current year,
and January 31, of the succeeding year, file a return and pay to the officer the amount of taxes
deducted during the preceding three month periods ending September 30, 1968, December 31,
1968, and thereafter ending March 31, of the current year, June 30, of the current year, September
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 317/505
3.
A.
B.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
1.
2.
30, of the current year, and December 31, of the current year, respectively. Such return unless
otherwise agreed upon between the officer and employer shall show the name and social security
number of each such employee, the earned income of such employee during such preceding
three-month period, the tax deducted therefrom, the political subdivisions imposing the tax upon
such employee, the total earned income of all such employees during such preceding three-month
period, and the total tax deducted therefrom and paid with the return.
Any employer who for two of the preceding four quarterly periods has failed to deduct the proper
tax, or any part thereof, or has failed to pay over the proper amount of tax to the taxing authority,
may be required by the officer to file his return and pay the tax monthly. In such cases, payments
of tax shall be made to the officer on or before the last day of the month succeeding the month for
which the tax was withheld.
On or before February 28, of the succeeding year, every employer shall file with the officer:
An annual return showing the total amount of earned income paid, the total amount of tax
deducted, and the total amount of tax paid to the officer for the period beginning January 1 of
the current year (July 1 in the year 1968), and ending December 31, of the current year.
A return withholding statement for each employee employed during all or any part of the
period beginning January 1 of the current year (July 1 in the year 1968), and ending
December 31, of the current year, setting forth the employee's name, address and social
security number, the amount of earned income paid to the employee during said period, the
amount of tax deducted, the political subdivisions imposing the tax upon such employee, the
amount of tax paid to the officer. Every employer shall furnish two copies of the individual
return to the employee for whom it is filed.
Every employer who discontinues business prior to December 31, of the current year, shall, within
30 days after the discontinuance of business, file the returns and withholding statements
hereinabove required and pay the tax due.
Except as otherwise provided in § 24-409 any employer who omits to make the deductions
required by this section shall be liable for payment of the taxes which he was required to withhold
to the extent that such taxes have not been recovered from the employee.
The failure or omission of any employer to make the deductions required by this section shall not
relieve any employee from the payment of the tax or from complying with the requirements of the
ordinance relating to the filing of declarations and returns.
If an employer makes a deduction of tax as required by this ordinance, the amount deducted shall
constitute in the hands of such employer a trust fund held for the account of the governing body as
beneficial owner and the employee from whose earned income such tax was deducted shall be
deemed to have paid such tax.
§ 24-405. Powers and Duties of Officer.
[Ord. 493, 5/8/1968, Article 5]
It shall be the duty of the officer to collect and receive the taxes, fines and penalties imposed by
this Part 4. It shall also be his duty to keep a record showing the amount received by him from
each person or business paying the tax and if paid by such taxpayer or employer in respect of
another taxpayer, the name of such other taxpayer, and the date of such receipt.
The officer is hereby charged with the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this
Part 4 and is hereby empowered to prescribe, adopt, promulgate and enforce, rules and
regulations relating to any matter pertaining to the administration and enforcement of the part,
including provisions for the reexamination and correction of declarations and returns, and of
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 318/505
3.
4.
5.
6.
1.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
2.
payments alleged or found to be incorrect, or as to which an overpayment is claimed or found to
have occurred, and to make refunds in cases of overpayment, for any period of time not to exceed
six years subsequent to the date of payment of the sum involved, and to prescribe forms
necessary for the administration of the ordinance. No rule or regulation of any kind shall be
enforceable unless it has been approved by resolution by the governing body. A copy of such
rules and regulations currently in force shall be available for public inspection.
The officer shall refund, on petition of, and proof by the taxpayer, earned income tax paid on the
taxpayer's ordinary and necessary business expenses, to the extent that such expenses are not
paid by the taxpayer's employer.
The officer and agents designated by him are hereby authorized to examine the books, papers,
and records of any employer or of any taxpayer or of any person whom the officer reasonably
believes to be an employer or taxpayer, in order to verify the accuracy of any declaration or return,
or if no declaration or return was filed, to ascertain the tax due. Every employer and every
taxpayer and every person whom the officer reasonably believes to be an employer, or taxpayer,
is hereby directed and required to give to the officer, or to any agent designated by him, the
means, facilities and opportunity for such examination and investigations, as are hereby
authorized.
Any information gained by the officer, his agents or by any other official or agent of the taxing
district, as a result of any declarations, returns, investigations, hearings or verifications required or
authorized by this Part 4 shall be confidential, except for official purposes and except in
accordance with a proper judicial order, or as otherwise provided by law.
The officer is authorized to establish different filing, reporting and payment dates for taxpayers
whose fiscal years do not coincide with the calendar year.
§ 24-406. Suit for Collection of Tax.
[Ord. 493, 5/8/1968, Article 6]
The officer may sue in the name of the taxing district for the recovery of taxes due and unpaid
under this Part 4.
Any suit brought to recover the tax imposed by this Part 4 shall be begun within three years after
such tax is due, or within three years after the declaration or return has been filed, whichever date
is later; provided, however, that this limitation shall not prevent the institution of a suit for the
collection of any tax due or determined to be due in the following cases:
Where no declaration or return was filed by any person although a declaration or return was
required to be filed by him under the provisions of this Part 4, there shall be no limitation.
Where an examination of the declaration or return filed by any person, or of other evidence
relating to such declaration or return in the possession of the officer, reveals a fraudulent
evasion of taxes, there shall be no limitation.
In the case of substantial understatement or tax liability of 25% or more, and no fraud, suit
shall be begun within six years.
Where any person has deducted taxes under the provisions of this Part 4, and has failed to
pay the amounts so deducted to the officer, or where any person has willfully failed or omitted
to make the deductions required by this section there shall be no limitations.
This section shall not be construed to limit the governing body from recovering delinquent
taxes by any other means provided by this Part 4.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 319/505
3.
1.
2.
3.
4.
The officer may sue for recovery of an erroneous refund provided such suit is begun two years
after making such refund, except that the suit may be brought within five years if it appears that
any part of the refund was induced by fraud or misrepresentation of material fact.
§ 24-407. Interest and Penalties.
[Ord. 493, 5/8/1968, Article 7]
If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6% per annum on the amount of
said tax, and an additional penalty of 1/2 of 1% of the amount of the unpaid tax for each month or
fraction thereof during which the tax remains unpaid, shall be added and collected. Where suit is
brought for the recovery of any such tax, the person liable therefor shall, in addition, be liable for the
costs of collection and the interest and penalties herein imposed.
§ 24-408. Fines and Penalties.
[Ord. 493, 5/8/1968, Article 8; as amended by Ord. 599, 12/19/1983]
Any person who fails, neglects, or refuses to make any declaration or return required by this Part
4, any employer who fails, neglects, or refuses to register or to pay the tax deducted from his
employees, or fails, neglects or refuses to deduct or withhold the tax from his employees, any
person who refuses to permit the officer or any agent designated by him to examine his books,
records, and papers, and any person who knowingly makes any incomplete, false or fraudulent
return, or attempts to do anything whatsoever to avoid the full disclosure of the amount of his net
profits or earned income in order to avoid the payment of the whole or any part of the tax imposed
by this Part 4, shall, upon conviction thereof before any justice of the peace or court of competent
jurisdiction in the county, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $300 for each offense, and
costs, and, in default of payment of said fine and costs to be imprisoned for a period not
exceeding 30 days.
Any person who divulges any information which is confidential under the provisions of this Part 4,
shall, upon conviction thereof before any justice of the peace or court of competent jurisdiction, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $300 for each offense, and costs, and, in default of
payment of said fines and costs to be imprisoned for a period not exceeding 30 days.
The penalties imposed under this section shall be in addition to any other penalty imposed by any
other section of this Part 4.
The failure of any person to receive or procure forms required for making the declaration or
returns required by this Part 4 shall not excuse him from making such declaration or return.
§ 24-409. Distress and Sale of Goods and Chattels of Taxpayer.
[Ord. 493, 5/8/1968, Article 9]
The officer shall have power in case of the neglect or refusal of any person, copartnership, or
association, to make payment of the amount of any tax due by him, after two months from the date of
the tax notice, to levy the amount of such tax, any penalty due thereon and costs, not exceeding costs
and charges allowed constables for similar services by distress and sale of the goods and chattels of
such delinquent, wherever situate or found, upon giving at least 10 days' public notice of such sale, by
posting 10 written or printed notices, and by one advertisement in a newspaper of general circulation
published in the county.
No failure to demand or collect any taxes by distress and sale of goods and chattels shall invalidate
any return made, or lien filed for nonpayment of taxes, or any tax sale for the collection of taxes.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 320/505
1.
2.
3.
4.
§ 24-410. Collection of Delinquent Earned Income Taxes From
Employers.
[Ord. 493, 5/8/1968, Article 10]
The officer shall demand, receive and collect from all corporations, political subdivisions, associations,
companies, firms or individuals, employing persons owing delinquent earned income taxes, or whose
wife owes delinquent earned income taxes, or having in possession unpaid commissions or earnings
belonging to any person or persons owing delinquent earned income taxes, or whose wife owes
delinquent earned income taxes, upon the presentation of a written notice and demand certifying that
the information contained therein is true and correct and containing the name of the taxpayer or the
husband thereof and the amount of tax due. Upon the presentation of such written notice and demand,
it shall be the duty of any such corporation, political subdivision, association, company, firm or
individual to deduct from the wages, commissions or earnings of such individual employees, then
owing or that shall within 60 days thereafter become due, or from any unpaid commissions or earnings
of any such taxpayer in its or his possession, or that shall within 60 days thereafter come into its or his
possession, a sum sufficient to pay the amount of the delinquent earned income taxes and costs,
shown upon the written notice or demand, and to pay the same to the officer within 60 days after such
notice shall have been given. Such corporation, political subdivision, association, firm or individual
shall be entitled to deduct from the moneys collected from each employee the costs incurred from the
extra bookkeeping necessary to record such transactions, not exceeding 2% of the amount of money
so collected and paid over to the officer. Upon the failure of any such corporation, political subdivision,
association, company, firm or individual, to deduct the amount of such taxes or to pay the same over to
the officer, less the cost of bookkeeping involved in such transactions, as herein provided, within the
time required, such corporation, political subdivision, association, company, firm or individual shall
forfeit and pay the amount of such tax for each such taxpayer whose taxes are not withheld and paid
over, or that are withheld and not paid over together with a penalty of 10% added thereto, to be
recovered by an action of assumpsit in a suit to be instituted by the officer or by the proper authorities
of the taxing district, as debts of like amount are now by law recoverable, except that such person shall
not have the benefit of any stay of execution or exemption law.
§ 24-411. Payment of Tax to Other Political Subdivisions.
[Ord. 493, 5/8/1968, Article 11]
Payment of any tax to any other political subdivision pursuant to an ordinance or resolution
passed or adopted prior to the effective date of the Act, shall be credited to and allowed as a
deduction from the liability of taxpayers for any tax imposed under this Part 4.
Payment of any tax on salaries, wages, commission, other compensation or net profits of
business, professions or other activities to any other political subdivision by residents thereof
pursuant to any ordinance or resolution passed or adopted under the authority of the Act shall be
credited to and allowed as a deduction from the liability of such persons for any tax imposed under
this Part 4.
Payment of any tax on income to any other political subdivision by residents thereof pursuant to
an ordinance or resolution passed or adopted under the authority of the Act shall to the extent that
such income includes salaries, wages, commissions, other compensation or net profits of
businesses, professions or other activities, but in such proportion as hereinafter set forth, be
credited to and allowed as a deduction from the liability of such persons for any tax imposed under
this Part 4.
Payment of any tax on income to any state or to any other political subdivision thereof by residents
thereof, pursuant to any state or local law, shall, to the extent that such income includes salaries,
wages, commissions, or other compensation or net profits of businesses, professions or other
activities but in such proportions as hereinafter set forth, be credited to and allowed as a deduction
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 321/505
5.
6.
1.
2.
3.
4.
from the liability of such person for any tax imposed under this Part 4, if residents of the political
subdivision in Pennsylvania receive credits and deductions of a similar kind to a like degree from
the tax on income imposed by the other state or political subdivision thereof.
Payment of any tax on income to any state other than Pennsylvania or to any political subdivision
located outside the boundaries of this Commonwealth, by residents of a political subdivision
located in Pennsylvania shall, to the extent that such income includes salaries, wages,
commission, or other compensation, or net profits of businesses, professions, or other activities
but in such proportions as hereinafter set forth, be credited to and allowed as a deduction from the
liability of such person for any tax imposed under this Part 4.
Where a credit or a deduction is allowable in any of the several cases hereinabove provided, it
shall be allowed in proportion to the concurrent periods for which taxes are imposed by other state
or respective political subdivisions, but not in excess of the amount previously paid for a
concurrent period.
§ 24-412. Incorporation of Local Tax Enabling Act.
[Ord. 493, 5/8/1968, Article 12; as amended by Ord. 599, 12/19/1983]
All provisions of the Act of December 31, 1965, P.L. 1257, known as the "Local Tax Enabling Act", as
amended and supplemented, are incorporated herein by reference.
§ 24-413. Effective Date.
[Ord. 493, 5/8/1968, Article 13; as amended by Ord. 599, 12/19/1983]
This Part 4 shall become effective July 1, 1968, and shall continue in force from year to year until
amended or superseded by subsequent ordinances.
§ 24-414. Registration of Rental Housing and Tenants.
[Ord. 493, 5/8/1968; as added by Ord. 696, 9/12/1990, § 1]
Owners of rental housing units are required to file a "Rental Housing and Tenant Report" for all
rental properties located within the Borough of Stroudsburg. The property owner must supply the
addresses of all rental housing units and the names of all persons occupying such units or
properties.
The Borough will advise all such property owners of their duty to register their rental properties
and tenants. The Borough shall supply such forms as it prepares for this purpose. All property
owners shall file a "Rental Housing and Tenant Report" annually and shall notify the Borough of
any change in occupancy within 30 days of the change. Owners of rental property shall pay an
annual registration fee of $10 per housing unit. An additional registration fee is not required for a
change of occupancy after the annual registration fee is paid.
[Amended by Ord. No. 1060, 12/4/2018]
Any owner of rental housing units who fails, neglects or refuses to register his/her property or
refuses to identify his/her tenants or refuses to notify the Borough of any change in occupancy
within the prescribed time limit or any person who knowingly makes any incomplete, false, or
fraudulent report shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $25
nor more than $300 for each offense and costs.
[Amended by Ord. No. 1060, 12/4/2018]
The Borough Council may, by resolution, change the registration fee in the future without the need
to enact a formal amendment to this Part.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 322/505
[Added by Ord. No. 1060, 12/4/2018]
Part 5. DISCOUNTS AND PENALTIES
§ 24-501. Discounts.
[Ord. 594, 12/29/1982, § 4]
All taxpayers subject to the payment of taxes, assessed by any taxing district, shall be entitled to a
discount of 2% from the amount of such tax upon making payment of the whole amount thereof within
two months after the date of the tax notice.
§ 24-502. Penalties.
[Ord. 594, 12/29/1982, § 4]
All taxpayers, who shall fail to make payment of any such taxes charged against them for four months
after the date of the tax notice, shall be charged a penalty of 10% which penalty shall be added to the
taxes by the tax collector and be collected by him.
Chapter 25. Trees
Part 1. MUNICIPAL TREE PROGRAM
§ 25-101. Short Title.
[Ord. 861, 7/5/2006]
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Municipal Tree Ordinance" of the Borough of
Stroudsburg, County of Monroe, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 25-102. Purpose.
[Ord. 861, 7/5/2006]
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote and protect the public health, safety and general welfare by
providing for the regulation of the planting, maintenance, pruning, trimming and removal of trees in the
streets, highways, sidewalks and public places and otherwise providing for an organized municipal tree
program in the Borough of Stroudsburg.
§ 25-103. Definitions.
[Ord. 861, 7/5/2006]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
AUTHORIZED AGENT
A person or company employed by the Borough (under the authority of the Commission) to
perform the duties outlined by the Commission.
BOROUGH
The Borough of Stroudsburg.
BOROUGH ARBORIST
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 323/505
A certified arborist, appointed and/or employed by the Shade Tree Commission and approved by
the Council, who specializes in the care and maintenance of trees in the Borough right-of-way
and/or on Borough property.
COMMISSION
The Shade Tree Commission of the Borough of Stroudsburg.
COUNCIL
The Council of the Borough of Stroudsburg.
DEPARTMENT
The Stroudsburg Street Department or any other designated department of the Borough under
whose jurisdiction street and park trees fall.
HAZARDOUS TREES/BRANCHES
Any dead, diseased, broken or mutilated branches or parts of trees which are in a state of
decomposition and pose a threat to public safety.
LARGE TREES
Those attaining a height of 45 feet or more at maturity.
MANAGER
The Manager of the Borough of Stroudsburg.
MEDIUM TREES
Those attaining a height of 35 feet to 45 feet at maturity.
MUNICIPALITY
The Borough of Stroudsburg, Monroe County, Pennsylvania.
PERMISSION
Approval, in writing, by the Borough Manager or his/her designee.
PERSON
Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind,
and includes the plural of each.
PRIVATE ARBORIST
Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind
engaged in the business of tree pruning, trimming, maintenance, planting or removal for a fee.
PROPERTY OWNER
The person owning such property as shown on the Monroe County Assessor's list.
PUBLIC PLACE(S)
All parks and other grounds owned by the Borough of Stroudsburg, including public rights-of-way
or other areas under the control of the Borough.
PUBLIC TREE(S)
Shall include all trees, shrubs, bushes and all other vegetation on any street or highway or in the
public parks or public places or in any other area owned by the Borough or to which the public has
free access.
REPLACEMENT TREE(S)
Any tree planted by the Borough as a public tree to replace another public tree that was removed.
For every public tree removed, one replacement tree will be planted. The replacement tree does
not necessarily have to be immediately planted in the vicinity of the removed tree if the
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 324/505
Commission decides it can be used at another location. However, within two years of removal, a
replacement tree will be planted in the vicinity of a removed tree.
SHADE TREE
Any tree, shrub or other woody plant on any street, highway, avenue or other public place in the
Borough of Stroudsburg.
SMALL TREES
Those trees attaining a height of 20 feet to 30 feet at maturity.
STREET OR HIGHWAY
The entire width of every municipal way or right-of-way when any part thereof is open to the use of
the public, as a matter of right, for the purpose of vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
TOPPING
The removal of the top and upright branches with many internodal cuts, also known as "heading,"
"tipping" or "round over."
TREE
A large perennial plant with one main trunk and many branches.
TREE LAWN
That part of the street right-of-way adjacent to developed property, not covered by the sidewalk or
other paving, lying between the sidewalk and that portion of the street used for vehicular traffic.
§ 25-104. Establishment of Shade Tree Commission.
[Ord. 861, 7/5/2006]
There is hereby created a Commission to be known and designated as the "Shade Tree Commission
of the Borough of Stroudsburg, Pennsylvania."
§ 25-105. Membership of Commission.
[Ord. 861, 7/5/2006]
Said Commission shall consist of five residents of the Borough of Stroudsburg who shall be appointed
by the Borough Council and shall serve without compensation for their terms of office and with all the
rights, powers and duties and obligations provided for by law (Act of February 1, 1966 (P.L. 1656, No.
581). Each term shall be five years. Upon expiration of any term, a successor shall be appointed, or
the member whose term has expired shall be reappointed, to serve for a term of five years. In the
event of a vacancy occurring during any term, such vacancy shall be filled by the Borough Council for
the then-remaining portion of the unexpired term. Three members of the Commission shall constitute a
quorum. The Commission may organize, selecting a Chair or other officers deemed necessary.
§ 25-106. Powers of Commission.
[Ord. 861, 7/5/2006]
The Shade Tree Commission of the Borough of Stroudsburg shall have custody and control of the
shade trees on the public streets and highways of the Borough of Stroudsburg (hereinafter referred to
as "shade trees") and shall have authority to plant, remove, maintain and protect such trees.
§ 25-107. Employees of Commission.
[Ord. 861, 7/5/2006]
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 325/505
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
(1)
G.
1.
The Commission may employ and pay such necessary assistants as the proper performance of the
duties devolving upon it shall require, and to enforce regulations for the care and protection of the
shade trees of the Borough, provided that such expenditures are within the budget of the Commission
approved by the Borough Council. No such regulation shall be enforced until it has been approved by
the Borough Council and enacted as an ordinance.
§ 25-108. Commission Reports.
[Ord. 861, 7/5/2006]
The Shade Tree Commission shall annually report its actions of trees removed and planted, but not
limited to this information, and expenses in furtherance of the purposes of this chapter for the last fiscal
year and shall present to the Borough Council a written plan and a proposed budget for the coming
fiscal year for the proposed care, preservation, maintenance, removal or disposition and planting of
trees and/or shrubs in the Borough.
§ 25-109. Notices by Commission.
[Ord. 861, 7/5/2006]
Whenever said Commission proposes to plant, transplant or remove shade trees on any street,
sidewalk or highway in the Borough, notice of the time and place of the meeting at which such work is
to be considered shall be given in one newspaper of general circulation in the Borough of Stroudsburg
once a week for two weeks immediately preceding the time of the meeting. The notice shall specify, in
detail, the streets or portions upon which trees are proposed to be so planted, replanted or removed.
§ 25-110. Duties and Responsibilities of Commission.
[Ord. 861, 7/5/2006]
The duties and responsibilities of the Shade Tree Commission shall include the following:
To study the problems and determine the needs of the Borough in regard to trees.
To appoint a Borough Arborist to serve at the pleasure of the Shade Tree Commission.
To investigate, provide assistance and make recommendations to the Borough Manager
regarding supplemental funding from sources such as but not limited to grants, loans and
donations.
To develop, update and administer an annual written plan for tree care and maintenance. The
plan will address care, preservation, pruning, planting, removal and disposition of trees and
shrubs in parks, along streets and on other public lands. The plan will also address watering,
fertilizing, dead and hazardous tree removal, safety, and insect and disease control. The plan
will establish a program for the planting of donated trees and the care and maintenance of
historic trees.
To maintain, with the assistance of the Borough Arborist, an updated inventory of public trees
by species, member, condition and location.
To plan, implement and coordinate programs to celebrate Arbor Day in the community.
To develop and update standards of practice and arboricultural specifications relating to the
following:
Recommend species for planting by location.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 326/505
(2)
(3)
(4)
H.
I.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
1.
Tree removal, planting and trimming standards.
Safety standards.
Permit fees, bonds and insurances for the Private Arborist.
To review the planting plan of street trees within the planting strips of any new subdivision for
conformity with the Borough's specifications and standards of practice. A landscape plan for
the subdivision shall be submitted by the developer to the Shade Tree Commission, which
shall review and provide recommendations regarding the new subdivision landscape plan and
forward those recommendations to the Stroudsburg Borough Planning Commission, working
within the time frame of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code for approving
subdivision and land development plans.
To review any proposed change in width in a public street right-of-way or any proposed street
improvement, where feasible, to include allowances for planting strips. Plans and
specifications for planting such areas shall be integrated into the general plan of
improvements, and it shall be the duty of the Borough Engineer to coordinate the design of
such improvements with the Shade Tree Commission prior to completion of the final overall
plans.
§ 25-111. Arboricultural Specifications and Standards of Practice.
[Ord. 861, 7/5/2006]
The Shade Tree Commission shall, by resolution, approve arboricultural specifications, which shall
include but are not limited to the following:
Authorized species of trees.
Authorized planting locations and spacing of trees.
Size specifications for tree planting or replacement.
Tree trimming and maintenance standards.
Root zone controls.
Tree removal.
Distance from curb and sidewalk.
Sight easement, sidewalk and street branch height and streetlight/traffic control or sign
visibility.
Utilities.
§ 25-112. Responsibility for Maintaining Public Trees.
[Ord. 861, 7/5/2006]
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person or private property owner(s) to plant, prune, trim or
remove any public tree(s) or tree(s) in a public place(s).
§ 25-113. Maintenance of Trees on Private Property; Pruning and
Trimming.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 327/505
1.
2.
1.
[Ord. 861, 7/5/2006]
It shall be the duty of any person or persons owning or occupying real property bordering on any
street upon which property there may be trees to maintain such trees on private property in such a
manner that they will not obstruct or shade the streetlights, obstruct the passage of pedestrians on
sidewalks, obstruct vision of traffic signs, or obstruct the view of any street or alley intersection.
Based on tree species, the recommended minimum clearance of any overhanging portion thereof
shall be eight feet over the sidewalk and 14 feet over all streets, except truck thoroughfares, which
shall have a clearance of 16 feet. Low-growing or low-limbed species shall be trimmed to allow for
the safe passage of pedestrians and motor vehicles. A minimum height of eight feet shall be
provided over the required open area of three feet of sidewalk for pedestrians and a minimum of
14 feet at one foot from the face of the curb for vehicle passage or parking.
Owner(s) shall remove all dead, diseased, or dangerous trees or broken or decayed limbs on
private property which constitute a menace to the safety of the public. The Borough shall have the
right to prune/trim any tree or shrub on private property when it interferes with the proper spread of
light along the street from the streetlight or interferes with visibility of any traffic control device or
street sign or sight triangle at intersections. Tree limbs that grow near voltage electrical conductors
shall be maintained and cleared of such conductors by the electric utility company in compliance
with any applicable franchise agreements. A utility tree trimming policy must be reviewed by the
utility company and Commission prior to any trimming by the utility company.
§ 25-114. Pruning Standards.
[Ord. 861, 7/5/2006]
Tree pruning shall conform to ANSI A300-2001 Pruning Standards, Tree, Shrub and Other Woody
Plant Maintenance - Standard Practices. All work must also conform to the latest revision of the
American National Standards Institute ANSI Z133.1 (Safety Requirements for Pruning, Trimming,
Repairing, Maintaining, Removing Trees and for Cutting Brush). Copies of both standards (ANSI A300-
2001 and ANSI Z133.1) are on file in the Municipal Building. Any person or entity violating the
provisions of this chapter by performing tree maintenance activities in violation of tree maintenance or
safety standards (ANSI A300-1002 and ANSI Z133.1) shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to a fine of
not more than $600 for each tree affected or, in default of payment, shall be subject to imprisonment
for a period not to exceed 30 days. Any tree damage caused by any person or entity is to be repaired
immediately at no expense to and to the satisfaction of the Shade Tree Commission. Tree damage as
judged by the Shade Tree Commission will be appraised to determine the value of the damage. If the
Shade Tree Commission determines that the damage warrants removal, the cost of tree and stump
removal and the planting of replacement trees will be paid by the person or entity that caused such
damage. Failure to comply shall cause such repair work to be completed by the Borough and billed to
the person or entity that caused such damage. If damage resulted in removal or death of the tree, the
Borough may accept replacement trees whose combined diameter is equal to that of the tree removed.
All replacement trees shall be at least two-inch caliper, balled and burlapped, and of a species
approved by the Shade Tree Commission. Replacement trees shall be delivered to the Borough
between April 1 and May 15 of the year following the damage.
§ 25-115. Private Tree Care.
[Ord. 861, 7/5/2006]
The Commission shall have the right to cause the removal of any dead or diseased trees on
private property within the Borough when such trees constitute a hazard to life and property or
harbor insects or disease which constitutes a potential threat to other trees within the Borough.
The Commission shall have the right to cause the trimming of any shade trees with branches
which overhang a street or sidewalk or obstruct light from streetlights in accordance with the
current Shade Tree Arboricultural Specifications and Standards of Practice.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 328/505
2.
3.
1.
2.
3.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
The Borough Manager or his/her designee shall notify the affected property owner(s), in writing, by
certified mail, of such trees on private property that must be removed or trimmed.
Removal or trimming of tree(s) on private property shall be done by the affected property
owner(s), at their own expense, within 30 days after receipt of the notice. If the owner(s) fail to
comply with said notice, the Borough shall have the authority to remove or trim such trees and
charge the cost of removal or trimming to the property owner(s) as provided for by law.
§ 25-116. Removal of Stumps.
[Ord. 861, 7/5/2006]
All stumps of street and public trees shall be removed to a depth of six inches below the surface of the
ground or six inches below the top of the curb.
§ 25-117. Registration of Private Arborists.
[Ord. 861, 7/5/2006]
Any person who is employed or engaged by the Borough or the owner of any public or privately
owned tree to remove, plant or maintain any public or privately owned tree must be a private
arborist or employ a registered arborist and must comply with the arboricultural specifications and
standards adopted by the Shade Tree Commission. Private arborists shall register annually with
the Borough Manager or his/her designee.
All utility companies shall notify the Shade Tree Commission of the identity of their staff arborist or
consulting arborist. Such notification shall constitute registration of said arborist hereunder.
All private arborists are required to present proof of all required insurances and credentials at the
time of registration with the Borough Manager.
§ 25-118. Activities for Which Permission/Approval Required.
[Ord. 861, 7/5/2006]
No person shall plant, spray, fertilize, preserve, prune, remove, root, trim or otherwise disturb any
tree or vegetation on any street, right-of-way or public place.
No person shall attach any guide rope, cable or electric wire to any such tree or tree guard support
without first seeking approval in the Borough Manager's office and receiving written permission
from the Borough Manager or his/her designee.
No person shall lay any pavement within a minimum area of 12 square feet around the base of the
trunk of any tree in a public right-of-way or deposit any stone, gravel, cement, lumber or other
material in such a way as to obstruct the free access of air and water to the roots of any tree in
such right-of-way without first seeking approval from the Borough Manager or his/her designee
and obtaining written permission.
Approval for Subsection three above must be made at the Borough Office or otherwise specified
municipal office. Requests must be made at least 72 hours prior to the start of work.
Utilities may be issued blanket permission; however, the utility is still responsible for notifying the
Borough Manager of work at least three working days prior to the start of work.
Before any permission is granted for work on private property, each applicant shall first show
evidence of being a private arborist and in possession of liability insurance, workers'
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 329/505
7.
8.
9.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
1.
1.
compensation insurance, bodily injury insurance and property damage insurance as specified in
the Arboricultural Specifications and Standards of Practice.
The person receiving permission for work on private property is responsible for notifying
Pennsylvania One-Call prior to planting or removing a tree.
Standards of issuance. The Borough Manager or his/her designee shall inspect the proposed work
on private property and give permission if, in the Borough Manager's or designee's opinion, the
proposed work is desirable and the proposed method and workmanship thereof are of a
satisfactory nature. Written permission shall contain a definite expiration date, and all work must
be completed by this date.
The person receiving permission for work on private property shall abide by the Arboricultural
Specifications and Standards of Practice adopted by the Shade Tree Commission.
§ 25-119. Prohibited Activities.
[Ord. 861, 7/5/2006]
The following are prohibited activities:
Fasten a carriage, animal, motor vehicle of any kind or bicycle to any shade tree, tree guard
or support thereof.
Authorize or procure any gas, hot water, brine, oil, dye or other substance deleterious to tree
life to lay, pour, flow, leak or drip on or into the soil about the base of a tree in any public
highway, street, avenue, alley or public place.
Allow a tree on public right-of-way to be injured or removed during the erection, repair,
removal or alteration of any building or structure.
Build or kindle a fire near any tree on any public right-of-way or public place as to endanger
the trunk, limbs or foliage of such shade tree(s).
Attach any advertisements to any tree or shrub in any street, highway, avenue or public rightof-
way.
§ 25-120. Liability for Damage.
[Ord. 861, 7/5/2006]
Any person who inflicts damage to a tree in a public right-of-way, either willfully or negligently, shall be
liable to the Borough for costs of professional care in the treatment of the tree wounds. If the tree shall
die within one growing season as a direct result of such damage, or if the damaged tree shall be
rendered unsuitable and condemned by the Borough, then the person responsible shall pay all costs of
the removal of said tree and its stump and costs of replacing it with a tree of approved specifications.
Such work shall be performed by the Borough or contracted by the Borough and costs assessed to the
responsible person.
§ 25-121. Violations and Penalties.
[Ord. 861, 7/5/2006]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, or a plea
of guilty, pay a fine not to exceed $600 for each tree affected plus replacement costs of any shade
tree damaged as a result of the violation.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 330/505
2.
A.
B.
C.
D.
1.
Any costs incurred by the Borough for violations of this chapter may be assessed to the property
owner(s). Any penalty so assessed shall be a lien upon the real estate of the offender and may be
collected as municipal claims are collected.
§ 25-122. Repealer.
[Ord. 861, 7/5/2006]
By enactment of this chapter, Ordinance No. 124, adopted December 7, 1921, as amended and
reenacted by Ordinance No 599, adopted December 19, 1983; as amended by Ordinance No. 835,
adopted November 19, 2003; and Ordinance No. 762, adopted March 18, 1998, are hereby repealed.
Chapter 26. Water
ATTACHMENTS
Appendix A - Stormwater Facilities Agreement
Appendix B - Stormwater Management Criteria
Appendix C - Drainage Plan Application
Appendix D - Stormwater Management Map
Appendix E - West Nile Virus Guidance
Part 1. BRODHEAD AND MCMICHAEL CREEKS
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE
A.. General Provisions.
§ 26-101. Statement of Findings.
[Ord. 906, 7/16/2009, § 101]
The governing body of the Borough of Stroudsburg finds that:
Inadequate management of accelerated stormwater runoff resulting from development
throughout a watershed increases flood flows and velocities, contributes to erosion and
sedimentation, overtaxes the carrying capacity of existing streams and storm sewers, greatly
increases the cost of public facilities to convey and manage stormwater, undermines
floodplain management and flood reduction efforts in upstream and downstream
communities, reduces groundwater recharge, and threatens public health and safety.
A comprehensive program of stormwater management, including reasonable regulation of
development and activities causing accelerated erosion, is fundamental to the public health,
safety, welfare, and the protection of the people of the Borough and all the people of the
Commonwealth, their resources, and the environment.
Inadequate management of accelerated stormwater runoff resulting from development
throughout a watershed poses a threat to surface and groundwater quality.
Through project design, impacts from stormwater runoff can be minimized to maintain the
natural hydrologic regime, and sustain high water quality, groundwater recharge, stream
baseflow and aquatic ecosystems. The most cost effective and environmentally
advantageous way to manage stormwater runoff is through nonstructural project design,
minimizing impervious surfaces and sprawl, avoiding sensitive areas (i.e., buffers, floodplains,
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 331/505
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
1.
steep slopes), and designing to topography and soils to maintain the natural hydrologic
regime.
§ 26-102. Purpose.
[Ord. 906, 7/16/2009, § 102]
The purpose of this Part is to promote the public health, safety, and welfare within the
Brodhead/McMichaels Creek Watersheds by maintaining the natural hydrologic regime by
minimizing the impacts described in § 26-101 of this Part through provisions designed to:
Promote alternative project designs and layout that minimizes impacts to surface and ground
water.
Promote nonstructural BMP's.
Minimize increases in stormwater volume.
Minimize impervious surfaces.
Manage accelerated runoff and erosion and sedimentation problems at their source by
regulating activities that cause these problems during construction.
Utilize and preserve the existing natural drainage systems.
Encourage recharge of groundwater where appropriate and prevent degradation of
groundwater quality.
Address the quality and quantity of stormwater discharges from the development site.
Maintain existing baseflow and quality of streams and watercourses in the Borough and the
Commonwealth.
Preserve and restore the flood-carrying capacity of streams.
Provide proper maintenance of all permanent stormwater management facilities that are
constructed in the Borough.
Provide performance standards and design criteria for watershed-wide stormwater
management and planning.
§ 26-103. Statutory Authority.
[Ord. 906, 7/16/2009, § 103]
The Borough of Stroudsburg is empowered to regulate land use activities that affect runoff, surface
and groundwater quality and quantity by the authority of the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act 167),
32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq., as amended, the "Stormwater Management Act" (hereinafter referred to as
"the Act"), and the Water Resources Management Act of 2002, as amended, Municipalities Planning
Code, Act of 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq., as amended, and the Borough Code, 53
P.S. § 46201 et seq.
§ 26-104. Applicability/Regulated Activities.
[Ord. 906, 7/16/2009, § 104]
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 332/505
1.
2.
3.
4.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
5.
This Part shall apply to all of Stroudsburg Borough, which is located within the
Brodhead/McMichaels Creek Watershed, as delineated in Appendix D, which is hereby adopted
as part of this Part.
This Part shall only apply to permanent nonstructural and structural stormwater management best
management practices (BMP's) constructed as part of any of the regulated activities listed in this
section.
This Part contains only the stormwater management performance standards and design criteria
that are necessary or desirable from a watershed-wide perspective. Local stormwater
management design criteria (e.g., inlet spacing, inlet type, collection system design and details,
outlet structure design, etc.) shall continue to be regulated by the applicable Borough ordinances
and applicable state regulations.
The Borough may, after consultation with DEP, approve alternative methods for meeting the state
water quality requirements other than those in this Part, provided that they meet the minimum
requirements of, and do not conflict with, state law, including but not limited to the Clean Streams
Law and the Pennsylvania Stormwater BMP Manual as revised.
The following activities are defined as "regulated activities" and shall be regulated by this Part:
Land development.
Subdivisions.
Alteration of the natural hydrologic regime.
Construction of/or additional impervious or semi-pervious surfaces (driveways, parking lots,
roads).
Construction of new buildings or additions to existing buildings.
Redevelopment of a site which will increase runoff or change a discharge point. Any
redevelopment that does not increase the runoff must still comply with § 26-123 (Water
Quality and Streambank Erosion) and § 26-124 (Groundwater Recharge).
Diversion piping or encroachments in any natural or man-made channel.
Nonstructural and structural stormwater management BMP's or appurtenances thereto.
Stream enhancement or restoration projects.
§ 26-105. Repealer.
[Ord. 906, 7/16/2009, § 105]
Any ordinance or ordinance provision of the Borough inconsistent with any of the provisions of this Part
is hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only.
§ 26-106. Severability.
[Ord. 906, 7/16/2009, § 106]
Should any section or provision of this Part be declared invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction,
such decision shall not affect the validity of any of the remaining provisions of this Part.
§ 26-107. Compatibility With Other Ordinance Requirements.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 333/505
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
1.
[Ord. 906, 7/16/2009, § 107]
Approvals issued pursuant to this Part do not relieve the applicant of the responsibility to secure
required permits or approvals for activities regulated by any other applicable code, rule, act, or
ordinance.
B.. Definitions.
§ 26-111. Interpretation.
[Ord. 906, 7/16/2009, § 201]
For the purposes of this Part, certain terms and words used herein shall be interpreted as follows:
Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the singular number includes the
plural, and the plural number includes the singular; words of masculine gender include
feminine gender; and words of feminine gender include masculine gender.
The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the specific example, but is
intended to extend its meaning to all other instances of like kind and character.
The word "person" includes an individual, firm, association, organization, partnership, trust,
company, corporation, unit of government, or any other similar entity.
The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory; the words "may" and "should" are permissive.
The words "used or occupied" include the words "intended, designed, maintained, or
arranged to be used, occupied or maintained."
§ 26-112. Definitions.
[Ord. 906, 7/16/2009, § 202]
ACCELERATED EROSION
The removal of the surface of the land through the combined action of man's activity and the
natural processes of a rate greater than would occur because of the natural process alone.
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITIES
The work of producing crops and raising livestock including tillage, plowing, disking, harrowing,
pasturing and installation of conservation measures. For purposes of regulation by this Part,
construction of new buildings or impervious area is not considered an agricultural activity.
ALTERATION
As applied to land, a change in topography as a result of the moving of soil and rock from one
location or position to another; also, the changing of surface conditions by causing the surface to
be more or less impervious; land disturbance.
APPLICANT
A person who has filed an application for approval to engage in any regulated activities as defined
in § 26-104 of this Part.
AS-BUILT DRAWINGS
Those maintained by the contractor as he constructs the project and upon which he documents
the actual locations of the building components and changes to the original contract documents.
These, or a copy of same, are turned over to the applicant's engineer at the completion of the
project.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 334/505
BANKFULL
The channel at the top-of-bank or point where water begins to overflow onto a floodplain.
BASE FLOW
The portion of stream flow that is sustained by ground water discharge.
BIORETENTION
A stormwater retention area which utilizes woody and herbaceous plants and soils to remove
pollutants before infiltration occurs.
BMP (BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE)
Stormwater structures, facilities and techniques to control, maintain or improve the quantity and
quality of surface runoff and groundwater recharge.
BOROUGH
The Borough of Stroudsburg, Monroe County, Pennsylvania.
BUFFER
The area of land immediately adjacent to any wetland, lake, pond, vernal pond, or stream,
measured perpendicular to and horizontally from the delineated edge of the wetland, lake, pond,
or vernal pond, or the top-of-bank on both sides of a stream. The inner buffer is located nearest to
the feature being protected and surrounded by the outer buffer, where applicable.
CHANNEL EROSION
The widening, deepening, and headward cutting of small channels and waterways, caused by
stormwater runoff or bankfull flows.
CISTERN
An underground reservoir or tank for storing rainwater.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT
The Monroe County Conservation District.
CONSUMPTIVE WATER USE
That part of water removed from the immediate water environment not available for other
purposes such as water supply, maintenance of stream flows, water quality, fisheries and
recreation, as opposed to water that is used nonconsumptively, which is returned to surface water,
where practicable, and groundwater.
CULVERT
A structure with appurtenant works, which carries water under or through an embankment or fill.
DAM
An artificial barrier, together with its appurtenant works, constructed for the purpose of impounding
or storing water or another fluid or semifluid, or a refuse bank, fill or structure for highway, railroad
or other purposes which does or may impound water or another fluid or semifluid.
DEPARTMENT
The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (DEP).
DESIGNEE
The agent of the Monroe County Planning Commission, Monroe County Conservation District
and/or agent of the governing body involved with the administration, review or enforcement of any
provisions of this Part by contract or memorandum of understanding.
DESIGN PROFESSIONAL (QUALIFIED)
A Pennsylvania registered professional engineer, trained to develop stormwater management
plans.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 335/505
DESIGN STORM
The magnitude and temporal distribution of precipitation from a storm event measured in
probability of occurrence (e.g., a five-year storm) and duration (e.g., 24 hours), used in the design
and evaluation of stormwater management systems.
DETENTION BASIN
An impoundment structure designed to manage stormwater runoff by temporarily storing the runoff
and releasing it at a predetermined rate.
DETENTION DISTRICT
Those subareas in which some type of detention is required to meet the plan requirements and
the goals of Act 167.
DEVELOPMENT SITE
The specific tract of land for which a regulated activity is proposed.
DIFFUSED DRAINAGE DISCHARGE
Drainage discharge not confined to a single point location or channel, such as sheet flow or
shallow concentrated flow.
DISTURBED AREAS
Land area where an earth disturbance activity is occurring or has occurred.
DOWNSLOPE PROPERTY LINE
That portion of the property line of the lot, tract, or parcels of land being developed located such
that overland or pipe flow from the site would be directed towards it.
DRAINAGE CONVEYANCE FACILITY
A stormwater management facility designed to transmit stormwater runoff and shall include
channels, swales, pipes, conduits, culverts, storm sewers, etc.
DRAINAGE EASEMENT
A right granted by a grantor to a grantee, allowing the use of private land for stormwater
management purposes.
DRAINAGE PERMIT
A permit issued by the Borough governing body after the drainage plan has been approved.
DRAINAGE PLAN
The documentation of the stormwater management system, if any, to be used for a given
development site, the contents of which are established in § 26-133.
EARTH DISTURBANCE
A construction or other human activity which disturbs the surface of land including, but not limited
to, clearing and grubbing, grading, excavations, embankments, agricultural plowing or tilling,
timber harvesting activities, road maintenance activities, mineral extraction, and the moving,
depositing, stockpiling, or storing of soil, rock or earth materials.
EMERGENCY SPILLWAY
A conveyance area that is used to pass peak discharge greater than the maximum design storm
controlled by the stormwater facility.
ENCROACHMENT
A structure or activity that changes, expands or diminishes the course, current or cross section of
a watercourse, floodway or body of water.
EROSION
The movement of soil particles by the action of water, wind, ice, or other natural forces.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 336/505
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN
A site specific plan that is designed to minimize accelerated erosion and sedimentation during
construction.
EXCEPTIONAL VALUE WATERS
Surface waters of high quality which satisfy Pennsylvania Code, Title 25, "Environmental
Protection," Chapter 93, "Water Quality Standards," § 93.4b(b) (relating to anti-degradation).
EXISTING CONDITIONS
The initial condition of a project site prior to the proposed alteration. If the initial condition of the
site is undeveloped land, the land use shall be considered as "meadow" unless the natural land
cover is proven to generate lower curve numbers or Rational "C" value.
FLOOD
A temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of land areas from the overflow of streams,
rivers, and other waters of this Commonwealth.
FLOODPLAIN
Any land area susceptible to inundation by water from any natural source or delineated by
applicable Department of Housing and Urban Development, Federal Insurance Administration
Flood Hazard Boundary — Mapped as being a special flood hazard area.
FLOODWAY
The channel of the watercourse and those portions of the adjoining floodplains, which are
reasonably required to carry and discharge the one-hundred-year frequency flood. Unless
otherwise specified, the boundary of the floodway is as indicated on maps and flood insurance
studies provided by FEMA. In an area where no FEMA maps or studies have defined the
boundary of the one-hundred-year frequency floodway, it is assumed—absent evidence to the
contrary—that the floodway extends from the stream to 50 feet from the top of the bank of the
stream.
FOREST MANAGEMENT/TIMBER OPERATIONS
Planning and activities necessary for the management of forest land with no change of land use
proposed. These include timber inventory and preparation of forest management plans,
silvicultural treatment, cutting budgets, logging road design and construction, timber harvesting
and reforestation.
FREEBOARD
A vertical distance between the elevation of the design high-water and the top of a dam, levee,
tank, basin, swale, or diversion berm. The space is required as a safety margin in a pond or basin.
GRADE
A slope, usually of a road, channel or natural ground specified in percent and shown on plans as
specified herein.
(TO) GRADE
To finish the surface of a roadbed, top of embankment or bottom of excavation.
GRASSED WATERWAY
A natural or constructed waterway, usually broad and shallow, covered with erosion-resistant
grasses, used to convey surface water.
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE
Replenishment of existing natural underground water supplies without degrading groundwater
quality.
HEC-HMS
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 337/505
The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Hydrologic Engineering Center (HEC) - Hydrologic Modeling
System (HMS) computer program.
HIGH QUALITY WATERS
Surface waters having quality which exceeds levels necessary to support propagation of fish,
shellfish, and wildlife and recreation in and on the water by satisfying Pennsylvania Code, Title 25,
"Environmental Protection," Chapter 93, "Water Quality Standards," § 93.4b(a).
HYDROLOGIC REGIME (NATURAL)
The hydrologic cycle or balance that sustains quality and quantity of stormwater, baseflow,
storage, and groundwater supplies under natural conditions.
HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP
A classification of soils by the Natural Resources Conservation Service, formerly the Soil
Conservation Service, into four runoff potential groups. The groups range from A soils, which are
very permeable and produce little runoff, to D soils, which are not very permeable and produce
much more runoff.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE
A surface that prevents the percolation of water into the ground such as rooftops, pavement,
sidewalks, driveways, gravel drives, roads and parking, and compacted fill, earth or turf to be used
as such.
IMPOUNDMENT
A retention or detention basin designed to retain stormwater runoff and release it at a controlled
rate.
INFILL
Development that occurs on smaller parcels that remain undeveloped but are within or very close
proximity to urban areas. The development relies on existing infrastructure and does not require
an extension of water, sewer or other public utilities.
INFILTRATION
For stormwater to pass through the soil from the surface.
INFILTRATION STRUCTURES
A structure designed to direct runoff into the underground water (e.g., French drains, seepage pits,
seepage trench).
INLET
The upstream end of any structure through which water may flow.
LAND DEVELOPMENT
(A) the improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts, or parcels of land for any
purpose involving: one a group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings, whether
proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of
the number of occupants or tenure or two the division or allocation of land or space, whether
initially or cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or prospective occupants by
means of, or for the purpose of, streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building
groups, or other features; (B) A subdivision of land; (C) development in accordance with
§ 503(1.1) of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. Excluded from review and approval
as a land development are the addition of the first accessory building on a lot or lots subordinate
to an existing principal residential building on a residential use lot.
LIMITING ZONE
A soil horizon or condition in the soil profile or underlying strata which includes one of the
following:
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 338/505
A.
B.
C.
A seasonal high water table, whether perched or regional, determined by direct observation of
the water table or indicated by soil mottling.
A rock with open joints, fracture or solution channels, or masses of loose rock fragments,
including gravel, with insufficient fine soil to fill the voids between the fragments.
A rock formation, other stratum or soil condition which is so slowly permeable that it
effectively limits downward passage of water.
LOT
A designated parcel, tract, or area of land established by a plat or otherwise as permitted by law
and to be used, developed, or built upon as a unit.
MAIN STEM (MAIN CHANNEL)
Any stream segment or other runoff conveyance facility used as a reach in the
Brodhead/McMichaels hydrologic model.
MANNING EQUATION (MANNING FORMULA)
A method for calculation of velocity of flow (e.g., feet per second) and flow rate (e.g., cubic feet per
second) in open channels based upon channel shape, roughness, depth of flow and slope. "Open
channels" may include closed conduits so long as the flow is not under pressure.
MUNICIPALITY
Stroudsburg Borough, Monroe County, Pennsylvania.
NATURAL HYDROLOGIC REGIME
See "hydrologic regime."
NON-POINT SOURCE POLLUTION
Pollution that enters a water body from diffuse origins in the watershed and does not result from
discernible, confined, or discrete conveyances.
NONSTRUCTURAL BMPS
Methods of controlling stormwater runoff quantity and quality, such as innovative site planning,
impervious area and grading reduction, protection of natural depression areas, temporary ponding
on site and other techniques.
NRCS
Natural Resource Conservation Service (previously SCS).
OPEN CHANNEL
A drainage element in which stormwater flows within an open surface. Open channels include, but
shall not be limited to, natural and man-made drainage ways, swales, streams, ditches, canals,
and pipes flowing partly full.
OUTFALL
Point where water flows from a conduit, stream, or drain.
OUTLET
Points of water disposal from a stream, river, lake, tidewater or artificial drain.
PARENT TRACT
The parcel of land from which a land development or subdivision originates existing as of the date
of Borough adoption of this Part.
PARKING LOT STORAGE
Involves the use of parking areas as temporary impoundments with controlled release rates during
rainstorms.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 339/505
PEAK DISCHARGE
The maximum rate of stormwater runoff from a specific storm event.
PENN STATE RUNOFF MODEL (CALIBRATED)
The computer-based hydrologic modeling technique adapted to the Brodhead/McMichaels
Watershed for the Act 167 Plan. The model has been "calibrated" to reflect actual recorded flow
values by adjoining key model input parameters.
PIPE
A culvert, closed conduit, or similar structure (including appurtenances) that conveys stormwater.
PLANNING COMMISSION
The Planning Commission of the Borough of Stroudsburg.
PMF - PROBABLE MAXIMUM FLOOD
The flood that may be expected from the most severe combination of critical meteorologic and
hydrologic conditions that are reasonably possible in any area. The PMF is derived from the
probable maximum precipitation (PMP) as determined based on data obtained from the National
Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA).
PRACTICABLE ALTERNATIVE
An alternative that is available and capable of being done after taking into consideration cost,
existing technology and logistics in light of overall project purposes.
PREDEVELOPMENT
Undeveloped/natural condition.
PRETREATMENT
Techniques employed in structural and nonstructural stormwater BMPs to provide storage or
filtering to help trap coarse materials and other pollutants before they enter the system, but not
necessarily meet the water quality volume requirements of § 26-123.
RATIONAL FORMULA
A rainfall-runoff relation used to estimate peak flow.
RECHARGE AREA
Undisturbed surface area or depression where stormwater collects, and a portion of which
infiltrates and replenishes the underground and groundwater.
RECORD DRAWINGS
Original documents revised to suit the as-built conditions and subsequently provided by the
applicant's engineer to the applicant. The applicant's engineer takes the contractor's as-builts,
reviews them in detail with his/her own records for completeness, then either turns these over to
the applicant or transfers the information to a set of reproducibles, in both cases for the applicant's
permanent records.
REDEVELOPMENT
Any construction, alteration, or improvement exceeding 5,000 square feet of impervious surface
on sites where existing land use is commercial, industrial, institutional, or multifamily residential.
REGULATED ACTIVITIES
Actions or proposed actions that have an impact on stormwater runoff quality and quantity and
that are specified in § 26-104 of this Part.
RELEASE RATE
The percentage of existing conditions peak rate of runoff from a site or subarea to which the post
development peak rate of runoff must be reduced to protect downstream areas.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 340/505
RETENTION BASIN
A structure in which stormwater is stored and not released during the storm event. Retention
basins do not have an outlet other than recharge and must infiltrate stored water in no more than
three days.
RETURN PERIOD
The average interval, in years, within which a storm event of a given magnitude can be expected
to recur.
RISER
A vertical pipe extending from the bottom of a pond that is used to control the discharge rate from
the pond for a specified design storm.
ROOFTOP DETENTION
Temporary ponding and gradual release of stormwater falling directly onto flat roof surfaces by
incorporating controlled-flow roof drains into building designs.
RUNOFF
Any part of precipitation that flows over the land surface.
SALDO
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance [Chapter 22].
SEDIMENT BASIN
A barrier, dam, retention or detention basin located and designed to retain rock, sand, gravel, silt,
or other material transported by water during construction.
SEDIMENT POLLUTION
The placement, discharge or any other introduction of sediment into the waters of the
Commonwealth.
SEDIMENTATION
The process by which mineral or organic matter is accumulated or deposited by the movement of
water or air.
SEEPAGE PIT/SEEPAGE TRENCH
An area of excavated earth filled with loose stone or similar coarse material, into which surface
water is directed for infiltration into the underground water.
SHEET FLOW
Runoff that flows over the ground surface as a thin, even layer.
SOIL-COVER COMPLEX METHOD
A method of runoff computation developed by the NRCS that is based on relating soil type and
land use/cover to a runoff parameter called curve number (CN).
SOURCE WATER PROTECTION AREAS (SWPA)
The zone through which contaminants, if present, are likely to migrate and reach a drinking water
well or surface water intake.
SPECIAL PROTECTION SUBWATERSHEDS
Watersheds for which the receiving waters are exceptional value (EV) or high quality (HQ) waters.
SPILLWAY
A conveyance that is used to pass the peak discharge of the maximum design storm controlled by
the stormwater facility.
STORAGE INDICATION METHOD
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 341/505
A reservoir routing procedure based on solution of the continuity equation (inflow minus outflow
equals the change in storage) with outflow defined as a function of storage volume and depth.
STORM FREQUENCY
The number of times that a given storm "event" occurs or is exceeded on the average in a stated
period of years. See "return period."
STORM SEWER
A system of pipes and/or open channels that convey intercepted runoff and stormwater from other
sources, but excludes domestic sewage and industrial wastes.
STORMWATER
The surface runoff generated by precipitation reaching the ground surface.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY
Any structure, natural or man-made, that, due to its condition, design, or construction, conveys,
stores, or otherwise affects stormwater runoff quality and quantity. Typical stormwater
management facilities include, but are not limited to, detention and retention basins, open
channels, storm sewers, pipes, and infiltration structures.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN
The plan for managing those land use activities that will influence stormwater runoff quality and
quantity and that would impact the Brodhead/McMichaels Watershed adopted by the Monroe
County Commissioners as required by the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864, (Act 167), and known
as the "Brodhead/McMichaels Watershed Act 167 Stormwater Management Plan."
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SITE PLAN
The plan prepared by the applicant or his representative indicating how stormwater runoff will be
managed at the particular site of interest according to this Part.
STREAM
A natural watercourse.
STREAM ENCLOSURE
A bridge, culvert or other structure in excess of 100 feet in length upstream to downstream which
encloses a regulated water of this Commonwealth.
SUBAREA (SUBWATERSHED)
The smallest drainage unit of a watershed for which stormwater management criteria have been
established in the stormwater management plan.
SUBDIVISION
The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of land by any means into two or more lots,
tracts, parcels or other divisions of land including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs or devisees,
transfer of ownership, or building or lot development; provided, however, that the subdivision by
lease of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new
street or easement of access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SWALE
A low lying stretch of land which gathers or carries surface water runoff.
TIMBER OPERATIONS
See "forest management."
TIME-OF-CONCENTRATION (TC)
The time for surface runoff to travel from the hydraulically most distant point of the watershed to a
point of interest within the watershed. This time is the combined total of overland flow time and
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 342/505
1.
2.
3.
flow time in pipes or channels, if any.
VERNAL POOL
An isolated, contained basin depression that holds water for at least two months in the spring and
summer, critical to several amphibian, reptile and invertebrate species. It also provides important
storage for stormwater runoff and spring snowmelt that would otherwise contribute to down stream
flooding. A vernal pond is typically no bigger than 300 feet long and 120 feet wide and is often
much smaller.
WATERCOURSE
A channel or conveyance of surface water having defined bed and banks, whether natural or
artificial, with perennial or intermittent flow.
WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH
Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, rivulets, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes, dammed
water, wetlands, ponds, springs, and all other bodies or channels of conveyance of surface and
underground water, or parts thereof, whether natural or artificial, within or on the boundaries of this
Commonwealth.
WELLHEAD
The point at which a groundwater well bore hole meets the surface of the ground.
WELLHEAD PROTECTION AREA
The surface and subsurface area surrounding a water supply well, well field, spring or infiltration
gallery supplying a public water system, through which contaminants are reasonably likely to
move toward and reach the water source.
WETLAND
Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and
duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of
vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, including swamps, marshes, bogs,
fens, and similar areas.
C.. Stormwater Management
§ 26-121. General Requirements.
[Ord. 906, 7/16/2009, § 301]
Applicants proposing regulated activities in Brodhead/McMichaels Creek Watershed which do not
fall under the exemption criteria shown in § 26-132 shall submit a drainage plan consistent with
the Brodhead/McMichaels Creek Watershed Stormwater Management Plan to the Borough for
review. These criteria shall apply to the total proposed development even if development is to take
place in stages.
The applicant is required to perform an alternatives analysis to find practicable alternatives to the
surface discharge of stormwater, the creation of impervious surfaces and the degradation of
waters of the Commonwealth, and must maintain as much as possible the natural hydrologic
regime.
The drainage plan must be designed through an alternatives analysis consistent with the
sequencing provisions of § 26-122 to ensure maintenance of the natural hydrologic regime and to
promote groundwater recharge and protect groundwater and surface water quality and quantity.
The drainage plan designer must proceed sequentially in accordance with Part 1C.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 343/505
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
A.
1.
Stormwater drainage systems shall be provided in order to permit unimpeded flow along natural
watercourses, except as modified by stormwater management facilities or open channels
consistent with this Part.
The existing points of concentrated drainage that discharge onto adjacent property shall not be
altered in any manner which could cause property damage without permission of the affected
property applicant(s) and shall be subject to any applicable discharge criteria specified in this Part.
Areas of existing diffused drainage discharge shall be subject to any applicable discharge criteria
in the general direction of existing discharge, whether proposed to be concentrated or maintained
as diffused drainage areas, except as otherwise provided by this Part. If diffused drainage
discharge is proposed to be concentrated and discharged onto adjacent property, the applicant
must document that adequate downstream conveyance facilities exist to safely transport the
concentrated discharge, or otherwise prove that no erosion, sedimentation, flooding or other
impacts will result from the concentrated discharge.
Where a development site is traversed by existing watercourses, drainage easements shall be
provided conforming to the line of such watercourses. The terms of the easement shall conform to
the stream buffer requirements contained in § 26-123, Subsection 1I(8), of this Part.
Any stormwater management facilities regulated by this Part that would be located in or adjacent
to waters of the Commonwealth or wetlands shall be subject to approval by PA DEP through the
Joint Permit Application process, or, where deemed appropriate by PA DEP, the General Permit
process. When there is a question whether wetlands may be involved, it is the responsibility of the
applicant or his agent to show that the land in question cannot be classified as wetlands,
otherwise approval to work in the area must be obtained from PA DEP.
Any stormwater management facilities regulated by this Part that would be located on state
highway rights-of-way shall be subject to approval by the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation (PennDOT).
Infiltration of runoff through seepage beds, infiltration trenches, etc., where soil conditions permit,
and minimization of impervious surfaces to the extent permitted by the Borough's Zoning
Ordinance are encouraged to reduce the size or eliminate the need for detention facilities or other
structural BMPs.
Roof drains shall not be connected to streets, sanitary or storm sewers or roadside ditches in
order to promote overland flow and infiltration/percolation of stormwater where advantageous to
do so. Considering potential pollutant loading, roof drain runoff in most cases will not require
pretreatment.
All stormwater runoff, other than roof top runoff discussed in Subsection 11 above, shall be treated
for water quality prior to discharge to surface or groundwater.
§ 26-122. Nonstructural Project Design (Sequencing to Minimize
Stormwater Impacts).
[Ord. 906, 7/16/2009, § 302]
The design of all regulated activities shall include the following steps in sequence to minimize
stormwater impacts.
The applicant is required to find practicable alternatives to the surface discharge of
stormwater, the creation of impervious surfaces and the degradation of waters of the
Commonwealth, and must maintain as much as possible the natural hydrologic regime of the
site.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 344/505
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
2.
1.
An alternative is practicable if it is available and capable of being done after taking into
consideration cost, existing technology and logistics in light of overall project purposes.
All practicable alternatives to the discharge of stormwater are presumed to have less adverse
impact on quantity and quality of waters of the Commonwealth unless otherwise
demonstrated.
The applicant shall demonstrate that they designed the regulated activities in the following
sequence to minimize the increases in stormwater runoff and impacts to water quality:
Prepare an Existing Resource and Site Analysis Map (ERSAM), showing environmentally
sensitive areas including, but not limited to, steep slopes, ponds, lakes, streams, wetlands,
hydric soils, vernal ponds, floodplains, buffer areas, hydrologic soil groups A and B (areas
conducive to infiltration), any existing recharge areas and any other requirements outlined in
the Borough Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance [Chapter 22].
Establish buffers according to § 26-123.
Prepare a draft project layout avoiding earth disturbance in sensitive areas identified in
Subsection 2A and minimizing total site earth disturbance as much as possible. The ratio of
the disturbed area to the entire site area and measures taken to minimize earth disturbance
shall be included on the ERSAM.
Identify site specific predevelopment drainage areas, discharge points, recharge areas to be
preserved and hydrologic soil groups A and B to be utilized for recharge.
Evaluate nonstructural stormwater management alternatives.
Minimize earth disturbance.
Minimize impervious surfaces.
Break up large impervious surfaces.
Satisfy water quality and streambank erosion protection objective (§ 26-123).
Satisfy groundwater recharge (infiltration) objective (§ 26-124) and provide for stormwater
treatment prior to infiltration.
Determine what Management District the site falls into (Appendix D) and conduct a
predevelopment runoff analysis.
Prepare final project design to maintain predevelopment drainage areas and discharge points,
to minimize earth disturbance and impervious surfaces, and to reduce runoff to the maximum
extent possible.
Conduct a post development runoff analysis based on the final design and to meet the
release rate and in turn the overbank flow and extreme event requirements (§ 26-125).
Manage any remaining runoff through treatment prior to discharge, as part of detention,
bioretention, direct discharge or other structural control.
§ 26-123. Water Quality and Streambank Erosion Requirements.
[Ord. 906, 7/16/2009, § 303]
In addition to the performance standards and design criteria requirements of this Part, the
applicant shall comply with the following water quality requirements of this subpart.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 345/505
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
B.
C.
For water quality and streambank erosion, the objective is to design a water quality BMP to
detain the proposed conditions two year, twenty-four-hour design storm to the existing
conditions one year flow using the SCS Type II distribution. Additionally, provisions shall be
made (such as adding a small orifice at the bottom of the outlet structure) so that the
proposed conditions one-year storm takes a minimum of 24 hours to drain from the facility
from a point where the maximum volume of water from the one-year storm is captured. (i.e.,
the maximum water surface elevation is achieved in the facility.) At the same time, the
objective is not to attenuate the larger storms in "no detention" areas (District C) only. This
can be accomplished by configuration of the outlet structure not to control the larger storms,
or by a bypass or channel to divert only the two-year flood into the basin or divert flows in
excess of the two-year storm away from the basin.
Where practicable, wet basins shall be utilized for water quality control and shall meet the
requirements found in the PA Stormwater BMP Manual as revised.
Release of water can begin at the start of the storm (i.e., the invert of the water quality orifice
is at the invert of the facility). The design of the facility shall consider and minimize the
chances of clogging and sedimentation. Orifices smaller than three inches diameter are not
recommended. However, if the design engineer can provide proof that the smaller orifices are
protected from clogging by use of trash racks, etc., smaller orifices may be permitted.
In selecting the appropriate BMPs or combinations thereof, the applicant shall consider the
following:
Total contributing area.
Permeability and infiltration rate of the site soils.
Slope and depth to bedrock.
Seasonal high water table.
Proximity to building foundations and well heads.
Erodibility of soils.
Land availability and configuration of the topography.
Peak discharge and required volume control.
Stream bank erosion.
Efficiency of the BMPs to mitigate potential water quality problems.
The volume of runoff that will be effectively treated.
The nature of the pollutant being removed.
Maintenance requirements.
Creation/protection of aquatic and wildlife habitat.
Recreational value.
For areas within defined special protection subwatersheds which includes exceptional value
(EV) and high quality (HQ) waters, the temperature and quality of water and streams shall be
maintained through the use of temperature sensitive BMPs and stormwater conveyance
systems.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 346/505
D.
E.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
F.
G.
H.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
1)
(a)
(6)
I.
The applicant shall consider the guidelines found in the references specified in the DEP
Stormwater BMP Manual, for constructed wetlands, where proposed.
Pretreatment in accordance with § 26-121, Subsections 11 and 12, shall be provided prior to
infiltration.
Streambank restoration projects shall include the following:
No restoration or stabilization projects may be undertaken without examining the fluvial
geomorphology of stable reaches above and below the unstable reach.
Restoration project design must then consider maintenance of stability in the adjacent
stable reaches of the stream channel.
An erosion and sediment control plan approved by the Conservation District must be
provided by the applicant.
All applicable state and federal permits must be obtained.
Biology shall be incorporated into the design of all wet basins in accordance with the West
Nile Virus Guidance found in Appendix E.
To accomplish the above, the applicant shall submit original and innovative designs to the
Borough Engineer for review and approval. Such designs may achieve the water quality
objectives through a combination of BMPs (best management practices).
Buffers.
In addition to the other restrictions of this section, buffers shall be provided in accord with
this Subsection 1I.
Where resource buffers overlap, the more restrictive requirements shall apply.
Outer buffers are not required for any portion of the required buffer area that does not
drain to the resource requiring the buffer.
Pre-existing Lots or Parcels/Development in Buffers. In the case of legally preexisting lots
or parcels (approved prior to the effective date of this Part) where the usable area of a lot
or parcel lies within a buffer area, rendering the lot or parcel unable to be developed in
accordance with the allowable use per Borough zoning, the development may only be
permitted by modification as provided by subpart H of this Part.
Improvements to Existing Structures in Outer Buffers. The provisions of this Subsection
1I do not require any changes or improvements to be made to lawfully existing structures
in buffers. However, when any substantial improvement to a structure is proposed which
results in a horizontal expansion of that structure, the improvement may only be
permitted by modification as provided by subpart H of this Part.
Wetlands and Vernal Ponds.
Wetland Identification. Wetlands shall be identified in accord with the 1987 U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers Manual for Identifying and Delineating Wetlands, and
properly flagged and surveyed on site to ensure they are protected.
Wetlands in an Artificial Watercourse. Wetlands contained within the banks of
an artificial watercourse shall not to be considered for buffer delineation
purposes.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 347/505
2)
a)
b)
1)
a)
b)
2)
(b)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(7)
1)
(a)
(8)
Wetlands in a Natural Watercourse. Wetlands contained within the banks of a
natural watercourse, only the stream buffer shall apply.
Wetland and Vernal Pond Buffer Delineation. A fifty foot inner buffer and twenty-five
foot outer buffer, measured perpendicular to and horizontally from the edge of the
delineated wetland or vernal pond for a total distance of 75 feet, shall be maintained
for all wetlands and vernal ponds.
Inner Buffer. Measured perpendicular to and horizontally from the edge of the
delineated wetland or vernal pond, for a distance of 50 feet.
Stormwater conveyance required by the Borough, buffer maintenance and
restoration, the correction of hazardous conditions, stream crossings
permitted by DEP and passive unpaved stable trails shall be permitted. No
other earth disturbance, grading, filling, buildings, structures, new
construction, or development shall be permitted.
The area of the inner buffer altered by activities permitted in accord with
Subsection 1I(6)(b)1) shall be minimized to the greatest extent practicable.
Outer Buffer. Measured perpendicular to and horizontally from the outer edge of
the inner buffer for a distance of 25 feet resulting in a total buffer of 75 feet.
Stormwater conveyance required by the Borough, buffer maintenance and
restoration, the correction of hazardous conditions, stream crossings
permitted by DEP, parking areas or roads constructed on or above existing
grade, unpaved trails, and limited forestry activities that do not clear cut the
buffer (e.g., selective regeneration, harvest) in accord with a forestry
management plan shall be permitted provided no buildings are involved,
and those activities permitted under Subsection 1I(4) and I(5).
No more than 20% of the cumulative outer buffer on the subject parcel shall
be altered by the activities permitted in accord with Subsection 1I(6)(b)2).
Lakes and Ponds.
There is no outer buffer around lakes and ponds.
Lake and Pond Buffer Delineation. A fifty foot buffer measured perpendicular to and
horizontally from the edge of any water body, shall be maintained around any water
body.
Permitted Activities/Development. Stormwater conveyance required by the Borough,
buffer maintenance and restoration, the correction of hazardous conditions, lake
front views, boat docks, swimming areas, patios, decks, and unpaved trails shall be
permitted provided no buildings are involved.
The area of the buffer impacted by activities permitted in Subsection 1I(7)(c) shall
not exceed 35% of the buffer on the subject parcel.
Streams.
Stream Buffer Delineation. A fifty foot inner buffer and twenty-five foot outer buffer,
measured perpendicular to and horizontally from the top-of-bank on both sides of
any stream, for a total distance of 75 feet, shall be maintained on both sides of any
stream. See Figure 123.1.
Inner Buffer. Measured perpendicular to and horizontally from the top-of-bank of
the stream for a distance of 50 feet. However, in no case shall the inner buffer
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 348/505
a)
b)
a)
b)
c)
2)
be less than a FEMA defined floodway.
Stormwater conveyance required by the Borough, buffer maintenance and
restoration, the correction of hazardous conditions, stream crossings
permitted by DEP, fish hatcheries, wildlife sanctuaries and boat launch sites
constructed so as not to alter the floodplain cross section, and unpaved
trails shall be permitted providing no buildings are involved. No other earth
disturbance, grading, filling, buildings, structures, new construction, or
development shall be permitted.
The area of the inner buffer altered by activities permitted in accord with
Subsection 1I(8)(a)1) shall be minimized to the greatest extent practicable.
Outer Buffer. Measured perpendicular to and horizontally from the outer edge of
the inner buffer for a distance of 25 feet resulting in a total buffer of 75 feet.
Stormwater conveyance required by the Borough, buffer maintenance and
restoration, the correction of hazardous conditions, agricultural activities,
plant nurseries, roads or parking lots constructed on or above existing
grade, temporary fairs and carnivals, accessory uses for residential
purposes, private sportsmen's club activities, athletic facilities, orchards,
wildlife sanctuaries, boat launch sites, roads constructed to existing grade,
stream crossings permitted by DEP and unpaved trails and limited forestry
activities that do not clear cut the buffer (e.g., selective regeneration
harvest) in accord with a forestry management plan shall be permitted
provided no buildings are involved.
In areas of the outer buffer which are not wetlands, vernal ponds or slopes
of more than 15%, stormwater management facilities which improve water
quality of stormwater discharge shall be permitted unless prohibited by
other Borough or state requirements. No other earth disturbance, grading,
filling buildings, structures, new construction, or development shall be
permitted.
No more than 20% of the cumulative outer buffer on the subject parcel shall
be altered by the activities permitted in accord with Subsection 1I(8)(b).
§ 26-124. Groundwater Recharge
(Infiltration/Recharge/Bioretention).
[Ord. 906, 7/16/2009, § 304]
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 349/505
(a)
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(2)
(a)
(3)
A.
1. Maximizing the ground water recharge capacity of the area being developed is required. Design of
the infiltration/recharge stormwater management facilities shall give consideration to providing
ground water recharge to compensate for the reduction in the percolation that occurs when the
ground surface is disturbed or impervious surface is created. It is recommended that roof runoff be
directed to infiltration BMPs which may be designed to compensate for the runoff from parking
areas. These measures are required to be consistent with § 26-102, and take advantage of
utilizing any existing recharge areas.
Infiltration BMPs shall meet the following minimum requirements:
Maximum Infiltration Requirements:
Regulated activities will be required to recharge (infiltrate), where practicable, a
portion of the runoff created by the development as part of an overall stormwater
management plan designed for the site. The volume of runoff to be recharged shall
be determined from Subsection 1A(2)(a) or (b), depending upon demonstrated site
conditions.
Infiltration BMPs intended to receive runoff from developed areas shall be selected based
on suitability of soils and site conditions and shall be constructed on soils that have the
following characteristics:
A minimum depth of 24 inches between the bottom of the BMP and the limiting zone.
Modifications of this requirement for at systems proposing at grade infiltration
systems will be considered with adequate water quality provisions.
An infiltration and/or percolation rate sufficient to accept the additional stormwater
load and drain completely as determined by field tests conducted by the applicant's
design professional.
The recharge facility shall be capable of completely infiltrating the recharge volume
within three days.
Pretreatment in accordance with § 26-121, Subsections 11 and 12, shall be provided
prior to infiltration.
The size of the recharge facility shall be based upon the following volume criteria:
NRCS curve number equation.
The NRCS runoff shall be utilized to calculate infiltration requirements (P) in inches.
For zero runoff: P = I (Infiltration) (in.) = (200/CN) — 2 Eqn: 124.1
Where: CN = SCS (NRCS) curve number of existing conditions contributing to the
recharge facility.
This equation is displayed graphically in, and the infiltration requirement can be
determined from, Figure 124.1.
The recharge volume required would therefore be computed as:
Re =I*% impervious area Eqn: 124.2
Where: I = infiltration requirements (in.)
v
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 350/505
(b)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
C.
Annual Recharge — Water Budget Approach. It has been determined that infiltrating
0.6 inch of runoff from the impervious areas will aid in maintaining the hydrologic
regime of the watershed. If the goals of Subsection 1A(2)(a) cannot be achieved,
then 0.6 inch of rainfall shall be infiltrated from all impervious areas, up to an existing
site condition curve number of 77. Above a curve number of 77, Equation 124.1 or
the curve in Figure 124.1 should be used to determine the Infiltration requirement.
The recharge volume (Re ) required would therefore be computed as: Re =0.6 or 1 *
% impervious area (whichever is less)
Soils. A detailed soils evaluation of the project site shall be required where practicable to
determine the suitability of recharge facilities. The evaluation shall be performed by a qualified
design professional, and at a minimum, address soil permeability, depth to bedrock and
subgrade stability. The general process for designing the infiltration BMP shall be:
Analyze hydrologic soil groups as well as natural and man-made features within the
watershed to determine general areas of suitability for infiltration practices.
Provide site-specific infiltration test results (at the level of the proposed infiltration
surface) in accord with ASTM Guide No. D 5126 to determine the appropriate hydraulic
conductivity rate.
Design the infiltration structure for the required storm volume based on field determined
capacity at the level of the proposed infiltration surface.
If on-lot infiltration structures are proposed by the applicant's design professional, it must
be demonstrated to the Borough that the soils are conducive to infiltrate on the lots
identified.
Stormwater Hotspots. A stormwater hotspot is defined as a land use activity that generates
higher concentrations of hydrocarbons, trace metals or toxicants than are found in typical
stormwater runoff, based on monitoring studies. Table 124.1 provides samples of designated
hotspots. If a site is designated as a hotspot, it has important implications for how stormwater
v v
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 351/505
D.
E.
1.
is managed. First and foremost, untreated stormwater runoff from hotspots cannot be allowed
to infiltrate into groundwater where it may contaminate water supplies. Therefore, the Re
requirement is not applied to development sites that fit into the hotspot category (the entire
WQ must still be treated). Second, a greater level of stormwater treatment may be needed at
hotspot sites to prevent pollutant washoff after construction. EPA's NPDES stormwater
program requires some industrial sites to prepare and implement a stormwater pollution
prevention plan.
Table 124.1
Classification of Stormwater Hotspots
The following land uses and activities are samples of stormwater hotspots:
• Vehicle salvage yards and recycling facilities
• Fleet storage areas (bus, truck, etc.)
• Public works storage areas
• Facilities that generate or store hazardous materials
Extreme caution shall be exercised where salt or chloride would be a pollutant since soils do
little to filter this pollutant and it may contaminate the groundwater. The qualified design
professional shall evaluate the possibility of groundwater contamination from the proposed
infiltration/recharge facility and perform a hydrogeologic justification study if necessary. The
infiltration requirement in high quality/exceptional value waters shall be subject to the
Department's Chapter 93 Antidegradation Regulations. The Borough may require the
installation of an impermeable liner in detention basins where the possibility of groundwater
contamination exists. A detailed hydrogeologic investigation may be required by the
Borough.
The Borough shall require the applicant to provide safeguards against groundwater
contamination for uses which may cause groundwater contamination, should there be a
mishap or spill.
Extreme caution shall be exercised where infiltration is proposed in source water protection
areas or that may affect a wellhead or surface water intake.
Recharge/infiltration facilities shall be used in conjunction with other innovative or traditional
BMPs, stormwater control facilities, and nonstructural stormwater management alternatives.
§ 26-125. Stormwater Management Districts.
[Ord. 906, 7/16/2009, § 305]
The Brodhead/McMichaels Watershed has been divided into stormwater management districts as
shown on the Watershed Map in Appendix D.
Standards for managing runoff from each subarea in the Brodhead/McMichaels Watershed for
design storms are shown in Table 125.1. Development sites located in each of the A, B, or C
Districts must control proposed conditions runoff rates to existing conditions runoff rates for the
design storms in accord with Table 125.1.
In addition to the requirements specified in Table 125.1 below, the water quality and streambank
erosion (§ 26-123), groundwater recharge (§ 26-124), and erosion control (§ 26-128) requirements
shall be implemented.
Table 125.1
Water Quantity Requirements
District Proposed conditions (reduce to) Existing conditions
v
v
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 352/505
2.
3.
Table 125.1
Water Quantity Requirements
District Proposed conditions (reduce to) Existing conditions
A 2-year 1-year
5-year 5-year
10-year 10-year
25-year 25-year
50-year 50-year
100-year 100-year
B-1 2-year 1-year
5-year 2-year
10-year 5-year
25-year 10-year
50-year 25-year
100-year 100-year
B-2 2-year 1-year
5-year 2-year
25-year 5-year
50-year 10-year
100-year 50-year
C Provisional Direct Discharge District. Development sites which can
discharge directly to the main channel or major tributaries or indirectly to
the main channel through an existing stormwater drainage system (i.e.,
storm sewer or tributary) which meets the "Downstream Hydraulic
Capacity Analysis" in Subsection 8 and is shown by the design
professional to not cause a downstream problem, may allow an increase
in flow as long as no downstream harm is demonstrated. However, sites in
District C shall comply with the criteria for water quality and streambank
erosion (§ 26-123); and groundwater recharge (§ 26-124). If the proposed
conditions runoff is intended to be conveyed by an existing stormwater
drainage system to the main channel, assurance must be provided that
such system has adequate capacity to convey the increased peak flows or
will be provided with improvements to furnish the required capacity. When
adequate capacity of the downstream system does not exist and will not
be provided through improvements, the proposed conditions peak rate of
runoff must be controlled to the existing conditions peak rate as required
in District A provisions (i.e., ten-year proposed conditions flows to ten year
existing conditions flows) for the specified design storms.
General. Proposed conditions rates of runoff from any regulated activity shall not exceed the peak
release rates of runoff prior to development for the design storms specified on the Stormwater
Management District Watershed Map (Appendix D) and § 26-122 of this Part.
District Boundaries. The boundaries of the Stormwater Management Districts are shown on an
official map that is available for inspection at the Borough office. A copy of the official map at a
reduced scale is included in the Appendix D. The exact location of the Stormwater Management
District boundaries as they apply to a given development site shall be determined by mapping the
boundaries using the two-foot topographic contours (or most accurate data required) provided as
part of the drainage plan.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 353/505
4.
5.
6.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
7.
Sites Located in More than One District. For a proposed development site located within two or
more stormwater management district category subareas, the peak discharge rate from any
subarea shall be the existing conditions peak discharge for that subarea as indicated in § 26-122.
The calculated peak discharges shall apply regardless of whether the grading plan changes the
drainage area by subarea. An exception to the above may be granted by the Borough if
discharges from multiple subareas recombine in proximity to the site. In this case, peak discharge
in any direction may be a 100% release rate if the overall site discharge meets the weighted
average release rate.
Off-Site Areas. Off-site areas that drain through a proposed development site are not subject to
release rate criteria when determining allowable peak runoff rates. However, on-site drainage
facilities shall be designed to safely convey off-site flows through the development site.
Site Areas. Where the site area to be impacted by a proposed development activity differs
significantly from the total site area, only the proposed impact area utilizing stormwater
management measures shall be subject to the management district criteria. In other words,
unimpacted areas bypassing the stormwater management facilities would not be subject to the
management district criteria.
"No Harm" Option. For any proposed development site not located in a provisional direct
discharge district, the applicant has the option of using a less restrictive runoff control (including
no detention) if the applicant can prove that "no harm" would be caused by discharging at a higher
runoff rate than that specified by the stormwater management plan. The "no harm" option is used
when an applicant can prove that the proposed hydrographs can match existing hydrographs, or if
it can be proved that the proposed conditions will not cause increases in peaks at all points
downstream. Proof of "no harm" must be shown based upon the following "downstream impact
evaluation" which shall include a "downstream hydraulic capacity analysis" consistent with
Subsection 8 to determine if adequate hydraulic capacity exists. The applicant shall submit to the
Borough this evaluation of the impacts due to increased downstream stormwater flows in the
watershed.
The hydrologic regime of the site must be maintained.
The "downstream impact evaluation" shall include hydrologic and hydraulic calculations
necessary to determine the impact of hydrograph timing modifications due to the proposed
development upon a dam, highway, structure, natural point of restricted streamflow or any
stream channel section, established with the concurrence of the Borough.
The evaluation shall continue downstream until the increase in flow diminishes due to
additional flow from tributaries and/or stream attenuation.
The peak flow values to be used for downstream areas for the design return period storms
(two, five, ten-, twenty-five-, fifty-, and one-hundred-year) shall be the values from the
calibrated model for the Brodhead/McMichaels Watershed. These flow values can be
obtained from the original Act 167 Watershed Stormwater Management Plans.
Applicant-proposed conditions runoff controls which would generate increased peak flow
rates at storm drainage problem areas would, by definition, are precluded from successful
attempts to prove "no-harm," except in conjunction with proposed capacity improvements for
the problem areas consistent with Subsection 8.
A financial distress shall not constitute grounds for the Borough to approve the use of the "noharm"
option.
Downstream capacity improvements may be provided as necessary to achieve the "no harm"
option.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 354/505
H.
A.
B.
C.
8.
9.
1.
Any "no harm" justifications shall be submitted by the applicant as part of the drainage plan
submission per Part 1D.
"Downstream Hydraulic Capacity Analysis." Any downstream hydraulic capacity analysis
conducted in accordance with this Part shall use the following criteria for determining adequacy for
accepting increased peak flow rates:
Existing natural or man-made channels or swales must be able to convey the increased runoff
associated with a two year return period event within their banks at velocities consistent with
protection of the channels from erosion. Acceptable velocities shall be based upon criteria
included in the DEP Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control Program Manual.
Existing natural or man-made channels or swales must be able to convey increased twentyfive-
year return period runoff without creating any hazard to persons or property.
Culverts, bridges, storm sewers or any other facilities which must pass or convey flows from
the tributary area must be designed in accordance with DEP Chapter 105 regulations (if
applicable) and, at minimum, pass the increased twenty-five-year return period runoff.
Hardship Option. The stormwater management plan and its standards and criteria are designed to
maintain existing conditions peak flows and volumes throughout the Brodhead/McMichaels
Watershed as the watershed becomes developed. There may be certain instances, however,
where the standards and criteria established are too restrictive for a particular applicant. The
existing drainage network in some areas may be capable of safely transporting slight increases in
flows without causing a problem or increasing flows elsewhere. If an applicant cannot meet the
stormwater standards due to lot conditions or if conformance would become a hardship to an
applicant, the hardship option may be applied. A financial distress shall not constitute grounds for
the Borough to approve the use of the hardship option. The applicant would have to plead his/her
case to the governing body with the final determination made by the Borough. Any applicant's
pleading the "hardship option" will assume all liabilities that may arise due to exercising this
option. A financial distress shall not constitute grounds for the Borough to approve the use of the
"no-harm" option.
§ 26-126. Calculation Methodology.
[Ord. 906, 7/16/2009, § 306]
Stormwater runoff from all development sites with a drainage area of greater than 200 acres shall
be calculated using a generally accepted calculation technique that is based on the NRCS Soil
Cover Complex Method. Table 126.1 summarizes acceptable computation methods and the
method selected by the design professional shall be based on the individual limitations and
suitability of each method for a particular site. The Borough may allow the use of the Rational
Method to estimate peak discharges from drainage areas that contain less than 200 acres. The
Soil Cover Complex Method shall be used for drainage areas greater than 200 acres.
Table 126.1
Acceptable Computation Methodologies for Stormwater Management Plans
Method
Method Developed
By Applicability
TR-20 (or commercial
computer package based
on TR-20)
USDA NRCS Applicable where use of full hydrology
computer model is desirable or
necessary.
TR-55 (or commercial
computer package based
on TR-55)
USDA NRCS Applicable for land development plans
within limitations described in TR-55.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 355/505
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
Table 126.1
Acceptable Computation Methodologies for Stormwater Management Plans
Method
Method Developed
By Applicability
HEC-1/HEC-HMS US Army Corps of
Engineers
Applicable where use of full hydrologic
computer model is desirable or
necessary.
PSRM Penn State
University
Applicable where use of a hydrologic
computer model is desirable or
necessary; simpler than TR-20 or HEC-
1.
Rational Method (or
commercial computer
package based on rational
method)
Emil Kuichling
(1889)
For sites less than 200 acres, or as
approved by the Borough and/or
Borough Engineer.
Other methods Varies Other computation methodologies
approved by the Borough and/or
Borough Engineer.
All calculations consistent with this Part using the Soil Cover Complex Method shall use the
appropriate design rainfall depths for the various return period storms according to the region in
which they are located as presented in Table B-1 in Appendix B of this Part. If a hydrologic
computer model such as PSRM or HEC-1 is used for stormwater runoff calculations, then the
duration of rainfall shall be 24 hours. The SCS 'S' curve shown in Figure B-1, Appendix B, of this
Part shall be used for the rainfall distribution.
For the purposes of existing conditions flow rate determination, undeveloped land shall be
considered as "meadow" in good condition, unless the natural ground cover generates a lower
curve number or rational 'C' value, as listed in Table B-2 or B-3 in Appendix B of this Part.
All calculations using the Rational Method shall use rainfall intensities consistent with appropriate
times-of-concentration for overland flow and return periods from the design storm curves from PA
Department of Transportation Design Rainfall Curves (1986) (Figures B-2 to B-4). Times-ofconcentration
for overland flow shall be calculated using the methodology presented in Chapter 3
of Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds, NRCS, TR-55 (as amended or replaced from time to
time by NRCS). Times-of-concentration for channel and pipe flow shall be computed using
Manning's equation.
Runoff curve numbers (CN) for both existing and proposed conditions to be used in the Soil Cover
Complex Method shall be obtained from Table B-2 in Appendix B of this Part.
Runoff coefficients (c) for both existing and proposed conditions for use in the Rational Method
shall be obtained from Table B-3 in Appendix B of this Part.
The designer shall consider that the runoff from proposed sites graded to the subsoil will not have
the same runoff conditions as the site under existing conditions, even after topsoiling or seeding.
The designer may increase his proposed condition "CN" or "C" to better reflect proposed soil
conditions.
Where uniform flow is anticipated, the Manning equation shall be used for hydraulic computations,
and to determine the capacity of open channels, pipes, and storm sewers. Values for Manning's
roughness coefficient (n) shall be consistent with Table B-4 in Appendix B of this Part.
Outlet structures for stormwater management facilities shall be designed to meet the performance
standards of this Part using any generally accepted hydraulic analysis technique or method.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 356/505
10.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
The design of any stormwater detention facilities intended to meet the performance standards of
this Part shall be verified by routing the design storm hydrograph through these facilities using the
storage-indication method. The design storm hydrograph shall be computed using a calculation
method that produces a full hydrograph. The Borough may approve the use of any generally
accepted full hydrograph approximation technique that shall use a total runoff volume that is
consistent with the volume from a method that produces a full hydrograph.
§ 26-127. Other Requirements.
[Ord. 906, 7/16/2009, § 307]
Any stormwater facility located on state highway rights-of-way shall be subject to approval by the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation (PennDOT).
Pretreatment in accordance with § 26-121, Subsections 11 and 12, shall be provided prior to
infiltration.
All wet basin designs shall incorporate biologic controls consistent with the West Nile Guidance
found in Appendix E.
Any stormwater management facility (i.e., BMP, detention basin) designed to store runoff and
requiring a berm or earthen embankment required or regulated by this Part shall be designed to
provide an emergency spillway to handle flow up to and including the one-hundred-year proposed
conditions. The height of embankment must provide a minimum one foot of freeboard above the
maximum pool elevation computed when the facility functions for the one-hundred-year proposed
conditions inflow. Should any stormwater management facility require a dam safety permit under
PA DEP Chapter 105, the facility shall be designed in accordance with Chapter 105 and meet the
regulations of Chapter 105 concerning dam safety which may be required to pass storms larger
than the one-hundred-year event.
Any facilities that constitute water obstructions (e.g., culverts, bridges, outfalls, or stream
enclosures), and any work involving wetlands governed by PA DEP Chapter 105 regulations (as
amended or replaced from time to time by PA DEP), shall be designed in accordance with Chapter
105 and will require a permit from PA DEP.
Any other drainage conveyance facility that does not fall under Chapter 105 regulations must be
able to convey, without damage to the drainage structure or roadway, runoff from the twenty-fiveyear
design storm with a minimum one foot of freeboard measured below the lowest point along
the top of the roadway. Any facility that constitutes a dam as defined in PA DEP Chapter 105
regulations may require a permit under dam safety regulations. Any facility located within a
PennDOT right-of-way must meet PennDOT minimum design standards and permit submission
requirements.
Any drainage conveyance facility and/or channel not governed by Chapter 105 regulations, must
be able to convey, without damage to the drainage structure or roadway, runoff from the twentyfive-
year design storm. Conveyance facilities to or exiting from stormwater management facilities
(i.e., detention basins) shall be designed to convey the design flow to or from that structure.
Roadway crossings located within designated floodplain areas must be able to convey runoff from
a one-hundred-year design storm. Any facility located within a PennDOT right-of-way must meet
PennDOT minimum design standards and permit submission requirements.
Storm sewers must be able to convey proposed conditions runoff from a twenty-five-year design
storm without surcharging inlets, where appropriate.
Adequate erosion protection shall be provided along all open channels, and at all points of
discharge.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 357/505
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
1.
A.
B.
2.
The design of all stormwater management facilities shall incorporate sound engineering principles
and practices, such as the design standards found in the DEP BMP Manual, as amended. The
Borough reserves the right to disapprove any design that would result in the construction of or
continuation of a stormwater problem area.
Drainage easements shall be incorporated into lots or established separately and shown on the
plan. When easements are not incorporated into lots but are established separately, future
ownership and maintenance responsibility shall be stated on the plan.
All proposed surface and subsurface structures shall be indicated on the stormwater management
plans. The designer of these structures shall demonstrate the structural adequacy of the facility.
Fencing shall be required for the protection of the public when facilities are proposed to store open
water.
Stormwater management plans shall include all appropriate design details and dimensions
necessary to clearly explain and show all proposed construction materials, grades and elevations.
When the property to be developed is composed of more than one watershed, and discharges
from the watersheds do not occur at a common point, each watershed shall be managed
separately so that no uncontrolled runoff may occur from any major portion of the developed total
site.
It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to obtain any and all stormwater easements on, over
or through other properties when such easements are required.
Storm sewer outfalls shall be so designed, with respect to the elevation of the invert, installation of
pumps or other features, that when the receiving stream is flooded, the storm sewer will continue
to drain the area it is designed to serve.
An easement to allow maintenance crews access to the basin and outlet areas shall be
established around all basins to be maintained. The limits of such easements shall be 15 feet from
the outside toe of all dams and embankments and top of all pond side slopes and shall be
connected to a public right-of-way.
Basin emergency spillways shall be constructed in undisturbed virgin soil and stabilized
accordingly. Outlets shall be designed to function without manual, electric, or mechanical controls
where possible.
All earth fill shall be free from brush, roots, and other organic material subject to decomposition.
The fill material in all earth dams and embankments shall be compacted to at least 95% of the
maximum density obtained from compaction tests performed by appropriate methodology.
§ 26-128. Erosion and Sediment Control Requirements.
[Ord. 906, 7/16/2009, § 308]
Any earth disturbance must be conducted in conformance with PA Title 25, Chapter 102, "Erosion
and Sediment Control."
Additional erosion and sediment control design standards and criteria that must be or are
recommended to be applied where infiltration BMPs are proposed shall include the following:
Areas proposed for infiltration BMPs shall be protected from sedimentation and compaction
during the construction phase to maintain maximum infiltration capacity.
Infiltration BMPs shall not be constructed nor receive runoff until the entire contributory
drainage area to the infiltration BMP has achieved final stabilization.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 358/505
A.
B.
C.
D.
1.
A.
B.
C.
D.
2.
D.. Drainage Plan Requirements.
§ 26-131. General Requirements.
[Ord. 906, 7/16/2009, § 401]
For any of the activities regulated by this Part, the preliminary or final approval of subdivision and/or
land development plans, the issuance of any building or occupancy permit, or the commencement of
any earth disturbance may not proceed until the applicant or his/her agent has received written
approval of a drainage plan from the Borough and an adequate erosion and sediment control plan
review by the Conservation District.
§ 26-132. Exemptions.
[Ord. 906, 7/16/2009, § 402]
Exemptions. The following land use activities are exempt from the drainage plan submission and
buffer requirements of this Part:
Use of land for gardening for home consumption.
Agriculture when operated in accordance with a conservation plan or erosion and sediment
control plan (E & S) found adequate by the Conservation District.
Forest management operations which are following the Department of Environmental
Protection's management practices contained in its publication "Soil Erosion and
Sedimentation (E & S) Control Guidelines for Forestry" and are operating under an approved
E & S plan and must comply with stream buffer requirements in § 26-123 and floodplain
management requirements.
Impervious Surface. Any regulated activity that has less than 5,000 square feet of impervious
surface and/or meets the following exemption criteria is exempt from the plan submittal and
buffer provisions of this Part. These criteria shall apply to the total development even if
development is to take place in phases. Impervious areas existing on the "parent tract" prior
to adoption of this Part shall not be considered in cumulative impervious area calculations for
exemption purposes.
Additional exemption criteria include:
Exemption Responsibilities. An exemption shall not relieve the applicant from implementing
such measures as are necessary to protect the public health, safety, and property. An
exemption shall not relieve the applicant from providing adequate stormwater management
for regulated activities to meet the purpose of this Part; however, drainage plans will not have
to be submitted to the Borough.
This exemption shall not relieve the applicant from meeting the special requirements for
watersheds draining to exceptional value (EV) waters and source water protection areas
(SWPA): requirements for nonstructural project design sequencing (§ 26-122) water quality
and streambank erosion (§ 26-123), and groundwater recharge (§ 26-124).
Drainage Problems. If a drainage problem is documented or known to exist downstream of, or
expected from the proposed activity, then the Borough may require a drainage plan submittal.
Parent Tracts. Ordinance criteria shall apply to the total development even if development is
to take place in phases. The date of the Borough ordinance adoption of this Part shall be the
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 359/505
1.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
B.
2.
starting point from which to consider tracts as "parent tracts" in which future subdivisions and
respective impervious area computations shall be cumulatively considered.
§ 26-133. Drainage Plan Contents.
[Ord. 906, 7/16/2009, § 403]
The drainage plan shall consist of a general description of the project including sequencing items
described in § 26-122, calculations, maps, and plans A note on the maps shall refer to the
associated computations and erosion and sediment control plan by title and date. The cover sheet
of the computations and erosion and sediment control plan shall refer to the associated maps by
title and date. All drainage plan materials shall be submitted to the Borough in a format that is
clear, concise, legible, neat, and well organized; otherwise, the drainage plan shall not be
accepted for review and shall be returned to the applicant.
The following items shall be included in the drainage plan:
General.
General description of the project including those areas described in § 26-122.
General description of permanent stormwater management techniques, including
construction specifications of the materials to be used for stormwater management
facilities.
Complete hydrologic, hydraulic, and structural computations for all stormwater
management facilities.
An erosion and sediment control plan, including all reviews and letters of adequacy
obtained by the Conservation District.
A general description of nonpoint source pollution controls.
Maps. Map(s) of the project area shall be submitted on twenty-four inch by thirty-six inch
sheets and/or shall be prepared in a form that meets the requirements for recording at the
offices of the Recorder of Deeds of Monroe County. If the Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance (SALDO) [Chapter 22] has more stringent criteria then the more stringent criteria
shall apply. The contents of the map(s) shall include, but not be limited to:
The location of the project relative to highways, municipalities, or other identifiable
landmarks.
Existing and final contours at intervals of two feet. In areas of steep slopes (greater than
15%), five-foot contour intervals may be used.
Existing streams, lakes, ponds or other waters of the Commonwealth within the project
area.
Other physical features including flood hazard boundaries, buffers, existing drainage
courses, areas of natural vegetation to be preserved, and the total extent of the upstream
area draining through the site.
The locations of all existing and proposed utilities, sanitary sewers, and water lines within
50 feet of property lines.
The location(s) of public water supply wells and surface water intakes as well as their
source water protection areas.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 360/505
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
(16)
(17)
(18)
(19)
(20)
(21)
(22)
(23)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
C.
Soil names and boundaries.
Limits of earth disturbance, including the type and amount of impervious area that would
be added.
Proposed structures, roads, paved areas, and buildings.
The name of the development, the name and address of the applicant of the property,
and the name of the individual or firm preparing the plan.
The date of submission.
A graphic and written scale of one inch equals no more than 50 feet; for tracts of 20
acres or more, the scale shall be one inch equals no more than 100 feet.
A north arrow.
The total tract boundary and size with distances marked to the nearest foot and bearings
to the nearest degree.
Existing and proposed land use(s).
A key map showing all existing man-made features beyond the property boundary that
would be affected by the project.
Location of all open channels.
Overland drainage patterns and swales.
A fifteen-foot wide access easement to and around all stormwater management facilities
that would provide ingress to and egress from a public right-of-way.
The location of all erosion and sediment control facilities.
A note on the plan indicating the location and responsibility for maintenance of
stormwater management facilities that would be located off-site. All off-site facilities shall
meet the performance standards and design criteria specified in this Part.
A statement, signed by the applicant, acknowledging that any revision to the approved
drainage plan must be approved by the Borough and that a revised E & S plan must be
submitted to the Conservation District for a determination of adequacy.
The following signature block for the Design Engineer: "I, (Design Engineer), on this date
(date of signature), hereby certify that the drainage plan meets all design standards and
criteria of the Brodhead/McMichaels Watershed Act 167 Stormwater Management
Ordinance."
Supplemental Information.
A written description of the following information shall be submitted.
The overall stormwater management concept for the project designed in accordance
with § 26-122.
Stormwater runoff computations as specified in this Part.
Stormwater management techniques to be applied both during and after
development.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 361/505
(d)
(e)
(f)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(1)
(2)
(3)
D.
1.
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
C.
2.
Expected project time schedule.
Development stages (project phases) if so proposed.
An operation and maintenance plan in accordance with § 26-162 of this Part.
An erosion and sediment control plan.
The effect of the project (in terms of runoff volumes and peak flows) on adjacent
properties and on any existing Borough stormwater collection system that may receive
runoff from the project site.
A declaration of adequacy and highway occupancy permit from the PennDOT District
office when utilization of a PennDOT storm drainage system is proposed.
Stormwater Management Facilities.
All stormwater management facilities must be located on a plan and described in detail.
When groundwater recharge methods such as seepage pits, beds or trenches are used,
the locations of existing and proposed septic tank infiltration areas and wells must be
shown.
All calculations, assumptions, and criteria used in the design of the stormwater
management facilities must be shown.
§ 26-134. Plan Submission.
[Ord. 906, 7/16/2009, § 404]
The Borough shall require receipt of a complete plan, as specified in this Part.
For any activities that require an NPDES permit for stormwater discharges from construction
activities, or a PA DEP joint permit application, or a PennDOT highway occupancy permit, or any
other permit under applicable state or federal regulations, or are regulated under Chapter 105
(Dam Safety and Waterway Management) or Chapter 106 (Floodplain Management) of PA DEP's
rules and regulations, the proof of application for said permit(s) or approvals shall be part of the
plan. The plan shall be coordinated with the state and federal permit process and the Borough
SALDO review process.
For those regulated activities which require SALDO approval, the drainage plan and ERSAM
shall be submitted by the applicant as part of the preliminary plan submission.
For those regulated activities that do not require SALDO approval, see § 26-131, "General
Requirements."
Six copies of the drainage plan shall be submitted and distributed as follows:
Two copies to the Borough accompanied by the requisite Borough review fee, as
specified in this Part.
Two copies to the Conservation District.
One copy to the Borough Engineer.
One copy to the County Planning Commission.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 362/505
D.
1.
2.
3.
A.
B.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
Any submissions found incomplete shall not be accepted for review and shall be returned to
the applicant with a notification in writing of the specific manner in which the submission is
incomplete.
§ 26-135. Drainage Plan Review.
[Ord. 906, 7/16/2009, § 405]
The Borough Engineer shall review the drainage plan for consistency with the adopted
Brodhead/McMichaels Watershed Act 167 Stormwater Management Plan.
The Borough Engineer shall review the drainage plan for any subdivision or land development
against the Borough Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance [Chapter 22] provisions not
superseded by this Part.
The E & S plan shall be reviewed by the County Conservation District and found adequate to meet
the requirements of PA DEP's Chapter 102 regulations prior to Borough of the drainage plan.
For regulated activities specified in § 26-104 of this Part, the Borough Engineer shall notify the
Borough in writing, within 45 calendar days, whether the drainage plan is consistent with the
stormwater management plan.
Should the drainage plan be determined to be consistent with the stormwater management
plan, the Borough Engineer will forward a letter of consistency to the Borough Secretary, who
will then notify the developer.
Should the drainage plan be determined to be inconsistent or noncompliant with the
stormwater management plan, the Borough Engineer shall forward a letter to the Borough
Secretary with a copy to the applicant citing the reason(s) and specific ordinance sections for
the inconsistency or noncompliance. Inconsistency or noncompliance may be due to
inadequate information to make a reasonable judgment as to compliance with the stormwater
management plan. Any drainage plans that are inconsistent or noncompliant may be revised
by the applicant and resubmitted consistent with this Part. The Borough Secretary shall then
notify the developer of the Borough Engineer's findings. Any disapproved drainage plans may
be revised by the developer and resubmitted consistent with this Part.
For regulated activities specified in § 26-104 of this Part, which require a building permit, the
Borough Engineer shall notify the Enforcement Officer in writing, whether the drainage plan is
consistent with the stormwater management plan and forward a copy of the approval/disapproval
letter to the applicant. Any disapproved drainage plan may be revised by the applicant and
resubmitted consistent with this Part.
For regulated activities specified in § 26-104 of this Part that require an NPDES permit application,
the applicant shall forward a copy of the Borough Engineer's letter stating that the drainage plan is
consistent with the stormwater management plan to the Conservation District. PADEP and the
Conservation District may consider the Borough Engineer's review comments in determining
whether to issue a permit.
The Borough shall not grant approval or grant preliminary approval to any subdivision or land
development for regulated activities specified in § 26-104 of this Part if the drainage plan has been
found to be inconsistent with the stormwater management plan, as determined by the Borough
Engineer. All required permits from PA DEP must be obtained prior to approval of any subdivision
or land development.
No Borough permits shall be issued for any regulated activity specified in § 26-104 of this Part if
the drainage plan has been found to be inconsistent with the stormwater management plan, as
determined by the Borough Engineer, or without considering the comments of the Borough
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 363/505
9.
10.
1.
2.
1.
Engineer shall be issued. All required permits from PA DEP must be obtained prior to issuance of
a building permit.
The applicant shall be responsible for completing record drawings of all stormwater management
facilities included in the approved drainage plan. The record drawings and an explanation of any
discrepancies with the design plans shall be submitted to the Borough Engineer for final approval.
In no case shall the Borough approve the record drawings until the Borough receives a copy of an
approved declaration of adequacy and/or highway occupancy permit from the PennDOT District
Office, NPDES permit, and any applicable permits or approvals, from PA DEP or the Conservation
District. The above permits and approvals must be based on the record drawings.
The Borough's approval of a drainage plan shall be valid for a period not to exceed five years
commencing on the date that the Borough signs the approved drainage plan or approves the land
development or subdivision plan accompanying the drainage plan application. If stormwater
management facilities included in the approved drainage plan have not been constructed, or if
constructed, and record drawings of these facilities have not been approved within this five-year
time period, then the Borough may consider the drainage plan disapproved and may revoke any
and all permits. Drainage plans that are considered disapproved by the Borough shall be
resubmitted in accordance with § 26-137 of this Part.
§ 26-136. Modification of Plans.
[Ord. 906, 7/16/2009, § 406]
A modification to a drainage plan under review by the Borough for a development site that
involves a change in stormwater management facilities or techniques, or that involves the
relocation or re-design of stormwater management facilities, or that is necessary because soil or
other conditions are not as stated on the drainage plan as determined by the Borough Engineer,
shall require a resubmission of the modified drainage plan consistent with § 26-134 of this Part
and be subject to review as specified in § 26-135 of this Part.
A modification to an already approved or disapproved drainage plan shall be submitted to the
Borough, accompanied by the applicable Borough review and inspection fee. A modification to a
drainage plan for which a formal action has not been taken by the Borough shall be submitted to
the Borough, accompanied by the applicable Borough review and inspection fee.
§ 26-137. Resubmission of Disapproved Drainage Plans.
[Ord. 906, 7/16/2009, § 407]
A disapproved drainage plan may be resubmitted, with the revisions addressing the Borough
Engineer's concerns documented in writing and addressed to the Borough Secretary in accordance
with § 26-134 of this Part and distributed accordingly and be subject to review as specified in § 26-135
of this Part. The applicable Borough review and inspection fee must accompany a resubmission of a
disapproved drainage plan.
E.. Inspections.
§ 26-141. Schedule of Inspections.
[Ord. 906, 7/16/2009, § 501]
The Borough Engineer or his Borough designee shall inspect all phases of the installation of the
permanent stormwater management facilities as deemed appropriate by the Borough Engineer.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 364/505
2.
3.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
1.
1.
During any stage of the work, if the Borough Engineer or his Borough designee determines that
the permanent stormwater management facilities are not being installed in accordance with the
approved stormwater management plan, the Borough shall revoke any existing permits or other
approvals and issue a cease and desist order until a revised drainage plan is submitted and
approved, as specified in this Part.
A final inspection of all stormwater management facilities shall be conducted by the Borough
Engineer or his Borough designee and to confirm compliance with the approved drainage plan
prior to the issuance of any occupancy permit.
F.. Fees and Expenses.
§ 26-151. Borough Drainage Plan Review and Inspection Fee.
[Ord. 906, 7/16/2009, § 601]
Fees shall be established by the Borough to defray plan review and construction inspection costs
incurred by the Borough. All fees shall be paid by the applicant at the time of drainage plan
submission. Review and inspection fee schedule shall be established by resolution of the Borough
governing body based on the size of the regulated activity and based on the Borough's costs for
reviewing drainage plans and conducting inspections pursuant to § 26-141. The Borough shall
periodically update the review and inspection fee schedule to ensure that review costs are adequately
reimbursed.
§ 26-152. Expenses Covered by Fees.
[Ord. 906, 7/16/2009, § 602]
The fees required by this Part shall at a minimum cover:
Administrative costs.
The review of the drainage plan by the Borough and the Borough Engineer.
The site inspections.
The inspection of stormwater management facilities and drainage improvements during
construction.
The final inspection upon completion of the stormwater management facilities and drainage
improvements presented in the drainage plan.
Any additional work required to enforce any permit provisions regulated by this Part, correct
violations, and assure proper completion of stipulated remedial actions.
G.. Construction and Maintenance Responsibilities.
§ 26-161. Performance Guarantee.
[Ord. 906, 7/16/2009, § 701]
For subdivisions and land developments the applicant shall provide a financial guarantee to the
Borough for the timely installation and proper construction of all stormwater management controls
as: (A) Required by the approved drainage plan equal to or greater than the full construction cost
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 365/505
2.
A.
B.
3.
4.
1.
A.
B.
2.
3.
1.
2.
of the required controls or (B) in the amount and method of payment provided for in the
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance [Chapter 22].
For other regulated activities, the Borough may require a financial guarantee from the applicant.
At the completion of the project, and as a prerequisite for the release of the performance
guarantee, the applicant or his representatives shall:
Provide a certification of completion from an engineer, architect, surveyor or other qualified
person verifying that all permanent facilities have been constructed according to the plans
and specifications and approved revisions thereto.
Provide a set of record drawings.
After the Borough receives the certification, a final inspection shall be conducted by the Borough
Engineer or designee to certify compliance with this Part.
§ 26-162. Maintenance Responsibilities.
[Ord. 906, 7/16/2009, § 702]
The drainage plan for the development site shall contain an operation and maintenance plan
prepared by the applicant and approved by the Borough Engineer. The operation and
maintenance plan shall outline required routine maintenance actions and schedules necessary to
insure proper operation of the facility(ies).
The drainage plan for the development site shall establish responsibilities for the continuing
operation and maintenance of all proposed stormwater control facilities, consistent with the
following principles:
If a development consists of structures or lots which are to be separately owned and in which
streets, sewers or other public improvements are to be dedicated to the Borough, stormwater
control facilities may also be dedicated to and maintained by the Borough (the Borough is not
obligated to accept ownership).
If a development site is to be maintained in a single ownership or if streets, sewers or other
public improvements are to be privately owned and maintained, then the ownership and
maintenance of stormwater control facilities may be the responsibility of the applicant or
private management entity.
The governing body, upon recommendation of the Borough Engineer, shall make the final
determination on the continuing maintenance responsibilities prior to approval of the drainage
plan. The governing body reserves the right to accept the ownership and operating responsibility
for any or all of the stormwater management controls.
§ 26-163. Maintenance Agreement for Privately Owned
Stormwater Facilities.
[Ord. 906, 7/16/2009, § 703]
Prior to approval of the site's drainage plan, the applicant shall sign and record the maintenance
agreement contained in Appendix A which is attached and made part hereof, covering all
stormwater control facilities that are to be privately owned.
Other items may be included in the agreement where determined necessary to guarantee the
satisfactory maintenance of all facilities. The maintenance agreement shall be subject to the
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 366/505
A.
B.
C.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
1.
review and approval of the Borough solicitor and governing body.
§ 26-164. Borough Stormwater Maintenance Fund.
[Ord. 906, 7/16/2009, § 704]
Persons installing stormwater storage facilities shall be required to pay a specified amount to the
Borough stormwater maintenance fund to help defray costs of periodic inspections and
maintenance expenses. The amount of the deposit shall be determined as follows:
If the storage facility is to be privately owned and maintained, the deposit shall cover the cost
of periodic inspections performed by the Borough for a period of 10 years, as estimated by
the Borough Engineer. After that period of time, inspections will be performed at the expense
of the Borough.
If the storage facility is to be owned and maintained by the Borough, the deposit shall cover
the estimated costs for maintenance and inspections for 10 years. The Borough Engineer will
establish the estimated costs utilizing information submitted by the applicant.
The amount of the deposit to the fund shall be converted to present worth of the annual series
values. The Borough Engineer shall determine the present worth equivalents, which shall be
subject to the approval of the governing body.
If a storage facility is proposed that also serves as a recreation facility (e.g., ballfield, lake), the
Borough may reduce or waive the amount of the maintenance fund deposit based upon the value
of the land for public recreation purpose.
If at some future time a storage facility (whether publicly or privately owned) is eliminated due to
the installation of storm sewers or other storage facility, the unused portion of the maintenance
fund deposit will be applied to the cost of abandoning the facility and connecting to the storm
sewer system or other facility. Any amount of the deposit remaining after the costs of
abandonment are paid will be returned to the depositor.
Long-Term Maintenance. The Borough may require applicants to pay a fee to the Borough
stormwater maintenance fund to cover long term maintenance of stormwater control and best
management practices.
Stormwater Related Problems. The Borough may require applicants to pay a fee to the Borough
stormwater maintenance fund to cover stormwater related problems which may arise from the land
development and earth disturbance.
H.. Modifications.
§ 26-171. Modifications.
[Ord. 906, 7/16/2009, § 801]
In order to permit the reasonable utilization of property, the Borough Council may grant a
modification of the requirements of one or more provisions of this Part if literal compliance will
result in undue hardship or be unreasonable as it is applied to a particular property, or if the
applicant establishes to the satisfaction of the Borough Council that an alternative proposal will
allow for equal or better results, provided that such modification will not be contrary to the public
interest and fulfills the purpose and intent of this Part.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 367/505
2.
A.
B.
C.
3.
4.
A.
1.
In granting any requested modification, the Borough Council may impose such conditions as will,
in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the standards and requirements of this Part.
All requests for modification shall be made in writing, shall be signed by the applicant, shall
accompany the submission of the drainage plan, and shall include:
The specific provision of this Part with respect to which a modification is desired.
The specific modification desired and the proposed alternative.
The applicant's justification for the modification, including the full basis and facts of the
alleged unreasonableness or undue hardship, and an explanation of how the requested
modification is the minimum modification necessary to permit the reasonable utilization of the
property but still achieves the purposes and objectives of this Part.
The Borough Council shall maintain a written record of the action taken on all requests for
modification. Any modifications that are granted or approved shall be set forth on the approved
drainage plan and on the record plan. Modifications granted in accordance with these provisions
shall be considered to be consistent with this Part.
I.. Enforcement and Penalties.
§ 26-181. Right-of-Entry.
[Ord. 906, 7/16/2009, § 901]
Upon presentation of proper credentials, duly authorized representatives of the Borough may enter at
reasonable times upon any property within the Borough to inspect the condition of the stormwater
structures and facilities in regard to any aspect regulated by this Part.
§ 26-182. Notification.
[Ord. 906, 7/16/2009, § 902]
In the event that a person fails to comply with the requirements of this Part, or fails to conform to the
requirements of any permit issued hereunder, the Borough shall provide written notification of the
violation. Such notification shall set forth the nature of the violation(s) and establish a time limit for
correction of these violation(s). Failure to comply within the time specified shall subject such person to
the penalty provisions of this Part. All such penalties shall be deemed cumulative and shall not prevent
the Borough from pursuing any and all remedies. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant of the
real property on which any regulated activity is proposed to occur, is occurring, or has occurred, to
comply with the terms and conditions of this Part.
§ 26-183. Enforcement.
[Ord. 906, 7/16/2009, § 903]
The Borough governing body is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all of the provisions of
this Part. All inspections regarding compliance with the drainage plan shall be the responsibility of
the Borough Engineer or other qualified persons designated by the Borough.
Design Plans. A set of design plans approved by the Borough shall be on file at the site
throughout the duration of the construction activity. Periodic inspections may be made by the
Borough or designee during construction.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 368/505
B.
C.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(a)
(b)
(2)
(3)
D.
E.
1.
2.
1.
Adherence to Approved Plan. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
undertake any regulated activity under § 26-104 on any property except as provided for in the
approved drainage plan and pursuant to the requirements of this Part. It shall be unlawful to
alter or remove any control structure required by the drainage plan pursuant to this Part or to
allow the property to remain in a condition which does not conform to the approved drainage
plan.
Hearing. Prior to revocation or suspension of a permit and at the request of the applicant, the
governing body will schedule a hearing to discuss the noncompliance if there is no immediate
danger to life, public health or property. The expense of a hearing shall be the applicant's
responsibility.
Suspension and Revocation of Permits.
Any permit issued by the Borough may be suspended or revoked for:
Non-compliance with or failure to implement any provision of the permit.
A violation of any provision of this Part or any other applicable law, ordinance, rule or
regulation relating to the project.
The creation of any condition or the commission of any act during construction or
development which constitutes or creates a hazard or nuisance, pollution or which
endangers the life or property of others, or as outlined in this subpart I.
A suspended permit shall be reinstated by the governing body when:
The Borough Engineer or his Borough designee has inspected and approved the
corrections to the stormwater management and erosion and sediment pollution
control measure(s), or the elimination of the hazard or nuisance.
The governing body is satisfied that the violation of the ordinance, law, or rule and
regulation has been corrected.
A permit that has been revoked cannot be reinstated. The applicant may apply for a new
permit under the procedures outlined in this Part.
Occupancy Permit. An occupancy permit shall not be issued unless the certification of
completion pursuant to § 26-161, Subsection 1, has been approved by the Borough. The
occupancy permit shall be required for each lot owner and/or applicant for all subdivisions and
land development in the Borough.
§ 26-184. Public Nuisance.
[Ord. 906, 7/16/2009, § 904]
The violation of any provision of this Part is hereby deemed a public nuisance.
Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 26-185. Penalties.
[Ord. 906, 7/16/2009, § 905]
Anyone violating the provisions of this Part shall be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000 for
each violation, recoverable with costs, or imprisonment of not more than 30 days, or both. Each
day that the violation continues shall be a separate offense.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 369/505
2.
1.
2.
A.
B.
C.
D.
1.
In addition, the Borough may institute injunctive, mandamus or any other appropriate action or
proceeding at law or in equity for the enforcement of this Part. Any court of competent jurisdiction
shall have the right to issue restraining orders, temporary or permanent injunctions, mandamus or
other appropriate forms of remedy or relief.
§ 26-186. Appeals.
[Ord. 906, 7/16/2009, § 906]
Any person aggrieved by any action of the Borough or its designee may appeal to the Borough
Council [within] 30 days of that action.
Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Borough Council may appeal to the County Court of
Common Pleas in the County where the activity has taken place within 30 days of the Borough
decision.
Part 2. (Reserved)
§ 26-201. (Reserved)
Part 3. WATER CONNECTIONS
A.. General Provisions.
§ 26-301. Short Title.
[Ord. 856, 11/16/2005, § 101]
This Part shall be known as the "Borough of Stroudsburg Mandatory Water Connection Ordinance."
§ 26-302. Purpose.
[Ord. 856, 11/16/2005, § 102]
This Part is adopted for the following purposes:
To protect and provide for the public health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the
Borough.
To adopt rules and regulations pertaining to the making of connections to the regional water
supply and distribution system of the Brodhead Creek Regional Authority (the "Authority")
serving portions of the Borough, which is a member of the Authority.
To insure an adequate and safe water supply for the people of the Borough.
To further define the relationship between the Borough and the Authority.
§ 26-303. Application.
[Ord. 856, 11/16/2005, § 103]
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 370/505
1.
2.
This Part applies to all buildings, presently existing and later constructed, abutting Authority water
distribution mains.
§ 26-304. Legal Conflicts.
[Ord. 856, 11/16/2005, § 104]
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict this Part are repealed.
The invalidity of any section or provision of this Part shall not affect the validity of any other part of
this Part which can be given effect without the invalid parts. The Borough intends that this Part
would have been adopted had an invalid provision not been included.
B.. Definitions.
§ 26-311. General Interpretation.
[Ord. 856, 11/16/2005, § 201]
For the purpose of this Part, the present tense shall include the future tense; the singular shall include
the plural; words used in masculine gender shall include the feminine and the neuter; the word "shall"
is always mandatory; the word "may" is always permissive.
§ 26-312. Specific Words and Phrases.
[Ord. 856, 11/16/2005, § 202]
The following terms shall have the meanings set forth below when used herein:
ABUTS AND ABUTTING
Any property whose boundary line is adjacent to a distribution line of the Water System and which
contains a building any part of which is located within 200 feet of such line.
ACT
The Municipality Authorities Act of 2001, as amended, as codified at 53 Pa.C.S.A. 55.
AUTHORITY
Brodhead Creek Regional Authority.
AUTHORITY ENGINEER
A registered professional engineer in Pennsylvania designated by the Authority, as the Authority
engineer.
BOROUGH
The Borough of Stroudsburg, Monroe County.
BUILDING
Each single or multiple residential structure or unit or apartment unit, store, shop, office, business,
commercial or industrial unit, or family unit contained within any structure in the Borough intended
for continuous or periodic habitation, which contains facilities for use of water for human
consumption.
COUNCIL
Council of the Borough of Stroudsburg.
DEP
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 371/505
The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
PERSON
An individual, partnership, corporation, private or governmental, or other legally recognized entity.
WATER SYSTEM
The water supply and distribution system owned and operated by the Authority.
C.. Water System Connection Requirements.
§ 26-321. Connection Required.
[Ord. 856, 11/16/2005, § 301]
All persons holding legal title or an interest therein (the "owner") to real property in the Borough
containing a building which abuts a main of the water system must make connections to such main,
shall use exclusively water from such main as their water supply for human consumption, except as
hereinafter provided, and shall be responsible to pay for all related connection costs.
§ 26-322. Unlawful to Maintain Private Supply System.
[Ord. 856, 11/16/2005, § 302]
It shall be unlawful for any owner who is required to connect to the water system pursuant to this Part
to construct or maintain any other supply system from wells or other private sources, except as
provided in 53 P.S. § 67603. Such private facilities shall be disconnected in the manner required by
regulations of the Authority and DEP.
§ 26-323. Application Required.
[Ord. 856, 11/16/2005, § 303]
All owners required to connect to the water system shall file with the Authority an application for
connection in the form provided by the Authority and shall pay the tapping fee and connection charge,
if any, then in effect. Thereafter, the Authority shall issue a connection permit, tap its main and provide
water service from the main to the curb for all such new connections.
§ 26-324. Use of Contractors.
[Ord. 856, 11/16/2005, § 304]
Any owner who has applied for permission to connect to the Authority's main, who has paid the tapping
fee, and connection charge, if any, and received a connection permit from the Authority may construct
a connection to the water system, at the curb, utilizing his own contractor. Such connection shall be
made in strict conformity with the Rules and Regulations of the Authority, and the owner will indemnify
and hold harmless the Borough and the Authority from all loss and damage arising from construction
by such owner.
§ 26-325. Borough or Authority as Its Agent May Perform
Uncompleted Connection.
[Ord. 856, 11/16/2005, § 305]
In the event that any owner fails to make the required connection within 90 days of receiving notice by
personal service or registered mail of the connection requirement, the Borough, or the Authority as the
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 372/505
Borough's agent, shall be empowered to enter the subject property and perform the necessary work.
§ 26-326. Billing of Property Owners.
[Ord. 856, 11/16/2005, § 306]
Where the Borough or the Authority as its agent constructs a connection because of a property
owner's failure to do so, the Borough, or the Authority, as applicable, shall submit an itemized bill to the
owner for the completed work, which shall be immediately payable. In case of neglect or refusal by
such owner to pay said bill within 30 days thereafter, it shall be the duty of the Borough or the Authority
as its agent to file municipal liens for the amount of such bill, or collect such bill by an action in
assumpsit. In the alternative, the Borough or the Authority as the Borough's agent, may authorize the
payment of the cost of construction in equal monthly installments, to bear interest at the rate not
exceeding 6% per annum, due and payable in full in one year pursuant to the provisions of 53 P.S.
§ 68303.
§ 26-327. Powers and Authority of Inspectors.
[Ord. 856, 11/16/2005, § 307]
The Authority and/or Authority Engineer and other duly authorized representatives or employees of the
Authority bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted, at all reasonable times, to
enter upon any premises connected or about to be connected or required to be connected to the water
system for the purpose of inspection and testing in accordance with the provisions of this Part and the
Act.
§ 26-328. Rates and Charges Payable by Those Required to
Connect.
[Ord. 856, 11/16/2005, § 308]
The owner of property required to connect shall be responsible for paying the tapping fee, connection
charge and water rates, in accordance with the Authority's applicable resolution, beginning on the date
such owner is required to connect to the water system. This responsibility shall continue whether or not
the property is actually connected.
§ 26-329. Required Permits.
[Ord. 856, 11/16/2005, § 309]
No person shall connect to the water system or otherwise use, alter or disturb said system in any
manner without first filing an application for and obtaining a permit, in writing, from the Authority.
D.. Penalties for Violation of this Part.
§ 26-331. Notice and Correction of Violations.
[Ord. 856, 11/16/2005, § 401]
Any person who violates any provision of this Part shall be served by the Borough with written notice
stating the nature of the violation and providing a time limit of 60 days or other period specified in the
notice for the satisfactory correction of the violation. The offender shall correct all violations within such
period of time stated in the notice.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 373/505
§ 26-332. Continuing Violation.
[Ord. 856, 11/16/2005, § 402]
Any person who continues any violation beyond the specific time limit shall be subject to a civil penalty
in an amount not exceeding $600 per violation. A new and separate violation shall be deemed to have
been committed for each day the violation continues beyond the specific time limit. The provisions of
this Part may also be enforced by an action in equity.
§ 26-333. Use of Penalties.
[Ord. 856, 11/16/2005, § 403]
All penalties imposed for violation of any provision of this Part shall be paid to the Treasurer of the
Borough for the Borough's use.
§ 26-334. Additional Penalties.
[Ord. 856, 11/16/2005, § 404]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Part, in addition to being liable for a penalty, shall be
liable to the Borough and the Authority for any expense, loss or damage suffered by the Borough or
the Authority by reason of the violation.
§ 26-335. Enforcement by Authority.
[Ord. 856, 11/16/2005, § 405]
The Council hereby authorizes and directs the Authority to act as agent for the Borough to enforce the
provisions of this Part.
E.. Requirements for Imposing Water Tapping Fees.
§ 26-341. Tapping Fees.
[Ord. 856, 11/16/2005, § 501]
All tapping fees, connection charges and similar fees charges by the Authority for the Water System
shall be calculated in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Act.
§ 26-342. Reimbursement of Property Owners Expansions.
[Ord. 856, 11/16/2005, § 502]
Where a property owner or owners construct or cause to be constructed any addition, expansion or
extension to or of the water system which provides capacity to accommodate future development upon
the lands of others, the Authority shall provide for reimbursement to the property owner or owners in
accordance with the provisions of the Act.
Chapter 27. Zoning
(This chapter is based on Ordinance 597, as enacted October 14, 1983)
ATTACHMENTS
Attachment 1 - Table of Nonresidential Zoning District Use Requirements
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 374/505
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
Attachment 2 - Table of Regulations Governing Lot Size
Attachment 3 - Regulations for Multiple Family Dwellings
Attachment 4 - Official Zoning Map
Attachment 5 - Commercial Overlay District Map
Part 1. TITLE, PURPOSE AND INTERPRETATION
§ 27-101. Title.
A Zoning Ordinance regulating and restricting the height, location, size and use of buildings and/or
land in the Borough of Stroudsburg, Pennsylvania; the areas to be occupied by buildings in proportion
to the size of the lots upon which they stand: the size of yards and other open spaces appurtenant
thereto and the density of population, and for these purposes establishing districts and boundaries,
and designating and regulating residential, commercial and industrial or other uses within such districts
and boundaries and providing for the appointment of a Zoning Hearing Board, and setting forth the
duties and functions of said board and providing for administration, charges and enforcement of this
chapter and providing penalties for violation thereof.
§ 27-102. Short Title.
This Zoning Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as "The Zoning Ordinance of the Borough of
Stroudsburg, Pennsylvania". It is also hereinafter referred to as Zoning Ordinance.
§ 27-103. Purpose.
The purpose of this Zoning Ordinance is to promote the public health, safety, morals and general
welfare by:
Encouraging the most appropriate use of land.
Preventing the overcrowding of land.
Conserving the value of land and buildings.
Lessening the congestion of traffic on the roads.
Avoiding undue congestion of population.
Providing for adequate light and air.
Securing safety from fire, flood and other dangers.
Facilitating the adequate provision of transportation, vehicular parking, loading space, water,
sewerage, schools, parks and other public facilities.
Giving reasonable consideration, among other things, to the character of districts and their popular
suitability for particular uses.
Giving effect to the statement of community development objectives contained in this chapter.
§ 27-104. Interpretation.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 375/505
1.
2.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance, they shall be held to be the
minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals and general
welfare of the Borough. Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance or regulation impose
greater restrictions than this chapter, the provisions of such statute, ordinance or regulation shall be
controlling.
§ 27-105. Separability.
It is hereby declared to be the legislative intent that:
If a court of competent jurisdiction declares any provision of this chapter to be invalid or ineffective
in whole or in part, the effect of such decision shall be limited to those provisions which are
expressly stated in the decision to be invalid or ineffective, and all other provisions of this chapter
shall continue to be separately and fully effective.
If a court of competent jurisdiction finds the application of any provision or provisions of this
chapter to any lot, building, or other structure, or tract of land, to be invalid or ineffective, in whole
or in part, the effect of such decisions shall be limited to the person, property, or situation
immediately involved in the controversy, and the application of any such provision to other
persons, property, or situations shall not be affected.
§ 27-106. Application to Public Utility Corporations.
This chapter shall not apply to any existing or proposed building, or extension thereof, used or to be
used by a public utility corporation, if upon petition of the corporation, the Pennsylvania Public Utility
Commission shall, after a public hearing, decide that the present or proposed situation of the building
in question is reasonably necessary for the convenience or welfare of the public.
§ 27-107. Applications of Ordinance.
No building, sign or other structure or land shall be used or occupied and no building or structure or
part thereof shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, enlarged or structurally altered
unless in conformity with the regulations of this chapter.
§ 27-108. Zoning Permit Required Prior to Land Use or Building
Construction.
Hereafter, there shall be no use of any land, construction, erection, alteration, or addition of any
building or part of a building, or land or construction or erection of any stationary sign unless a zoning
permit has been approved by and acquired from the Borough Zoning Officer. Failure to obtain a zoning
permit shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
§ 27-109. Occupancy Permit.
[Added by Ord. 646, 4/13/1988, § 1]
Prior to the initial use or occupancy of any building or land parcel or for any change of use of any
existing building or land, an occupancy permit shall be secured from the zoning officer. Any
applications for occupancy permits shall be in writing on forms to be furnished by the Borough.
Part 2. DEFINITIONS
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 376/505
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
§ 27-201. General.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and phrases shall be construed throughout this
chapter to have the meanings herein indicated:
Words used in the present tense include the future.
The singular includes the plural, and the plural the singular.
The word "person" includes a corporation, partnership, association and individual.
The word "shall" is always mandatory. The word "may" is permissive.
The word "lot" includes the word "parcel", "tract" or "plot".
The word "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or building shall be construed to include the
words "intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied".
The word "Borough" means the Borough of Stroudsburg, Monroe County, Pennsylvania; the terms
"Council", "Zoning Board", "Planning Commission" mean respectively, the Borough Council, the
Zoning Hearing Board and the Borough Planning Commission of the Borough. County refers to
Monroe County, Pennsylvania.
All definitions stated in the Subdivision and Development Ordinance of the Borough of
Stroudsburg as amended, shall represent the usage of those words when used in this chapter.
§ 27-202. Specific Definitions.
[As amended by Ord. 646, 4/13/1988, § 2; by Ord. 677, 8/9/1989, § 1; by Ord. 702, 4/10/1991, § 1; by
Ord. 722, 11/11/1992, § 1, by Ord. 757, 11/5/1997, § 1; by Ord. 848, 1/19/2005; by Ord. 860,
4/19/2006; by Ord. 910, 12/2/2009, § 1; and by Ord. 991, 6/3/2014]
Definitions of specific terms and words are as follows:
ACADEMIC CLINICAL RESEARCH CENTER
An accredited medical school within this commonwealth that operates or partners with an acute
care hospital licensed within this commonwealth.
[Added by Ord. No. 1075, 4/16/2019]
ACCESSORY BUILDING OR USE
A subordinate use or building customarily incidental to, and located on the same lot occupied by
the main use or building. The term "accessory building" may include a private garage, garden
shed or barn, private playhouse, private greenhouse, private swimming pool, guest house,
caretaker's cottage, or servants' quarters, as hereinafter provided. Where any part of the wall of an
accessory building is part of the wall of a main building, or where the accessory building is
attached to the main building by a roof, including carports however covered, such accessory
building shall be deemed part of the main building.
ADULT USAGE
The definition of adult uses specifies the following types of establishments:
ADULT ARCADE — An establishment where, for any form of consideration, one or more motion
picture projectors, slide projectors or similar machines are used for viewing, by five or fewer
persons, films or motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions
that are characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of "specified sexual
activities" or "specified anatomical areas."
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 377/505
ADULT BOOKSTORE — An establishment that has as a substantial portion of its stock in trade
and offers for sale, for any form of consideration, any one or more of the following: 1) books,
magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video
cassettes, slides or other visual representations that are characterized by an emphasis upon the
depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas," as herein
defined below; 2) instruments, devices or paraphernalia that are designed for use in connection
with specified sexual activities.
ADULT CABARET — A nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar establishment that for any form of
consideration regularly features live performances that are characterized by the exposure of
"specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities," as herein defined below, or films,
motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions in which a
substantial portion of the total presentation time is devoted to the showing of material that is
characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER — An establishment where, for any form of consideration,
films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions are shown,
and in which a substantial portion of the total presentation time is devoted to the showing of
material characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description "of specified sexual
activities" or "specified anatomical areas" as herein defined below.
ADULT THEATER— A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar establishment which regularly
features performances characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by
"specified sexual activities" for any form of consideration as herein defined below.
MASSAGE PARLOR — An establishment where, for any form of consideration, massage,
alcohol rub, fomentation, electric or magnetic treatment or similar treatment or manipulation of
the human body is administered, unless such treatment or manipulation is administered by a
medical practitioner, chiropractor, acupuncturist, physical therapist or similar professional person
licensed by the state. This definition does not include an athletic club, health club, school,
gymnasium, reducing salon, spa or similar establishment where massage or similar manipulation
of the human body is offered as an incidental or accessory service.
SEXUAL ENCOUNTER ESTABLISHMENT — An establishment, other than a hotel, motel or
similar establishment offering public accommodations, which for any form of consideration
provides a place where two or more persons may congregate, associate or consort for the
purpose of engaging in "specified sexual activities" or the exposure of "specified anatomical
areas" as herein defined below. This definition does not include an establishment where a
medical practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist or similar professional person licensed by the
state engages in sexual therapy.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS — Includes any of the following: 1) less than completely and
opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts below a point
immediately above the top of the areolae; or 2) human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state,
even if completely and opaquely covered.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — Includes any of the following: 1) the fondling or other erotic
touching of human genital, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts; 2) sex acts, oral, anal
or genital, actual or simulated, including intercourse or copulation, or sodomy; 3) masturbation,
actual or simulated; or 4) excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities
set forth in subdivisions one through three of this subsection.
ALLEY
A public or private right-of-way having a right-of-way width of 20 feet or less, which affords a
secondary means of access to the rear or side of abutting property and is not intended for general
traffic circulation. Regardless of whether an alley is given a street name, no main building shall
have its frontage on an alley. An alley may also be known as a court, place, or lane.
ALTERATIONS, STRUCTURAL
As applied to a building or structure, a change or rearrangement in the structural parts of a
structure including the walls, columns, beams, girders, floors, roof or ceiling; or an enlargement
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 378/505
whether by extending on a side or by increasing in height; or the moving from one location or
position to another; but not including normal maintenance or minor repairs or improvements.
ANTENNA
An exterior device or apparatus designed for cellular, digital, telephone, radio, pager, commercial
mobile radio, wireless internet, television, microwave or any other wireless communications
through sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves, including without limitation,
omnidirectional or whip antennas and directional or panel antennas. Unless otherwise stated, this
term shall not include "standard antenna."
ANTENNA HEIGHT
The vertical distance from the base of the antenna support structure at grade to the highest point
of the structure; including any antennas attached thereto or forming apart thereof. If the support
structure is on a sloped grade, then the average between the highest and lowest grades shall be
used in calculating the antenna height.
ANTENNA, STANDARD
A device, partially or wholly exterior to a building, that is used for receiving television or radio
signals for use on-site, or for transmitting shortwave or citizens band radio signals. See
"commercial communications antenna."
BASEMENT
A floor level partly or completely below grade. A basement shall be considered a story if more than
1/3 of the perimeter walls are five feet or more above the finished grade level of the ground
immediately adjacent to the walls.
BED AND BREAKFAST HOME
An owner-occupied dwelling in which short-term lodging rooms and breakfast meals are provided
for compensation.
BOARDING OR ROOMING HOUSE
A dwelling in which at least two rooms are offered for rent, payable in money or other
consideration, whether or not meals are furnished to lodgers, and in which no transients are
accommodated and no public restaurant is maintained. A school or college dormitory, fraternity or
sorority house, membership club with residents, and other similar uses are not deemed as a
boarding or rooming house.
BILLBOARD
Any sign used to identify the product made or the activity being pursued by any individual,
business, service, commercial or industrial enterprise, for the purpose of informing the public of
the location of such enterprise and/or the type of activity in which it is engaged.
BUFFER YARD
Strips of land planted with trees, shrubs and lawns, and/or fenced or walled, which serve to
separate incompatible uses or zoning districts.
BUILDING
A structure constructed or erected on the ground, with a roof supported by columns or walls.
Structures divided by unpierced masonry division walls extending from the ground to the roof shall
be deemed to be separate buildings.
BUILDING COVERAGE, MAXIMUM
The maximum ratio obtained by dividing the ground floor area of all principal and accessory
buildings on a lot (including covered porches, carports and breezeways, but excluding open
patios, parking areas, swimming pools, tennis courts, and other structures which are open to the
sky) by the total area of the lot upon which the buildings are located.
BUILDING LINE OR BUILDING SETBACK LINE
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 379/505
A.
B.
The line describing the minimum setback in which no building or other structure or portion thereof,
except as provided in this Zoning Ordinance, may be erected above grade level. The building line
is considered a vertical surface intersecting the ground on such line.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL
A building in which is conducted the main use of the lot on which it is situated. In any residential
zone, a dwelling shall be deemed a main building on the lot on which the same is located, unless
otherwise provided for elsewhere in this Zoning Ordinance.
BULK
The size and shape of building uses, and the exterior relationship of their exterior walls, or their
location, to lot lines and other buildings or other walls of the same building; and all open spaces
required in connection with a building. Bulk regulations include regulations dealing with lot area, lot
area per dwelling unit, lot frontage, lot width, height, required yards, courts, usable open space,
floor area ratio, spacing between buildings on a single lot, and the length of buildings in a row.
CAREGIVER
The individual designated by a patient to deliver medical marijuana.
[Added by Ord. No. 1075, 4/16/2019]
CERTIFIED MEDICAL USE
The acquisition, possession, use or transportation of medical marijuana by a patient, or the
acquisition, possession, delivery, transportation or administration of medical marijuana by a
caregiver, for use as part of the treatment of the patient's serious medical condition, as authorized
by certification by the commonwealth.
[Added by Ord. No. 1075, 4/16/2019]
CHURCH
A building used for public worship.
CLINICAL REGISTRANT
An entity that:
[Added by Ord. No. 1075, 4/16/2019]
Holds a permit both as a grower/processor and a dispensary; and
Has a contractual relationship with an academic clinical research center under which the
academic clinical research center or its affiliate provides advice to the entity, regarding,
among other areas, patient health and safety, medical applications and dispensing and
management of controlled substances.
COMMERCIAL COMMUNICATIONS TOWER OR ANTENNA
A structure, partially or wholly exterior to a building, used for transmitting or re-transmitting
electronic signals through the air, and that does not meet the definition of a "standard antenna."
Commercial communications antennae shall include, but are not limited to, antennae used for
transmitting commercial radio or television signals, or to receive such signals for a cable system,
or to re-transmit wireless telecommunications. A commercial communications tower shall be a
structure over 30 feet in height that is primarily intended to support one or more antenna. This
term shall not include a "standard antenna."
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE
Any motor vehicle which is required by law to bear any license plate other than that issued for
passenger car use. Also, any motor vehicle including passenger cars which by reason of a
characteristic coloring, or marking exceeding one square foot in area is identified or commonly
associated with any business, industry, or public agency, shall be considered a commercial vehicle
within the terms of this chapter. Other passenger cars used in business by a resident shall not be
considered a commercial vehicle.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 380/505
A.
B.
C.
CONDITIONAL USE
A use that is specifically allowed as a conditional use in a particular zoning district under the
zoning district provisions of this chapter, and which is required to be submitted to the Borough
Council for approval or disapproval under § 27-1206 of this chapter.
CONVALESCENT HOME
A building in which five or more persons are housed or lodged and furnished with nursing care for
hire, also known as a nursing home.
CONVENIENCE STORE (WITHOUT A GASOLINE OR FILLING STATION)
A commercial use, principally engaged in the sale of retail goods for individual and household
consumption (including alcohol if properly licensed), in a building of no more than 6,000 square
feet of gross floor area. Such a use shall be classified as a convenience store if, at minimum, it
offers for sale the following items: groceries, household dry goods and prepared or take-out foods
(hot and/or cold) intended for consumption off the premises. This use may be accompanied by a
gas or filling station as a special exception.
[Added by Ord. No. 1055, 7/17/2018]
CURB LEVEL
The mean curb level as established by Council or, in the absence of an established curb level, the
mean level of the existing curb or of the lot at the street line.
DISPENSARY
A person, including a natural person, corporation, partnership, association, trust or other entity, or
any combination thereof, which holds a permit issued by the Department of Health (DOH) of the
commonwealth to dispense medical marijuana.
[Added by Ord. No. 1075, 4/16/2019]
DISTRICT OR ZONE
A portion of the territory of the municipality within which certain uniform regulations and
requirements or various combinations thereof apply under the provisions of this chapter.
DUMP
A site used primarily for the disposal, by abandonment, dumping, burial, burning or other means
and for whatever purpose of garbage, trash, junk, vehicles or parts thereof, or waste material of
any kind.
DWELLING
Any building, vehicle or portion thereof designed or used exclusively as the residence or sleeping
place of one or more persons and as defined further below. The term dwelling shall not be
deemed to include automobile court, rooming house, tourist home, hotel, motel, hospital, nursing
home, dormitory, fraternity, or sorority house.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY
A detached building designed for or occupied exclusively by one family, except for a mobile
home as defined below.
DWELLING, TWO FAMILY
A detached or semi-detached building where not more than two individual family or dwelling
units are entirely separated by vertical walls and/or horizontal floors.
DWELLING, MOBILE HOME
A transportable dwelling structure, intended for permanent occupancy for use by one family,
contained in one or more sections designed to be joined into one integral unit and constructed
so that it may be used without a permanent foundation and capable of again being separated
for repeated towing, which arrives at a site complete and ready for occupancy except for
minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations; except for a travel trailer as defined
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 381/505
D.
E.
F.
A.
herein and excluding such mobile home dwellings or prefabricated homes or sections thereof
which when assembled or combined into a single unit are more than 19 feet in width.
DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY
A building designed for occupancy of families living independently of each other, and
containing three or more dwelling units per building. Low rise multi-family dwelling structures
shall include townhouses, garden apartments and other housing types not exceeding three
stories in height. High rise multi-family structures shall include elevator structures exceeding
three stories in height.
DWELLING, DORMITORY
A building used as a residence and accessory to an appropriate public use.
DWELLING, FRATERNITY AND/OR SORORITY
A building used for lodging by a group of persons joined together by common interests for
fellowship and said group being recognized by the Interfraternity Council of East Stroudsburg
State College. The same definition shall apply to sorority buildings.
DWELLING UNIT
One or more rooms, including a kitchen (or kitchenette) and sanitary facilities in a dwelling
structure, designed as a unit for occupancy by not more than one family for living and sleeping
purposes.
DWELLING UNIT AREA
The total number of square feet of floor area contained within the dwelling unit excluding closets
and stairways.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES
The erection, construction, alteration or maintenance, by public utilities or municipal or other
governmental agencies, of underground or overhead gas, electrical, communication, water
transmission or distribution systems, including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes,
conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants and other similar
equipment and accessories in connection therewith; reasonably necessary for the furnishing of
adequate service by such public utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies or for the
public health or safety or general welfare, but not including buildings, except telephone booths, fire
houses, pump stations, treatment plants, and similar facilities which shall also be considered as
essential service facilities hereunder.
FAMILY
Any individual, or two or more persons related by blood, marriage, legal adoption, foster
placement or a group of not more than four persons who need not be related by blood or
marriage, living together in a dwelling unit. A "family" shall not be deemed to include the
occupants of a boarding house, rooming or lodging house, club, fraternity/sorority or hotel.
FAMILY CARE FACILITY
A facility which provides resident service in a private residence to four or fewer individuals who are
not related to the resident household. These individuals are handicapped, aged, disabled or in
need of adult supervision and are provided service and supervision in accordance with their
individual needs. This category includes foster or boarding houses for children, group homes, and
family homes.
FENCE
A barrier of vegetative growth or of other natural or fabricated materials placed or arranged as a
line of demarcation between lots or to enclose a lot or a part of a lot.
FLOOD
A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
FLOODPLAIN
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 382/505
(1)
(2)
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
A relatively flat or low land area adjoining a river, stream, or watercourse which is subject
to partial or complete inundation.
An area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source. For the purpose of this chapter, the one-hundred-year floodplain as defined
in the Flood Insurance Study for the Borough of Stroudsburg prepared by the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development.
FLOODWAY
The designated area of a floodplain required to carry and discharge floodwaters of a given
magnitude. For the purpose of this chapter, the floodway shall be capable of accommodating
a flood of the one-hundred-year magnitude without raising the one-hundred-year flood
elevation more than one foot. For the purpose of this chapter, the floodway and approximated
floodplain, as defined in the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map and Floodway Data Table
prepared by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development.
FLOOD FRINGE
That portion of the floodplain outside the floodway.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD
A flood that has a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
REGULATORY FLOOD
The flood which has been selected to serve as the basis upon which the floodplain
management provisions of this and other ordinances have been prepared; for purposes of this
chapter, the one-hundred-year flood.
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION
For purposes of this chapter, the one-hundred-year flood elevation.
FLOODPROOFING
Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to
structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property,
water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOOR AREA
The sum of the gross areas of the floors of every story of a building measured from the exterior
faces of exterior walls or from the center lines of common or party walls separating two buildings.
Regardless of the internal arrangement of a building it shall be deemed to have at least one story
for each 20 feet of height or fraction thereof.
FLOOR AREA RATIO
The total floor area of a building divided by the area of the lot on which it is located.
FORM OF MEDICAL MARIJUANA
The characteristics of the medical marijuana recommended or limited for a particular patient,
including the method of consumption and any particular dosage, strain, variety and quantity or
percentage of medical marijuana or particular active ingredient.
[Added by Ord. No. 1075, 4/16/2019]
GARAGE
A building or part thereof used for the storage of one or more vehicles.
GASOLINE OR FILLING STATION
A building or lot or part thereof selling gasoline or other equivalent motor vehicle fuel or electric
fueling or charging stations at retail, dispensed directly into vehicles from pumps or plug-in
devices, where no automotive repairs, sales, rental or automatic car washes are conducted. A
gasoline or filling station may be permitted with a convenience store as a special exception.
[Added by Ord. No. 1055, 7/17/2018]
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 383/505
GROUP CARE FACILITY
A facility which provides resident services to seven or more individuals of whom one or more are
unrelated. These individuals are handicapped, aged, or disabled, are undergoing rehabilitation,
and are provided services to meet their needs. This category includes uses, licensed or
supervised by any federal, state or county health/welfare agency, such as group homes (all ages),
halfway houses, resident schools, resident facilities, and foster or boarding homes.
GROWER/PROCESSOR
A person, including a natural person, corporation, partnership, association, trust or other entity, or
any combination thereof, which holds a permit from the DOH to grow and process medical
marijuana.
[Added by Ord. No. 1075, 4/16/2019]
HEIGHT OF A STRUCTURE
The vertical distance derived from the average finished grade at the foundation corners of the
building or structure, to the highest point of the building or structure excluding a chimney or other
similar structure listed in § 27-605, Subsection 5.
HOME OCCUPATION
A secondary use of a residential property as permitted in § 27-612.
HOSPITAL
A building used for the diagnosis, treatment or other care of human ailments, unless otherwise
specified. A hospital shall be deemed to include a sanitarium, clinic, convalescent home, nursing
home, rest home, or other building with an equivalent appellation.
HOTEL
A building or part thereof which has a common entrance and common dining room, and which
contains seven or more living and sleeping rooms designed to be occupied by individuals or
groups of individuals for compensation.
IDENTIFICATION CARD
A document issued by the DOH that permits access to medical marijuana.
[Added by Ord. No. 1075, 4/16/2019]
INDOOR RECREATION
An establishment operated by a profitmaking corporation, partnership or other business entity for
the pursuit of sports, amusement and recreational activities, available to the general public for a
fee, where the principal use is conducted entirely within a completely enclosed building, including,
but not limited to, such principal uses as health or racquet and/or swim clubs, roller or ice rinks,
karate schools, gymnasiums, arenas, sports courts or playing fields, bowling alleys, amusement
arcades, virtual reality and simulation gaming parlors, escape rooms, billiard parlors, and dance
halls, but not including any uses listed separately in the Table of Nonresidential Zoning District
Use Requirements.
[Added by Ord. 1019, 9/6/2016]
JUNK
Junk shall include scrap iron, scrap tin, scrap brass, scrap copper, scrap lead or scrap zinc and all
other scrap metals and their alloys, and bones, rags, used cloth, used rubber, used machinery,
used tools, used appliances, used fixtures, used utensils, used lumber, used boxes or crates, used
pipe or pipe fittings, used tires, and other manufactured goods, any of which are so worn,
deteriorated or obsolete as to make them unusable in their existing condition, but are subject to
being dismantled or processed for reclamation, salvage or recycling.
JUNK YARD
A junk yard shall consist of buildings, structures or premises where junk, waste, discarded or
salvage materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled or handled,
including automobile wrecking yards, house wrecking and structural steel materials and equipment
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 384/505
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
C.
D.
E.
yards, but not including the purchase or storage of used furniture and household equipment or
used cars in operable condition.
LOT
A piece or parcel of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a principal building or a group of
such buildings and accessory buildings, or utilized for a principal use and uses accessory or
incidental to the operation thereof, together with such open spaces as required by this chapter.
LOT, CORNER
A lot situated at and abutting the intersection of two streets.
LOT, DEPTH
The average distance between the front and the rear lot lines.
LOT LINES
The property lines bounding the lot.
LOT LINE, FRONT
The line separating the lot from a street right-of-way. The shortest line of a corner lot shall
be the front lot line.
LOT LINE, REAR
The lot line opposite and most distant from the front lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE
Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from a street
is called a side street lot line.
LOT WIDTH
The width of the lot between side lot lines at the front building line as prescribed by the front
yard regulations.
LOT AREA
The computed area contained within the lot lines.
NONCONFORMING LOT
Any lot which does not conform with either one or more of the following: the minimum width,
depth, and area dimensions specified for the district where such a lot is situated.
MAIN USE OF BUILDING
The principal or most important use or building on a lot.
MANUFACTURING
The treatment or processing of raw materials, the production of products from raw or prepared
materials by giving them new forms or qualities.
MEDICAL MARIJUANA
Marijuana for certified medical use as legally permitted by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
with Act 16.[1]
[Added by Ord. No. 1075, 4/16/2019]
MEDICAL MARIJUANA DELIVERY VEHICLE OFFICE
Any facility used to house delivery vehicles for supplying marijuana plants or seeds to one or more
marijuana grower/processors and/or dispensaries.
[Added by Ord. No. 1075, 4/16/2019]
MEDICAL MARIJUANA ORGANIZATION OR FACILITY
A dispensary or a grower/processor of marijuana for medical purposes.
[Added by Ord. No. 1075, 4/16/2019]
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 385/505
MEDICAL OFFICE BUILDING
A building used exclusively by physicians and dentists for treatment and examination of patients,
provided that no overnight patients shall be kept on the premises.
MEMBERSHIP CLUB
A building, structure, lot or land area used as a private club or social organization not conducted
for individual profit or gain.
MOTEL
A building, or group of buildings, whether detached or in connected units, used as individual
sleeping or dwelling units, designed primarily for transient travelers, and provided with accessory
off-street parking facilities. The term "motel" includes buildings designed as tourist courts, motor
lodges, auto courts, and other similar uses.
MOTOR VEHICLE SALES AND SERVICE AGENCY
A retail establishment which offers motor vehicles for sale to the general public. This business
may also perform any repair service to motor vehicles normally performed in a repair garage.
NONCONFORMING USES, STRUCTURES AND LOTS
See Part 9.
NURSING HOME
Any premises containing sleeping rooms used by persons who are lodged and furnished with
meals and nursing care.
OPEN AREA
An unoccupied area open to the sky, usually in a natural state but including squares, plazas and
formal gardens. Also the unoccupied area open to the sky on the same lot with a principal and/or
accessory building.
PARKING FACILITIES
Public parking facilities shall consist of paved outdoor areas used for the storage of vehicles or of
specially designed buildings or garages used for the same purposes. Private parking facilities shall
be restricted to use by persons residing on the premises or residing in the immediate vicinity of
such facility or by their guests. Public parking facilities shall be open to the public as an
accommodation for customers, clients or visitors.
PATIO
A surfaced area or courtyard designed for outdoor living purposes as an accessory use to a
structure, which shall be completely unenclosed except for any side which may adjoin a structure
or for any fences, walls, shrubs or hedges. Outdoor areas enclosed by a roof or awning shall be
considered to be a structure.
PAWN BROKER
Any person, partnership or corporation, either as a principal, or agent or employee thereof, who
loans money on deposit or pledge of personal property, or other valuable thing, or who deals in the
purchasing of personal property or other valuable thing on condition of selling the same back
again at a stipulated price, or who loans money secured by chattel mortgage on personal property,
taking possession of the property or any part thereof so mortgaged.
PAWNSHOP
A facility for loaning money on the security of personal property and the sale of unclaimed
property.
PERMIT
A document issued by the proper authority of the municipality authorizing an applicant to
undertake certain activities as further defined below:
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 386/505
A.
B.
C.
ZONING PERMIT
A permit issued indicating that a proposed use, building or structure is in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter or with an order of the Zoning Hearing Board and authorizing an
applicant to proceed with said use, building or structure.
BUILDING PERMIT
A permit indicating that a proposed construction, alteration, or reconstruction of a structure is
in accordance with the construction provisions of any Building Code which may be adopted by
the Borough and authorizing an applicant to commence with said construction, alteration or
reconstruction. Such a permit shall not be confused with a zoning permit or with an
occupancy permit as required under the terms of this chapter.
OCCUPANCY PERMIT
A permit issued upon completion of the construction of a structure, or change in use of
structure or parcel of land indicating that the premises comply with the provisions of this
chapter and may be used for the purposes set forth in the occupancy permit.
PERMITTED USE
Any use which does not require special action by the Planning Commission or the Zoning Hearing
Board before a zoning permit is granted by the Zoning Officer.
PLANNING COMMISSION
The Planning Commission of the Borough of Stroudsburg.
PORTABLE STRUCTURE
A structure or building, whether above or below grade level, designed or intended for seasonal
rather than year-round use, and not attached to a principal building.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE
The office of a recognized profession maintained for the conduct of said profession. Such
professions shall be limited to those of medicine, law, architecture, engineering, art, music,
insurance, real estate, and accounting.
PROPERTY LINE
A line forming the front, rear or sides of lots or parcels of property as described in the recorded
title.
PUBLIC NOTICE
Notice of the time and place of a hearing, meeting, or proceeding printed in a newspaper of
general circulation in a manner provided by law.
REGISTRY
The registry established by the DOH for all medical marijuana organizations and practitioners.
[Added by Ord. No. 1075, 4/16/2019]
RESTAURANT
Any establishment, however designated, at which food is prepared and sold for consumption on
the premises within the principal building. However, a concession stand at a public or a community
playground, playfield, park or swimming pool, operated by the same agency operating the
recreational facilities, and solely for the convenience of patrons of the facility, shall not be deemed
to be a restaurant.
RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN
An establishment where food is prepared and sold primarily for consumption outside the confines
of the principal building or in automobiles parked upon the premises, regardless of whether or not,
in addition thereto, indoor or outdoor seats or other accommodations are provided for the patrons.
SCREEN OR SCREENING
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 387/505
A strip at least four feet wide, densely planted with shrubs or trees at least six feet high at the time
of planting of a type that will form a year-round dense screen at least six feet high, a solid wall or
barrier, or uniformly painted solid fence, at least six feet high. All shall be maintained in good
condition at all times, and may have normal entrances and exits, but shall have no signs affixed to
or hung in relation to the outside thereof except the following: for each entrance, one directional
arrow and the name of the establishment with "For Patrons Only" or like limitation, not over two
square feet in area, which shall be nonilluminated.
SIGN
See Part 8.
SINGLE AND SEPARATE OWNERSHIP
The ownership of a lot by one or more persons, partnerships or corporations, which ownership is
separate and distinct from that of any adjoining lot. Ownership of two or more contiguous lots by
one or more persons, partnerships, or corporations shall be construed to comprise one lot.
SPECIAL EXCEPTION
A "special exception" is a provision of the chapter which may be granted or denied by the Board
pursuant to express standards and criteria established in this chapter. Requests for such "special
exceptions" shall be decided by the Board after a hearing to determine compliance with said
standards and criteria and after review by the Planning Commission.
SPECIAL USE
The term "special use" shall have the same meaning and be identical with "special exception".
SPORTS GAMING ESTABLISHMENT
An establishment, nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar establishment that, for any form of
consideration, regularly features gaming or betting on sporting or similar activities.
STORY AND HALF-STORY
That portion of a building, included between the surface of any floor, but excluding the basement
or cellar, and the ceiling now above it and having a vertical distance of not less than seven feet.
Any such portion of a building having a distance of less than seven feet shall be considered to be
a half-story.
STREET
A public or private thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to abutting property,
including avenue, way, drive, boulevard, highway, road and any other thoroughfare except an
alley.
STRUCTURE
That which is built or constructed, including without limitation because of enumeration, buildings
for any occupancy or use whatsoever, fences, signs, billboards, fire escapes, chute escapes,
railings, water tanks, towers, open-grade steps, sidewalks, or stairways, tents, or anything erected
and framed of component parts which is fastened, anchored, or rests on a permanent foundation
or on the ground.
STRUCTURES
Anything constructed or erected above or below the ground or upon another structure.
SUBSTATION, GAS OR ELECTRIC
An assemblage of equipment for purposes other than generation or utilization, through which
electric or gas energy in bulk is passed for the purposes of switching or modifying its
characteristics to meet the needs of the general public, provided that an electric or gas substation
permitted in a residence district shall not include rotating equipment, storage of materials, trucks
or repair facilities or housing or repair crews.
SWIMMING POOL, PRIVATE
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 388/505
A.
B.
C.
D.
[1]
Any receptacle or artificially constructed container for water, whether erected above or below
ground level, having a wall depth of two feet or more at any point within its perimeter, intended or
adapted for the purposes of immersion or partial immersion of human beings therein, used in
connection with dwelling units, available only to the family of the dwelling unit holder and his
private guests, not open to the public, and not otherwise regulated by any statutes or by rules and
regulations other than those of the Borough of Stroudsburg.
SWIMMING POOL, PUBLIC OR SEMI-PUBLIC
Any swimming pool other than a private swimming pool, including publicly and privately owned
pools open to the general public and pools owned and operated in conjunction with membership
organizations, motels, hotels, and other similar uses.
THEATERS, DRIVE-IN
An open lot or part thereof, with its appurtenant facilities, devoted primarily to the showing of
moving pictures or theatrical productions, on paid admission basis, to patrons seated in
automobile or on outdoor seats.
TOURIST HOME
A building containing one or more dwelling units or rooms for the rooming and/or boarding of from
three to 20 persons for compensation. Occupants would normally stay for less than three months
of the year.
TRAILER, INCLUDING AUTOMOBILE TRAILER AND MOBILE HOMES
Any vehicle or structure used as a dwelling or for commercial use, which utilizes wheels and axles
for its transportation or is designed to be transported as a unit on separate wheels and axles.
USABLE OPEN SPACE
A portion of a lot or tract used for residential purposes, exclusive of required front and side yard
areas, which is not covered by buildings or parking areas and is suitable for use as outdoor open
space for the residents thereon.
VARIANCE
A modification of the regulations of this chapter, granted on grounds of exceptional difficulties or
unnecessary hardship, not self-imposed, pursuant to the provisions of Part 13 of this Zoning
Ordinance, and the laws of the State of Pennsylvania.
YARD
Any open space located on the same lot with a principal building situated between the nearest
roofed portion of the principal buildings and a lot line.
YARD, FRONT
A yard extending across the full width of the lot abutting the front lot line.
YARD, REAR
A yard extending across the full width of the lot, abutting the rear lot line.
YARD, SIDE
A yard extending from the front yard to the rear yard, abutting a side lot line.
YARD, WIDTH
The minimum perpendicular distance between the lot line and the nearest roofed portion of
the principal building.
ZONING HEARING BOARD
The Zoning Hearing Board of the Borough of Stroudsburg.
ZONING OFFICER
The administrative officer charged with the duty of enforcing the provisions of this chapter.
Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 10231.101 et seq.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 389/505
1.
2.
3.
Part 3. CLASSIFICATION OF DISTRICTS
§ 27-301. Establishment of Districts.
The Borough of Stroudsburg is hereby divided into zoning districts of different types, each type being
of such number, shape, kind and area, and of such common unity of purpose and adaptability of use
that is deemed most suitable to carry out the objectives of this chapter. Each parcel of land and every
building or other structure in the Borough, except as otherwise provided by law or by the chapter, shall
be subject to the regulations, restrictions and requirements specified for the district in which it is
located.
§ 27-302. Classes of Districts.
[As amended by Ord. 968, 4/17/2013; and by Ord. 969, 4/17/2013]
For the purposes of this Zoning Ordinance, the Borough is divided into 10 classes of districts which
shall be designated as follows:
R-1 Low Density Residential
R-2 Medium Density Residential
R-3 High Density Residential
C-1 General Commercial
C-1A General Commercial A
C-2 Central Business Commercial
MU-A (Mixed Use) District
MU-B (Mixed Use) District
I-1 Light Industrial
O-1 Open Space
§ 27-303. Zoning Map.
[Ord. 597, 10/14/1983; as amended by Ord. 614, 12/11/1985]
Districts are bounded and defined as shown on the map entitled "Zoning Map of the Borough of
Stroudsburg" that accompanies and which, with all explanatory matters thereon, is hereby made a part
of this chapter.
§ 27-304. Interpretation of District Boundaries.
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries between districts as indicated on the Zoning
Map, the Zoning Officer shall render a decision consistent with the following rules:
Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately coinciding with the center lines of streets
or railroad rights-of-way, such center lines shall be construed to be such boundaries.
Where district boundaries are so indicated that they approximately coincide with the lot lines, such
lot lines shall be construed to be said boundaries.
Where district boundaries are so indicated that they are approximately parallel to street or railroad
rights-of-way, such district boundaries shall be construed as being parallel thereto and at such
distance therefrom as indicated on the Zoning Map.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 390/505
4.
1.
2.
3.
Where district boundaries divide a lot, the location of such boundaries shall be determined by the
use of the scale shown on the Zoning Map unless the boundaries are indicated by dimension.
§ 27-305. Boundary Tolerances.
Where a district boundary line divides a lot held in single and separate ownership at the effective date
of this Zoning Ordinance, the use regulations applicable to the less restricted district shall extend over
the portion of the lot in the more restricted district of not more than 50 feet beyond the district boundary
line.
§ 27-306. Newly Annexed Areas.
All areas annexed by the Borough after the effective date of this chapter shall automatically be
classified in the O-1 (Open Space) District, provided that the Borough Council may, after public notice
and hearing, provide for the classification of such annexed areas as part thereof in another zoning
district or districts.
§ 27-307. Flooding and Flood Fringe Districts.
For the regulations pertaining to the flooding and flood fringe districts, which are overlays to the
existing districts as shown on the Zoning Map, refer to Part 11.
§ 27-308. Statement of Community Development Objectives.
[As amended by Ord. 968, 4/17/2013; and by Ord. 969, 4/17/2013; and by Ord. 991, 6/3/2014]
As an aid in interpreting the provisions of this chapter, the purposes for which the various zoning
districts are established, the character of uses to be permitted, and the overall goals and objectives as
embodied in this chapter are stated as follows:
R-1 Low Density Residential. The provisions for the R-1 zones are intended to create, preserve
and enhance areas composed primarily of single family residences built at low densities on quiet
streets, recognizing that in areas zoned R-1 some development has occurred in the past on lots
that are somewhat smaller than those of more recently developed single-family homes. All
provisions of this chapter are intended to protect R-1 zones from the intrusion of uses and
activities incompatible with the character of single-family areas. It is also the intent that these
zones have adequate light and space around the buildings, and be well landscaped, with mature
trees and shrubbery, so that they will be continuing assets to the Borough and will promote a
stable, healthy, and safe environment.
R-2 Medium Density Residential. The provisions for the R-2 zones are similar to those for R-1
except that in R-2 zones single and two family housing is permitted to encourage low and medium
density development. It is intended that these zones have adequate light and space around the
buildings, and be well landscaped, with mature trees and shrubbery, so that they will be continuing
assets to the Borough and will provide a stable, healthy, and safe environment.
R-3 High Density Residential. The provisions for the R-3 zones are intended to create, preserve
and enhance areas of the Borough that are primarily residential in character but built to higher
densities and providing for a diversity of housing types not provided for in the R-1 and R-2 zones.
They may be older areas or newly developed or open land where the Borough indicates that it is
feasible and desirable to develop certain areas with medium to high concentrations of population
yet provide adequate open space. R-3 zones have available adequate public facilities and utilities,
streets and transportation systems, and general environmental suitability for higher densities. R-3
zones may contain more diversity of uses including lawful nonconforming uses, and more public
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 391/505
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
A.
1.
and quasi-public uses. In general, R-3 zones are located near the center of the Borough, in older
established areas, adjoining existing commercial sub-districts or in the vicinity of Interstate 80
where large buffer areas are needed for adjacent residential development.
C-1 General Commercial. The provision for the C-1 zones are intended to create, preserve and
enhance areas with a wide range of retail and service establishments typically appropriate along
major traffic arteries or adjacent to interchange points of limited access highways, due to their
dependence on automobile traffic for business. The C-1 zones are intended to preserve areas that
are established business areas, but are secondary to the central business area and which contain
a mixture of businesses similar in nature to those found in the central business areas.
C-1A General Commercial A. The provisions of the C-1A are similar to the C-1 district except that
additional height and bulk regulations are provided to encourage a balance of building scale with
the existing character of the district.
C-2 Central Business Commercial. The provisions for the C-2 zones are intended to create,
preserve and enhance the central business area, with a wide range of retail and service
establishments, and are intended to create and enhance the area with centrally located offices
and public and quasi-public uses mixed with residential uses primarily above the first floor.
MU-A and MU-B (Mixed Use) Districts. The MU Districts are intended to provide for compatible
types of light business and residential development, in a manner that protects adjacent residential
neighborhoods. These Districts are intended to promote appropriate types of redevelopment,
including taller buildings.
I-1 Light Industrial. The provisions for the I-1 zones are intended to create, preserve and enhance
areas intended for industrial uses yet to control excessively objectionable or injurious uses that
would severely impact surrounding areas. The I1 zones are located so that they have suitable
access to rail and highway facilities.
O-1 Open Space. The provisions for the O-1 zones are intended to protect areas along streams
and areas containing major drainage channels; areas which are part of highway interchange,
rights-of-way and critical access points to limited access roads; areas for recreation and open
space and areas which, by reason of steep slope, geologic condition or natural character warrant
preservation through limited usage.
C-O Central Commercial Overlay District. To provide additional set of standards within designated
areas of particular public concern beyond the requirements of the underlying zoning district. To
also offer a set of standards for an applicant who chooses to use the option in the C-O District that
allows a taller height. In addition to serving the purposes as the underlying Zoning District, the C-O
District encourages compatible types of infill development consistent with the Traditional
Neighborhood provisions of the Municipalities Planning Code.
Part 4. ZONING DISTRICT USE REQUIREMENTS
§ 27-401. R-1 Low Density Residential.
[As amended by Ord. 665, 2/8/1989, § 1; by Ord. 697, 10/10/1990, § 1; and by Ord. 702, 4/10/1991,
§ 2]
The purpose of this zoning district is set forth in § 27-308, Subsection 1, of this chapter.
Use Regulations. A building may be erected or used and a lot may be used or occupied for any of
the following purposes, and no other, subject to the applicable provisions of Part 6, General
Regulations, and other applicable provisions of this and other Borough ordinances.
The following uses are permitted by right:
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 392/505
(1)
(2)
(3)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
C.
2.
3.
4.
(1)
(2)
A.
(1)
B.
1.
Single family detached dwelling.
Public park or playground.
Electric substation or automatic telephone exchange without rotary converter or
generating machinery. Outdoor storage and garaging of motor vehicles shall be
prohibited with said use.
The following uses and their accessory uses are special exception uses and may be
permitted by the Zoning Hearing Board following review and recommendation of the Planning
Commission in accord with Part 10 of this chapter.
Public or private educational institution or use, including an elementary or secondary
school or kindergarten, but not a business school, trade school, dance school or similar
use, subject to § 27-1003.
Cemetery subject to § 27-1004, Subsection 1.
Church, rectory, or parish house subject to § 27-1003.
Bed and Breakfast home subject to § 27-1004, Subsection 7.
Accessory uses on the same lot and customarily incidental to the permitted use are permitted
by right. The term "accessory use" shall not include a business but may include:
Private parking space or private garage, private garden or home swimming pool.
Home professional office, if located in a dwelling in which the practitioner resides, and
occupying less than 25% of the floor area of the building subject to § 27-612.
Sign pursuant to Part 8.
Area, Yard and Building Regulations — See Part 5.
Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations — See Part 7.
Sign Regulations — See Part 8.
§ 27-402. R-2 Medium Density Residential.
[As amended by Ord. 646, 4/13/1988, § 3; by Ord. 665, 2/8/1989, § 2; by Ord. 677, 8/8/1989, § 2; by
Ord. 702, 4/10/1991, § 3; and by Ord. 860, 4/19/2006]
The purpose of this zoning district is set forth in § 27-308, Subsection 2, of this chapter.
Use Regulations. A building may be erected or used, and a lot may be used or occupied for any of
the following purposes, and no other, subject to the applicable provisions of Part 6, General
Regulations, and other applicable provisions of this and other Borough ordinances.
The following uses are permitted by right:
Any uses permitted in the R-1 zoning district.
Two-family dwelling.
The following uses and their accessory uses are special exception uses and may be
permitted by the Zoning Hearing Board following review and recommendation by the Planning
Commission in accord with Part 10 of this chapter.
Any uses permitted as a special exception in the R-1 zoning district.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 393/505
(2)
(1)
C.
2.
3.
4.
(1)
(2)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
C.
1.
Bed and Breakfast home subject to § 27-1004, Subsection 7.
The following accessory uses are permitted by right:
Any use permitted in the R-1 zoning district.
Area, Yard and Building Regulations — See Part 5.
Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations — See Part 7.
Sign Regulations - See Part 8.
§ 27-403. R-3 High Density Residential.
[As amended by Ord. 665, 2/8/1989, § 3; by Ord. 697, 10/10/1990, § 2; by Ord. 702, 4/10/1991, § 4;
and by Ord. 860, 4/19/2006]
The purpose of this zoning district is set forth in § 27-308, Subsection 3, of this chapter.
Use Regulations — A building may be erected or used, and a lot may be used or occupied for any
of the following purposes, and no other, subject to the applicable provisions of Part 6, General
Regulations, and other applicable provisions of this and other Borough ordinances.
The following uses are permitted by right:
Any use permitted in R-1 zoning district.
Multiple family dwellings subject to the provisions of Part 5, Table II and § 27-1004,
Subsection 5.
The following uses and their accessory uses are special exception uses and may be
permitted by the Zoning Hearing Board following review and recommendation by the Planning
Commission in accord with Part 10 of this chapter.
Any uses permitted as a special exception in the R-1 Zoning district.
Nursing homes subject to § 27-1004, Subsection 4.
Family care facility and group care facility subject to § 27-1003.
Boarding or rooming house subject to § 27-1003.
Bed and Breakfast home subject to § 27-1004, Subsection 7.
The following accessory uses are permitted by right:
Any use permitted in the R-2 zoning district.
Area, Yard and Building Regulations — See Part 5.
Off-Street Parking & Loading Regulations — See Part 7.
Sign Regulations — See Part 8.
§ 27-404. Use Regulations Within the MU (Mixed Use) Zoning
Districts.
[As added by Ord. 969, 4/17/2013]
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 394/505
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
1.
2.
[1]
1.
2.
Land and buildings in the MU Districts shall only be used for these purposes, and shall comply
with all other applicable requirements of this chapter:
The following uses are permitted by right:
Single family detached houses, two family dwellings provided each dwelling is separated
by a vertical wall, multi-family dwellings provided each dwelling is in a townhouse
arrangement separated by a vertical wall.
Multi-family dwellings that are not in a townhouse arrangement and which have at least
one street level principal commercial use.
Public park or playground.
Nonresidential uses as set forth in the Table of Nonresidential Zoning District Use
Requirements.
Academic clinic research centers, subject to applicable performance standards in § 27-
6A01, Subsection 2.
[Added by Ord. No. 1075, 4/16/2019]
Additional Special Exception Standards.
As a condition of a special exception use proposed within 200 feet from an existing
dwelling that will involve truck traffic or operations perceptible to residents of dwellings
between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., the applicant shall describe the extent of
such activities in the application. The Zoning Hearing Board may place reasonable
conditions upon such activities and operations to provide compatibility with nearby
dwellings.
The Zoning Hearing Board may deny a special exception application if credible evidence
is provided that the proposed use would create health or safety hazards to residents of
nearby dwellings.
Parking, Loading and Sign Regulations. Parts 7 and 8 shall apply, except that signs in the MU
Districts shall comply with signs allowed in the C-2 District.
§ 27-405. Use Regulations for All Nonresidential Zoning Districts.
[As amended by Ord. 722, 11/11/1992, § 2, by Ord. 757, 11/5/1997, § 2; by Ord. 848, 1/19/2005, § 2 by
Ord. 860, 4/19/2006; by Ord. 907, 7/16/2009; by Ord. 910, 12/2/2009, §§ 2, 3; by Ord. 968, 4/17/2013;
by Ord. 969, 4/17/2013; and by Ord. 991, 6/3/2014]
The purpose of each nonresidential zoning district is set forth in § 27-308, Subsections 4 to 9, of this
chapter.
The table in this section of this Part designates the land use allowed in each nonresidential zoning
district. A use is allowed only if designated by a P or by an SE in the table. All uses not so
designated are prohibited.[1]
Editor's Note: The Table of Nonresidential Zoning District Use Requirements is included as an
attachment to this chapter.
CU, P and SE are defined as follows:
CU — Conditional Use is a use that is only allowed in a district if conditional use approval is
granted by the Borough Council under § 27-1206. Prior to Borough Council action, the Borough
Planning Commission shall be given an opportunity to provide a recommendation.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 395/505
3.
4.
1.
2.
(1)
A.
(1)
B.
3.
P — Permitted Uses (permitted by right as approved by the Zoning Officer or as otherwise
specified in this chapter).
SE — Special Exception Uses (permitted by the Zoning Hearing Board following review and
recommendation of the Planning Commission).
All uses permitted as special exception uses are subject to the provisions of Part 10 and any other
applicable provision of this chapter.
The regulations pertaining to minimum land or lot areas and other dimensional requirements for
uses in nonresidential zoning districts are set forth in Part 5 of this chapter.
Part 5. AREA AND BULK REQUIREMENTS
§ 27-501. Area and Bulk Requirements.
[As amended by Ord. 697, 10/10/1990, § 3; by Ord. 860, 4/19/2006; by Ord. 968, 4/17/2013; by Ord.
969, 4/17/2013; and by Ord. 991, 6/3/2014]
The area provided for each permitted use and structure and the bulk of each structure shall be in
accordance with the tables, requirements and standards of this Part and all other provisions of this
chapter, as applied in the zone in which the use or structure is located, such zone being designated by
the zoning map.[1]
All regulations for uses permitted by special exception are set forth in Part 10 of this chapter.
All general regulations pertaining to various uses are set forth in Parts 6 and 6A of this chapter.
[Amended by Ord. No. 1075, 4/16/2019]
Additional and Optional Provisions Within the C-O Overlay District.
This subsection is established under the authority of Article VII-A of the Municipalities
Planning Code, which promotes traditional neighborhood development within older infill areas,
as well as other sections of such Code.
The C-O Commercial Overlay District is hereby established, as shown on the map
labeled Exhibit A. The C-O Overlay District establishes additional regulations that must
be met for properties within the C-O Overlay District, in addition to the requirements of
the underlying zoning district. In some cases, these overlay regulations relax
requirements of the underlying zoning district. All of the regulations of the underlying C-2
and C-1A Districts and other provisions of this chapter shall continue to apply within the
C-O District, except for regulations that are specifically added, made more restrictive or
made more permissive by this subsection. If an applicant utilizes the taller height option
that is allowed in the C-O District, then those additional standards shall continue to
regulate the project over time.
As a conditional use, the Borough Council shall have the authority to approve a building in the
C-O District to have a maximum height of 56 feet or four stories, whichever is more restrictive,
if the following additional requirements are met:
A maximum building height of five stories or 65 feet, whichever is more restrictive, shall
be allowed as an option if the portion of the building with the height taller than 56 feet and
that has more than four stories is set back in such a manner that a fifth story is not visible
from a height of six feet measured along the curbline (or edge of pave in the absence of
curb) of the opposite side of the street, with the exception of public alleyways, at all
points perpendicular to the applicant’s property lines which abut a public right-of-way.
Alleys, as defined in this Part, are exempt from this requirement.
[Amended by Ord. 997, 12/16/2014; and by Ord. 1014, 12/15/2015]
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 396/505
(a)
(b)
(2)
(3)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(4)
(5)
(a)
(6)
C.
D.
The applicant shall provide a cross-section that is drawn to scale that shows that this
standard will be met regarding any fifth story.
The intent is to encourage a fifth story to be setback from the street in a manner that
could allow that space to be used as an outdoor patio for residents or customers,
such as for a restaurant.
The maximum height shall be 50 feet where an existing principal single family detached
or two-family detached dwelling is within 125 feet of such building.
Within the C-O District for a building using this height option, the maximum building
height shall be measured based upon the sidewalk elevation along the front lot line along
a public street, instead of using the height definition in § 27-202 of this chapter. If the
ground elevation is lower at the rear of a building, that by itself shall not require a lower
height.
Additional Height Standards.
Rooftop structures such as parapet walls, chimneys, and roof access structures shall
be exempt from the maximum building height requirement, provided that they do not
exceed the maximum building height by more than eight feet for chimneys, and roof
access structures and four feet for parapet walls and other similar architectural
details or structures.
Elevator shafts and roof top equipment necessary for the building functions and
maintenance shall be exempt from the maximum building height requirement,
provided the shafts and equipment are screened or integrated into architectural roof
lines so as not to be discernable from the public street level.
For the purposes of height, a parking structure shall be regulated in the same
manner as a building. However, a parking structure shall not be regulated in
numbers of levels, but instead shall be regulated in terms of building height in feet.
A story that is located below the street level of the street along the front lot line shall not
be regulated as one of the permitted stories.
An applicant shall only be allowed to use this C-O taller height option if the applicant
agrees to have the exterior design of a new principal building as viewed from a public
street reviewed and approved under standards and procedures of the Borough Historic
Preservation District Ordinance [Chapter 4, Part 2], even if the lot is not within the
Historic Preservation District.
The intent is not to require that a new building appear to be an old building, but that
new building shall include window shapes, window spacing, details and similar
features that are compatible with historic construction.
As part of the zoning application for any new principal building, the applicant shall submit
architectural elevations showing the proposed design of the facade facing the street frontage
and sides of the building visible from a public street. Such elevation shall describe the range
of materials that are intended to be used. Where conditional use approval was required, if the
Zoning Officer determines that substantial revisions have been made to the architectural
elevation after conditional use approval has been granted, then the changes shall require
conditional use approval.
Where the majority of existing buildings on the same side of the same block of Main Street
have a front yard setback along such street of 10 feet or less, then a minimum front yard
setback shall not be required, and the maximum front yard setback shall be 15 feet. Areas
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 397/505
E.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
F.
(1)
G.
H.
[1]
1.
2.
3.
4.
occupied by outdoor cafes, attached porches and pedestrian plazas may count as meeting
the fifteen-foot maximum front yard setback.
A new building with a length of greater than 50 feet along Main Street shall have the
appearance of two or more interconnected buildings.
A new building abutting Main Street shall meet the following additional requirements:
The building shall include pedestrian doors and windows along Main Street, and shall
include architectural details, articulation and trim and the appearance of a pitched,
peaked or gable roof or a decorative cornice.
Windows shall be separated from each other so that the predominant side material
continues uninterrupted between them. In such case, the distance between windows
should be no less than 2/3 of the width of adjacent windows.
Individual window openings of sizes typically found in buildings constructed before 1950
along Main Street in the Borough shall be used, as opposed to more modern connected
strips of windows. Multiple-unit windows installed in a single rough-opening shall not be
permitted.
Mirrored glass shall not be used as an exterior building material.
An undeveloped lot with a property line abutting Main Street shall not be developed with a
new building that has less than three habitable stories and that has a height as viewed from
Main Street of less than 36 feet.
A false facade greater than four feet above the roof shall not be permitted in order to
comply with Subsection 3G of this section.
A new building located in both the C-2 and C-O Zoning Districts and fronting upon Main Street
may include a zero foot rear setback along a rear alley and a 95% maximum building
coverage.
Editor's Note: The Table of Regulations Governing the Size of Lots, Yards and Buildings and the Table
of Regulations for Multifamily Dwellings are included as attachments to this chapter.
§ 27-502. Minimum Dwelling Unit Area Requirements.
[As added by Ord. 677, 8/9/1989, § 3]
Existing Dwelling Units. Properly permitted dwelling units in existence at the date of the adoption
of this section shall not be subject to the requirements of this Part as long as the number or area
of the dwelling units is not altered.
Change in Requirements. Whenever there is any change in the number of dwelling units or area of
the dwelling units, new construction, or conversion, the requirements of § 27-502, Subsection 3 or
4, shall be met.
All one bedroom dwelling units for one or two individuals, including efficiency apartments, shall
contain an area of not less than 500 square feet of dwelling unit area.
All dwelling units, exclusive of units described in § 27-502, Subsection 3, shall contain an area of
not less than 700 square feet of dwelling unit area plus an additional 100 square feet of dwelling
unit area for each bedroom over three.
Part 6. GENERAL REGULATIONS
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 398/505
1.
2.
3.
A.
4.
§ 27-601. Purpose.
This Part contains general regulations which apply to several or all zoning districts and which do not
require special action of the Planning Commission (except for subdivision review) or special exception
uses or variances by the Zoning Hearing Board.
DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS
§ 27-602. District Dimensional Requirements.
The dimensional requirements for each district pertaining to minimum lot area, minimum lot width,
minimum yards, maximum height and maximum building coverage are specified in Part 5 for permitted
uses and Part 10 for special exception uses.
§ 27-603. Lot Area or Yard Attribution.
The lot area and yards required for any new building or use shall not include any part of a lot that is
required by any other building or use to comply with the requirements of this chapter. No required lot
shall include any property, the ownership of which has been transferred subsequent to the effective
date of this chapter, if such property was a part of the area required for compliance with the
dimensional requirements applicable to the lot for which the transfer was made.
§ 27-604. Minimum Lot Width.
Where a minimum lot width is specified, no principal building shall be erected on any part of a lot which
has a width of less than is specified, except as may be permitted by § 27-605.
§ 27-605. Exceptions to Dimensional Requirements.
[As amended by Ordinance 646, 4/13/1988, § 4; and by Ordinance 829, 12/18/2002]
Front Yard Exceptions for Corner Lots. Where an unimproved corner lot is situated adjacent to two
improved lots, then the front and side yards of the corner lot which abut the street right-of-way
may be reduced to a depth equal to the respective front yards of the adjoining lots provided,
however, that each yard may not be reduced to below 10 feet.
Front Yard Exception. When an unimproved lot is situated between two improved lots, each
having a principal building within 20 feet of the side lot line of the unimproved lot, the front yard
may be reduced to a depth equal to that of the greater front yard of the two adjoining lots;
provided, however, that it may not be reduced to below 10 feet.
Front- and Rear- Yard Exception. In the C-2 zoning district, parking structures with more than one
parking level may reduce the front and rear setbacks to zero feet provided a minimum of a four
foot pedestrian walkway is provided along the adjoining street or vehicular way.
Projections into Yards. Projections into required yards shall be permitted as follows:
Bay windows, fireplaces, fire escapes, uncovered stairs and landing, balconies and cornices,
canopies, eaves and other architectural features not required for structural support may
project into the required side, front or rear yard not more than a total of three feet.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 399/505
B.
5.
1.
2.
Uncovered patios or porches, terraces, steps or other similar features not over three feet high
above the level of the floor of the ground story may be located in the required side and rear
yards not closer than three feet to any adjacent property line, and may project into front yards
not closer than 10 feet to the street right-of-way line.
Height Limitations — District height limitations shall not apply to church spires, belfries, cupolas,
domes, monuments, water towers, chimneys, smokestacks, silos, flag poles, radio and TV towers,
masts and aerials, public utility poles and towers, and parapet walks which extend not more than
four feet above the limiting height of the building. Also solar and communication devices shall be
exempt from height limitations.
UNIQUE LOT AND BUILDING LOCATIONS
§ 27-606. Two or More Buildings on a Lot.
Two or more principal buildings located on a parcel in single ownership shall conform to all the
requirements of this chapter which would normally apply to each building if each were on a separate
lot.
§ 27-607. Through Lots.
Where a single lot under individual ownership extends from one street to another parallel or nearly
parallel street or alley, the Planning Commission shall decide which street will be considered as the
front street. No principal structure shall be erected on the rear of the lot, except as specified in § 27-
606 and § 27-608 of this chapter.
§ 27-608. Lots Fronting on an Alley.
Individual lots, existing at the effective date of this chapter, fronting on an alley, shall comply with all the
requirements of this chapter and the district in which said lots are located.
§ 27-609. Side Yard of a Corner Lot.
The side yard of a corner lot which abuts a street, shall be equal to the required front yard for that
street, except as in § 27-605, Subsection 1, above.
§ 27-610. Visibility at Corners.
Corner Lots at Street Intersections — No obstruction to vision (other than an existing building,
post, column, public utility pole or tower, or trees) exceeding 30 inches above street grade shall be
erected or maintained on any lot within the triangle formed by the street intersection, created by
the right-of-way line of each street extended to a point, and a line drawn between two points, each
located 30 feet from the street intersection. All plant materials shall be kept trimmed to insure
uninterrupted vision for motor vehicle traffic.
At each point where a private accessory intersects a public street or road, a clear-sight triangle of
eight feet measured from the point of intersection of the street line and the edge of the accessory,
shall be maintained, within which vegetation and other visual obstructions shall be limited to a
height of not more than 30 inches above the street grade.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURES AND USES
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 400/505
A.
B.
C.
D.
1.
2.
A.
B.
C.
(a)
(b)
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(3)
D.
3.
§ 27-611. Accessory Structures.
[As amended by Ord. 910, 12/2/2009, § 4; by Ord. 950, 10/20/2011]
All accessory structures shall conform with the minimum yard regulations established in Part 5, except
as permitted below:
Unattached Structures Accessory to Residential Buildings — Structures accessory to residential
buildings which are not attached to a principal structure may be erected within the required side
and rear yards of a principal structure provided that they conform with the following:
Maximum Height. 1-1/2 stories or 15 feet in height.
Distance from Side Lot Line — Not less than four feet from the side lot line, except in the case
of corner lots where the full side yard as specified in § 27-609 shall be maintained.
Distance from Rear Lot Line — Not less than four feet from the rear lot line.
Distance from Principal Structure — Not less than 10 feet from any principal structure,
including a principal structure, on an adjoining lot.
Unattached Structure Accessory to Nonresidential Buildings — Accessory structures shall comply
with front and side yard requirements for the principal structure and shall have a minimum rear
yard of at least 10 feet.
Fences and Retaining Walls — Unless specifically noted the setback provisions of this chapter
shall not apply to fences.
No fence may be more than six feet in height above the average natural grade.
No fence shall contain barbed wire or other injurious materials.
Walls other than retaining walls shall not be permitted as fences in any residential zoning
district.
Chain link fencing shall not be used between a building face and public right-of-way.
Treatments such as decorative wrought iron should be used instead.
Height Limitations.
All yards fronting a public street: 42 inches 3 1/2 feet.
Side and rear yards: six feet 72 inches.
Construction and Placement.
Setback: zero foot setback from all property lines.
The higher quality and/or side without posts must face adjoining properties.
Visibility Triangle: fence or wall may not impede vision above 2.5 feet within the area
30 feet from two intersecting street right-of-way lines.
Materials.
Must be durable, weather resistant, rust proof, and easily maintained.
Acceptable materials include wrought iron, vinyl, wood, wire, and others of a similar
look.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 401/505
(c)
A.
B.
C.
D.
4.
1.
2.
3.
Must be kept in good condition, plumb, true, and without damage.
Antenna, Standard (includes amateur radio antenna):
A standard antenna is permitted by right in all districts as an accessory use.
A standard antenna, including its supporting structure, shall have a maximum total height
above the average surrounding ground level of 35 feet, or 15 feet above the top of the
building to which the antenna is attached, whichever is less restrictive, except that an amateur
radio antenna may have a maximum total height of 75 feet.
An antenna shall be properly anchored to resist high winds.
A freestanding standard antenna shall meet the minimum setbacks that apply to an accessory
building.
§ 27-612. Home Occupation.
[As amended by Ord. 608, 3/13/1985; by Ord. 646, 4/13/1988, § 5]
A single home occupation per dwelling unit is permitted as an accessory use to a residential structure,
provided that such home occupation shall be conducted only by the residents of the dwelling unit who
may not employ more than one additional nonresident person and that the only external evidence of
the home occupation shall be a sign not exceeding 1 1/2 square feet in area.
A home occupation shall occupy no more than 25% of the floor area of the dwelling unit.
No display of products and no mechanical or electrical equipment associated with the home
occupation shall be visible from the exterior of the building.
Home occupation shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling unit for
residential purposes, and shall be restricted to professional offices, the training and tutoring of up
to four adults in small classes, care and education of children numbering more than three and not
more than six, in-home child care services limited to more than three and no more than six
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 402/505
4.
5.
1.
children who are not related by blood, adopted or agency placed for foster care, custom dress
making, millinery or tailoring, beauty salons, and rooming or boarding of not more than four
persons.
Prior to the use or occupancy of any land or building or for any change of use of any existing
building or for any change or use of land, as a home occupation, a Home Occupation Permit shall
be secured from the Zoning Officer. The purpose of a Home Occupation Permit is to certify that
the premises comply with the provisions of this ordinance [this chapter] and may be used for the
purposes set forth in the Home Occupation Permit subject to the standards established in § 27-
612 hereof, and subject to compliance with any building code adopted in the Borough. With
respect to in-home child care services, the applicant must exhibit any appropriate license or
certificate issued by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. A copy of the Home Occupation Permit
shall be kept upon the premises, and shall be displayed on request made by the Zoning Officer or
other enforcement officer of the municipality.
Every person having a home occupation in his/her residence shall provide one off-street parking
space for the nonresident employee, if any. In addition, every person having a home occupation in
his/her residence shall provide the same number of off-street parking spaces required for that use
(profession or business) by § 27-701 of this Chapter 27, provided the required off-street parking
spaces may be provided off-lot if located within 300 feet of the home occupation site.
§ 27-613. Home Gardening, Nurseries and Greenhouses.
Home gardening and accessory structures used for nurseries or as greenhouses, are permitted in
residential areas, provided they are used by the residents for noncommercial purposes and provided
further that they shall not include the outdoor storage of equipment and supplies.
§ 27-614. Private Outdoor Swimming Pools.
A single private outdoor swimming pool per dwelling unit is permitted as an accessory use to a
residential structure provided that such swimming pool is for the private use of the residents of the
dwelling unit or for their guests. Such pool may be located within the required rear yards for the district
in which the pool is to be located except that no portion of the body of water in the pool shall be located
closer to the property line than four feet and no portion of any walks or accessory pool appurtenances
surrounding the body of water shall be closer than two feet to any property line.
Fences Around Pools. All pools shall be surrounded and enclosed by a four-foot high fence
structurally suitable to deter direct access to the body of water in the pool. Such a fence shall not
have openings, holes or gaps therein larger than four inches in width, no larger than four inches in
length except for doors or gates; provided, however, that if a picket fence is erected or maintained,
the horizontal dimensions shall not exceed four inches, provided, further, that a dwelling house or
accessory building may be used as a part of such a fence.
All gates or doors opening through such enclosures shall be equipped with a self-closing and selflatching
device designed to keep, and capable of keeping, such door or gate securely closed at all
times when not in actual use; provided, however, that the door of any dwelling occupied by human
beings and forming any part of the enclosure hereinabove required, need not be so equipped.
Fences shall be constructed of weather resistive materials and shall be assembled or fabricated
with sufficient rigidity to prevent any substantial alterations or deformation of the lawful openings,
holes or gaps.
The sides of a pool constructed above the ground level shall be considered to meet the
requirements for a fence preventing direct access to the pool provided that such sides of the pool
are at least four feet high and provided further that any stairs, steps or ladders used to reach the
water surface of the pool shall be removable or capable of being folded up or secured in such a
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 403/505
1.
2.
1.
2.
A.
B.
3.
way which will prevent their use when the pool is not in operation by the residents of the property
or their guests.
Any pool whose body of water is closer than six feet to a property line shall be shielded by a sixfoot
high privacy fence, hedge or other suitable visual obstruction which shall serve to screen the
pool from the adjoining property. Such a privacy fence may also serve as the fence required to
deter direct access to the body of water as required herein if it conforms with the other
requirements of this section.
DEVELOPMENT DESIGN REQUIREMENTS
§ 27-615. Residential Lots Not Served by Public Sewer and/or
Water.
The size of lots specified in Part 5 shall apply in all cases except where such lots are not served
with public sewer and/or water facilities. In such cases, the Zoning Officer shall require the owner
or applicant to make such tests as are needed to determine the adequacy of the lot for on-site
sewage treatment. All such tests must be conducted under the auspices of a Sewage
Enforcement Officer licensed by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources.
The Zoning Officer shall review the findings of the tests and submit them to the Zoning Hearing
Board which shall make a final decision on the adequacy of the lot size for the proposed
development. The Zoning Hearing Board may request the applicant to submit any additional
information needed to make a determination. The Board shall consult with the Borough Engineer
prior to making a final determination on the application.
§ 27-616. Highway Frontage Development.
In order to encourage the sound development of highway frontage and to minimize traffic congestion
and hazard, the following special provisions shall apply:
All areas for off-street parking, off-street loading and unloading, and the storage or movement of
motor vehicles shall be physically separated from the highway or street by a raised curb, planting
strip, wall, or other suitable barrier against unchanneled motor vehicle entrance or exit, except for
necessary accessways or access roads which supply entrance to and egress from such parking,
loading or storage area. All parking areas or lots shall be designed to prohibit vehicles from
backing out on the street, and the capacity of each lot shall provide adequate storage area and
distribution facilities upon the lot to prevent back-up of vehicles on a public street while awaiting
entry to the lot.
Each use with less than 100 feet of frontage on a public street shall have not more than one
accessway to each such street, and no business or other use with 100 feet or more of frontage on
a public street shall have more than two accessways to any one street for each 300 feet of
frontage. Where practicable, access to parking areas shall be provided by a common service
driveway or minor street in order to avoid direct access to a major street.
In the case of a shopping center, or a similar grouping of buildings on a lot, and in any other case
where practicable:
All buildings shall front upon a marginal street, service road, common parking lot or similar
area and not directly upon a public street;
All points of vehicular access to and from a public street shall be located not less than 200
feet from the intersection of any public street lines with each other, provided, however, that
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 404/505
C.
D.
4.
1.
2.
1.
such a point of vehicular access, which in effect, converts a "T" intersection into an
intersection of two streets which cross one another, shall be permitted;
Provision shall be made for safe and efficient ingress and egress to and from public streets
and highways serving the center, or other unified development, without undue congestion to,
or interference with normal traffic flow within the Borough;
All streets and accessways shall conform to the specifications determined by the Borough
Engineer and the requirements of the Borough of Stroudsburg Subdivision Ordinance.
Provision shall be made for adequate signalization, turn, standby and deceleration lanes, and
similar facilities where desirable.
All driveways, aisles, maneuvering spaces, vehicular service areas or spaces between or about
buildings, other than those related to a dwelling shall be adequately illuminated during night hours
of use.
§ 27-617. Screening and Buffer Yards.
Adequate screening shall be provided along the side and rear boundaries of any manufacturing or
commercial use or of any off-street parking or loading area for more than five vehicles which abut a
residential or institutional use or along the boundaries of any other use where such screening is
required.
Nonresidential uses existing at the time of passage of this chapter which are not conducted in a
completely enclosed building and open construction, storage, and junk yards shall be screened in
accordance with the provisions of this section.
Screening shall consist of a visual screen or obstruction of sufficient height, but not less than six
feet high, to effectively obscure the area being screened from adjoining uses. Such a screen or
obstruction shall consist of a suitable fence or wall or of appropriate planting materials such as
shrubs, hedges or trees located within a buffer strip having a minimum width of five feet. Such
fence, wall or planting materials shall be maintained in good condition without any advertising
thereon. Any space between such fence, wall or planting materials and adjoining lot line shall be
attractively surfaced and/or landscaped with grass, hardy shrubs or evergreen ground cover and
maintained in good condition.
GENERAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
§ 27-618. Compliance.
All uses and activities established after the effective date of this chapter, unless otherwise indicated,
shall comply with the following standards:
Noise. The sound level of any operation (other than outdoor athletic facilities and the operation of
motor vehicles or other transportation facilities, operations involved in the construction or
demolition of structures, emergency alarm signals or time signals) shall not exceed the decibel
levels in the designated octave bands as stated below. The sound-pressure level shall be
measured with a Sound Level Meter and an Octave Band Analyzer that conform to specifications
published by the American Standards Association (American Standard Sound Level Meters for
Measurement of Noise and Other Sounds, Z 24, 3-1944, American Standards Association, Inc.,
New York, New York, and the American Standard Specification for Octave-Band Filter Set for the
Analysis of Noise and Other Sounds, Z 24, 10-1953, American Standards Association, Inc., New
York, New York, shall be used).
The maximum permissible sound-pressure levels for smooth and continuous noise shall be as
follows (all of the decibel levels stated below shall apply in each case):
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 405/505
2.
3.
4.
5.
A.
B.
6.
Frequency Band
(Cycles per Second)
Maximum Permitted Sound-Pressure Level
(Decibels)
0 — 150 67
150 — 300 59
300 — 600 52
600 — 1,200 46
1,200 — 2,400 40
2,400 — 4,800 34
Above 4800 32
If the noise is not smooth and continuous or is radiated during sleeping hours, one or more of the
corrections shall be added to or subtracted from each of the decibel levels given above.
Type of Operation or Character of Noise Correction in Decibels
Noise occurs between the hours of 10:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m.
3
Noise occurs less than 5% of any one-hour
period
+5
Noise is of periodic character (hum, scream, etc.), or is of impulsive character (hammering, etc.).
(In the case of impulsive noise, the correction shall apply only to the average pressure during an
impulse, and impulse peaks shall not exceed the basic standards given above).
Smoke, Dust, Fumes, Gases, Odors, Mists, Vapors and Pollens. The emission of smoke, dust,
fumes, gases, odors, mists, vapors, pollens and similar matter, or any combination thereof, which
can cause any damage to human or animal health or vegetation, or to other forms of property, or
which can cause any soiling or staining of persons or property at the point beyond the lot line of
the use creating the emission is prohibited. Standards concerning such emissions shall be in
accord with the rules and regulations of the following source: The Air Pollution Control Act, the Act
of January 8, 1960, P.L. 2119, as amended 35 P.S., Article 4001, et seq.
Heat and Glare. Any operation producing glare and/or heat shall be performed within an enclosed
building or in such a manner as not to be visible or to produce any effect beyond the property line
of the lot on which the operation is located.
Vibrations. No use shall cause earth vibrations or concussions detectable beyond its lot lines
without the aid of instruments with the exception of that vibration produced as a result of
construction activity.
Electric, Diesel, Gas or Other Power. Every use requiring power shall be so operated that the
service lines, substation or other facilities shall conform to the highest safety requirements, and
shall be so constructed and installed as to be an integral part of the architectural features of the
plant and, except for essential poles and wires, shall not extend into any yard and shall be suitably
screened from streets or any adjacent property which would be deleteriously affected by such
installations.
Storage and Waste Disposal. The following general regulations shall apply to the storage of
materials and the disposal of materials:
No highly flammable or explosive liquids, solids, or gases shall be stored in bulk above
ground, except tanks or drums of fuel directly connecting with energy devices, heating
devices, or appliances located and operated on the same lot as the tanks or drums of fuel.
All outdoor storage facilities for fuel, raw materials and products; and all fuel, raw materials
and products stored outdoors shall be enclosed by an approved safety fence.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 406/505
C.
D.
[1]
1.
A.
B.
C.
D.
2.
A.
B.
C.
3.
No materials or wastes shall be deposited upon a lot in such form or manner that they may be
transferred off the lot by natural causes or forces, nor shall any substance which can
contaminate a stream or watercourse or otherwise render such stream or watercourse
undesirable as a source of water supply or recreation, or which will destroy aquatic life, be
allowed to enter any stream or watercourse.
All materials or wastes which might cause fumes or dust or which constitute a fire hazard or
which may be edible or otherwise attractive to rodents or insects shall be stored outdoors only
if enclosed in containers which are adequate to eliminate such hazards.
Part 6A. SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS FOR SPECIFIC
USES
§ 27-6A01. Medical Marijuana Facilities.
[Added by Ord. No. 1075, 4/16/2019]
Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish a process and standards for establishing,
constructing and operating medical marijuana facilities, pursuant to the Pennsylvania Medical
Marijuana Act (PA Act No. 16, 2016),[1] to allow for the integration of an allowed industry while
providing for the protection of the public's health, safety, morals and general welfare.
Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 10231.101 et seq.
Academic Clinical Research Centers.
An academic clinical research center may only grow medical marijuana in an indoor,
enclosed, and secure building which includes electronic locking systems, electronic
surveillance and other features required by the DOH. The grower/processor facility is
prohibited in a trailer, cargo container, mobile or modular unit, mobile home, recreational
vehicle or other motor vehicle.
All external lighting serving an academic clinical research center shall be shielded in such a
manner to not allow light to be emitted skyward or onto adjoining properties.
Parking requirements shall follow the parking schedule found in § 27-701 of the Zoning
Ordinance as listed for public or private educational institution use.
A buffer planting is required where an academic clinical research center adjoins a residential
use or district.
Medical Marijuana Grower/Processor.
A medical marijuana grower/processor may only grow medical marijuana in an indoor,
enclosed, and secure building which includes electronic locking systems, electronic
surveillance and other features required by the DOH. The grower/processor facility is
prohibited in a trailer, cargo container, mobile or modular unit, mobile home, recreational
vehicle or other motor vehicle.
The floor area of a medical marijuana grower/processor shall include enough space for
production, secure storage of marijuana seed, related finished product cultivation, and
marijuana related materials and equipment used in production and cultivation or for required
laboratory testing.
There shall be no emission of dust, fumes, vapors, odors, or waste into the environment from
any facility where medical marijuana growing, processing or testing occurs.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 407/505
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
(1)
(2)
(3)
I.
J.
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
D.
E.
F.
4.
Marijuana remnants and by-products shall be secured and properly disposed of in
accordance with the DOH policy and shall not be placed within any unsecure exterior refuse
containers.
The grower/processor shall provide only wholesale products to other medical marijuana
facilities. Retail sales and dispensing of medical marijuana and related products is prohibited
at medical marijuana grower/processor facilities.
All external lighting serving a medical marijuana grower/processor shall be shielded in such a
manner to not allow light to be emitted skyward or onto adjoining properties.
Parking requirements shall follow the parking schedule found in § 27-701 of the Zoning
Ordinance as listed for a manufacturing use.
A buffer planting is required where a medical marijuana grower/processor adjoins a
residential use or district.
Entrances and driveways to a medical marijuana grower/processor shall be designed to
accommodate the anticipated vehicles used to service the facility.
All accesses shall secure the appropriate highway occupancy permit (state or Borough).
The clear sight triangle found in § 27-610 of Zoning Ordinance shall be considered and
maintained.
The driveway shall be designed and improved to the standards expressly described in
§§ 27-702 and 27-703 of Zoning Ordinance.
Loading and off-loading areas within the structure are preferred. If an external loading dock
arrangement is designed, it shall be from within a secure environment.
Medical Marijuana Transport Vehicle Service.
All external lighting serving a medical marijuana transport vehicle service shall be shielded in
such a manner to not allow light to be emitted skyward or onto adjoining properties.
Parking requirements shall follow the parking schedule found in § 27-701 of the Zoning
Ordinance as listed for wholesale and warehousing use.
A buffer planting is required where a medical marijuana transport vehicle service adjoins a
residential use or district.
Entrances and driveways to a medical marijuana transport vehicle service shall be designed
to accommodate the anticipated vehicles used to enter and exit the premises.
All accesses shall secure the appropriate highway occupancy permit.
The clear sight triangle found in § 27-610 of Zoning Ordinance shall be considered and
maintained.
The driveway shall be designed and improved to the standards expressly described in
§§ 27-702 and 27-703 of Zoning Ordinance.
If for some reason a medical marijuana product is to be temporarily stored at a medical
marijuana transport vehicle service facility, the facility shall be secured to the same level as a
medical marijuana grower/producer and dispensary.
Loading and off-loading areas within the structure are preferred. If an external loading dock
arrangement is designed, it shall be from within a secure environment.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 408/505
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
5. Medical Marijuana Dispensary.
A medical marijuana dispensary shall be legally registered in the commonwealth and possess
a current valid medical marijuana permit from the DOH.
A medical marijuana dispensary may only dispense medical marijuana in an indoor, enclosed,
permanent, and secure building and is prohibited in a trailer, cargo container, mobile or
modular unit, mobile home, recreational vehicle or other motor vehicle.
A medical marijuana dispensary may not operate on the same site as a facility used for
growing and processing medical marijuana.
Medical marijuana dispensaries shall have a single secure public entrance and shall
implement appropriate security measures to deter and prevent the theft of marijuana and
unauthorized entrance into areas containing medical marijuana.
A medical marijuana dispensary shall be used for secure storage of product and shall have an
interior customer waiting area equal to a minimum of 25% of the gross floor area.
A medical marijuana dispensary shall:
Not have a drive-through service;
Not have outdoor seating areas;
Not have outdoor vending machines;
Prohibit the administering of, or the consumption of, medical marijuana on the premises;
and
Not offer direct or home delivery service.
A medical marijuana dispensary may dispense only medical marijuana to certified patients
and caregivers and shall comply with all lawful, applicable health regulations.
A medical marijuana dispensary may not be located within 500 feet of the property line of a
public, private or parochial school or a day-care center. This distance shall be measured in a
straight line from the closest exterior wall of the building or portion thereof in which the
business is conducted or proposed to be conducted, to the closest property line of the
protected use, regardless of municipality in which it is located.
A medical marijuana dispensary shall be a minimum distance of 1,000 feet from the next
nearest medical marijuana facility. This does not include complementing or supporting
businesses covered by different definitions. This distance shall be measured in a straight line
from the closest exterior walls of the buildings or portions thereof in which the businesses are
conducted or proposed to be conducted, regardless of municipality in which it is located. This
separation distance does not apply to the distance between the grower/processor or
academic clinical research centers and the specific dispensary they serve, or with which they
partner.
Any medical marijuana facility lawfully operating shall not be rendered in violation of these
provisions by the subsequent location of a public, private or parochial school or a day-care
center.
All external lighting serving a medical marijuana dispensary shall be shielded in such a
manner to not allow light to be emitted skyward or onto adjoining properties.
Parking requirements shall follow the parking schedule found in § 27-701 of Zoning
Ordinance as listed for medical and dental offices including outpatient clinics.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 409/505
M.
(1)
(2)
(3)
N.
O.
A.
B.
C.
D.
[2]
E.
F.
G.
6.
7.
A buffer planting is required where a medical marijuana dispensary adjoins a residential use
or district.
Entrances and driveways to a medical marijuana dispensary shall be designed to
accommodate the anticipated vehicles used to service the facility.
All accesses shall secure the appropriate highway occupancy permit.
The clear sight triangle found in § 27-610 of Zoning Ordinance shall be considered and
maintained.
The driveway shall be designed and improved to the standards expressly described in
§§ 27-702 and 27-703 of Zoning Ordinance.
Loading and off-loading areas within the structure are preferred. If an external loading dock
arrangement is designed, it should be from within a secure environment.
Building and Zoning Permits/Approvals.
A zoning permit shall be required prior to obtaining a building permit for the construction or
erection of a building; the alteration of a building or portion thereof; the use or change in use
of a building or land; or any adjustments to a nonconforming use.
The Stroudsburg Borough zoning permit application shall be completed.
Permit fees shall be as stipulated in the fee schedule adopted by resolution of the
Stroudsburg Borough Council in effect at the time of application.
Permits may be denied if the applicant is failing to comply with any state or local law or
regulation.
In the case of new construction, meeting the Pennsylvania MPC[2] definition, land
development plan application is required to be submitted and an approval secured, prior to
establishment of the use.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
If the application is to change the use of a building or needs to demonstrate allocation of
space within a structure, the applicant shall provide architectural drawings prepared by an
architect registered in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
A medical marijuana grower/processor shall be legally registered in the commonwealth and
possess a current valid medical marijuana permit from the DOH.
Any owner, operator, or other person who violates or permits a violation of this section shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding before a Magisterial District Judge,
pay to the Stroudsburg Borough a fine of not more than $500, plus all court costs, including but
not limited to reasonable attorney's fees incurred by the Stroudsburg Borough on account of such
violation. No penalty or cost shall be imposed until the date the determination of the violation by
the Magisterial District Judge becomes final. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the
judgment, the Stroudsburg Borough may enforce the judgment as provided by law. Each day a
violation exists after final judgment shall constitute a separate offense. The amount of the fine
imposed shall be multiplied by the number of such days and may be charged and collected by the
Stroudsburg Borough without further judicial proceedings. Further, the appropriate officers or
agents of the Stroudsburg Borough are hereby authorized to issue a cease and desist notice
and/or to seek equitable relief, including injunction, to enforce compliance herewith. No bond will
be required if injunctive relief is sought by the Borough. A person who violates this section shall
also be responsible for the Borough attorney's fees, engineering fees, expert fees and court costs
reasonably incurred by the Borough on account of such violation.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 410/505
Part 7. PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS
§ 27-701. Off-Street Parking.
[As amended by Ord. 646, 4/13/1988; by Ord. 722, 11/11/1992; by Ord. 757, 11/5/1997; by Ord. 1024,
2/7/2017; and by Ord. No. 1055, 7/17/2018]
Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in all zoning districts, except C-2, and satisfactorily
maintained in accordance with the following provisions for each building or use which, after the
effective date of this chapter, is established, erected, enlarged or altered for use for any of the following
purposes in any district; for uses not specifically listed, the requirements for the most similar use listed
shall be followed. When a specific use or similar use is not listed, the required number of off-street
parking spaces will be determined from a parking demand study. The study will be based on the use,
the expected number of full-time employees, and an estimated number of clients, customers, and
visitors. The study shall include a projection analysis for future growth of the use. The purpose of the
parking demand study shall be to determine the number of off-street parking spaces needed for
employees, clients, customers, and visitors. The Borough shall conduct the study and base the study
on data available from the applicant and either the National Parking Association, the Institute of
Transportation Engineers, or the American Planning Association. The cost of such a study shall be
paid by the applicant.
Use
One off-street parking
space required for each
Plus one off-street parking
space required for each
A) Residential
1) Single-family, 2-family, and
multifamily dwellings
0.5 dwelling unit (2 spaces
per unit)
—
2) Efficiency apartments 0.67 dwelling unit (1.5
spaces per unit)
—
3) Multifamily units for the
elderly
1 dwelling unit —
4) Conversions 0.5 dwelling unit (2 spaces
per unit)
—
5) Rooming house 1 guest room —
6) Home occupations 1) 0.5 dwelling unit
2) Nonresidential employee
100 square feet of floor
space used for the
occupation or office
7) Fraternity and sorority 1 occupant 500 square feet of floor
space
B) Public or Private Recreation
1) Private or membership
clubs or lodges
6 members or 6 persons of
total capacity
Full-time employee
2) Bowling alleys 0.25 lane (4 spaces per
lane)
Full-time employee
3) Adult uses 3 seats or every 50 square
feet of gross floor area,
whichever is more
restrictive
Full-time employee
C) Governmental, Institutional, Educational and Utility
1) Churches 4 seats 100 square feet of meeting
room area
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 411/505
Use
One off-street parking
space required for each
Plus one off-street parking
space required for each
2) Public or private educational
institution
0.8 faculty or other full-time
employees (1.25 spaces per
employee)
8 students aged 16 years or
older
3) Licensed convalescent or
nursing home
3 beds Staff and visiting doctor and
each employee (including
nurses on the major shift)
4) Hospitals 2 beds Staff and visiting doctor and
each employee (including
nurses on the major shift)
5) Cemeteries 1 full-time employee Salesperson
6) Day-care homes and
centers; nursery schools
1 faculty member 2 classrooms and offices
7) Essential public utility 1 employee
D) Retail, Commercial, Business, Professional Service
1) Auto servicing and repair 1/3 service bay (3 spaces
per bay)
Full-time employee
2) Business services such as
banks, credit unions
100 square feet of floor
space used for serving
customers
Full-time employee
3) Professional offices such as
real estate, insurance,
consultants
200 square feet of gross
floor area
Full-time employee
4) Retail stores and
businesses
300 square feet of area
used for serving customers
for all retail stores and
businesses in the MU-A and
MU-B Districts*
100 square feet of area
used for serving customers
for all retail stores and
businesses in the C-1, C-1A
and I-1 Districts
2 full-time employees
5) Funeral homes 4 seats for patron use or 50
square feet of gross floor
area
Full-time nonresident
employee
6) Medical or dental offices,
clinics
0.25 practitioner (4 spaces
per practitioner)
Full-time employee
7) Personal service business
such as barbershops, photo
shops, etc.
100 square feet of floor area
for serving customers
2 full-time employees
8) Restaurants, taverns 3 seats for customers 2 full-time employees
9) Drive-in restaurants 100 square feet of gross
floor area
Table or booth, plus 1 space
for each 2 counter stools,
plus 1 space for each 2 fulltime
employees
10) Self-service laundromats Washing or dry-cleaning
machine
2 full-time employees
11) (Reserved)
12) Motel, hotel Rental room or suite Full-time employee
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 412/505
1.
2.
3.
4.
A.
5.
Use
One off-street parking
space required for each
Plus one off-street parking
space required for each
13) Gaming establishments 3 seats for customers 2 full-time employees
14) Convenience store with or
without gasoline or filling
station; gasoline or filling
station
200 square feet of area
used for serving customers
2 full-time employees
E) Industrial and Wholesale
1) Manufacturing 1,000 square feet of floor
area
3 employees on largest shift
2) Wholesale and warehousing 1,000 square feet of floor
area
2 employees on largest shift
NOTES:
*Retail stores and businesses may add additional parking up to a maximum of 40% of the required
minimum off-street parking spaces.
§ 27-702. General Regulations Applying to All Off-Street Parking
Facilities.
[As amended by Ordinance 646, 4/13/1988, § 7; and by Ordinance 773, 2/3/1999, § 1]
Existing Parking. Structures and uses in existence at the date of adoption of this chapter shall not
be subject to the requirements of this Part so long as the kind or extent of use is not changed, and
provided that any parking facility is now serving such structures or uses shall not in the future be
reduced below such requirements.
Change in Requirements. Whenever there is an alteration of a structure or a change or extension
of a use which increases the parking requirements according to the standards of § 27-701, the
total additional parking required for the alteration, change or extension shall be provided in
accordance with the requirements of that section.
Conflict with Other Uses. No parking area shall be used for any use that interferes with its
availability for the parking need it is required to serve.
Continuing Character of Obligation. All required parking facilities shall be provided and maintained
so long as the use exists which the facilities were designed to serve. Off-street parking facilities
shall not be reduced in total extent after their provision except in conformity with the requirements
of this Part. Reasonable precautions shall be taken by the owner or sponsor of particular uses to
assure the availability of required facilities to the employees or other persons whom the facilities
are designed to serve.
Such facilities shall be designed and used in such a manner as to at no time constitute a
nuisance, or a hazard, or unreasonable impediment to traffic.
Joint Use.
Two or more uses may provide for required parking in a common parking lot if the total space
provided is not less than the sum of the spaces required for each use individually. However,
the number of spaces required in a common parking facility may be reduced below this total
by approval of the Zoning Hearing Board if it can be demonstrated to the Board that the hours
or days of peak parking needed for the uses are so different that a lower total will provide
adequately for all uses served by the facility.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 413/505
B.
6.
7.
A.
B.
C.
8.
9.
10.
1.
Up to 50% of the parking spaces for (a) theaters, auditoriums, bowling alleys, or private clubs
and up to 100% of the parking spaces required for churches or meeting halls may be provided
collectively and used jointly by (b) banks, offices, retail stores, repair shops, service
establishments, and similar uses not normally open, used, or operated during the same hours
as those listed in (a) provided, however, a written agreement assuring the continued
availability of such parking areas shall be properly drawn and executed by the parties
concerned, approved as to legal sufficiency by the Borough Solicitor, and filed with application
for zoning permit.
Fractional Spaces. Where the computation of required parking space results in a fractional
number, any fraction of the next higher number shall be counted as one.
Location of Parking Spaces. Required off-street parking spaces shall be on the same lot or
premises with the principal use served, or, where this requirement cannot be met, within 300 feet
of the principal use served within the same district.
Maintenance of Parking Area.
For parking areas of three or more vehicles, the area not landscaped and so maintained,
including driveways, shall be graded, surfaced with a dustless, durable, all-weather pavement
parking surface, and drained to the satisfaction of the Borough Engineer to the extent
necessary to prevent dust, erosion or excessive water flow across streets or adjoining
property. All off-street parking spaces shall be marked so as to indicate their location.
Parking areas with less than three parking spaces that are not provided with the type of
surface specified in § 27-702, Subsection 8A, shall be graded and surfaced with crushed
stone or gravel to provide a surface that is stable and will help reduce dust and erosion. The
perimeter of such parking areas and driveways shall be defined by bricks, stones, landscape
ties or other similar devices. In addition, whenever such a vehicle accommodation area abuts
a paved street, the driveway or portion of the parking surface leading from the street to the
parking area shall be paved as specified in § 27-702, Subsection 8A, for a distance of 10 feet
back from the paved street surface, or when a curb and sidewalk exist, the drive and parking
area shall be paved from the street to the building side of the sidewalk.
Parking of vehicles in areas other than approved parking areas shall be prohibited.
Lighting. All parking areas and driveways serving commercial uses shall be adequately illuminated
during the hours of use between sunset and sunrise.
Shade Trees. Off-street parking areas which provide parking for 10 or more vehicles shall be
provided with shade trees of a type and size approved by the Borough. The shade trees shall be
located in a planned manner within the parking lot area.
§ 27-703. Design Standards.
[As amended by Ord. 646, 4/13/1988, § 8, by Ord. 779, 7/7/1999, §§ 1 — 4; and by Ord. 829,
12/18/2002]
The design standards specified below shall be required for all off-street parking facilities with a
capacity of three or more vehicles built after the effective date of this chapter.
Parking lot dimensions shall be no less than those listed in the following table:
Aisle Width
Angle of Parking Parking Width Stall Depth One-way Two-way
90° 9' 18' 22' 24'
60° 9' 18' 13' 21'
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 414/505
2.
A.
B.
C.
3.
4.
5.
6.
(1)
(2)
A.
7.
Aisle Width
Angle of Parking Parking Width Stall Depth One-way Two-way
45° 9' 18' 12' 18'
30° 9' 18' 12' 15'
Parallel 20' 12' 18'
Parking areas shall be designed so that each motor vehicle may proceed to and from the parking
space provided for it without requiring the moving of any other motor vehicle.
The width of entrance and exit drives shall be:
A minimum of 12 feet for one-way use only;
A minimum of 20 feet for two-way use is allowed except for driveways and parking areas
designed for less than three cars. Driveways and parking areas made for less than three cars
shall have a minimum of a ten-foot wide driveway.
A maximum of 40 feet at the street line.
Any use with less than 100 feet of lot frontage on a public street shall have no more than one
accessway to each such street. Any business or other use with 100 feet or more of frontage on a
public street shall have no more than two accessways to any one street for each 300 feet of
frontage. Where more than one accessway is permitted, their centerline shall be placed at least 80
feet apart. On all corner properties, they shall be spaced a minimum of 60 feet, measured at the
curb line, between the center line of any entrance or exit drive and the street line or the street
parallel to said access drive.
In no case shall parking areas for three or more vehicles be designed to require or encourage cars
to back into a public street in order to leave a lot.
All parking spaces and access drives shall be at least five feet from any lot line. If the owners of
the adjoining lots agree in writing to provide off-street parking, the five feet setback requirement
may be waived for the adjoining property line of the properties of the adjoining property owners. At
any time this agreement is terminated by either party, the five feet criteria will be required.
Except where entrance and exit drives cross street lines, all parking areas for any purpose other
than single family residences shall be physically separated from any public street by a concrete
curb, sidewalk (where required), and by a planting strip which shall be not less than eight feet in
width.
Exceptions:
Newly created or expanded parking areas for existing buildings shall be required to be
physically separated from the public street and/or adjoining properties by a concrete
curb, sidewalk (where required), and a planting strip which shall not be less than three
feet. Plant material shall be presented and approved by the Borough Planning
Commission who shall be selected for interest in its structure, texture and color and for its
ultimate growth. Plants that are indigenous to the area and others that will be hearty,
harmonious to the design and of good appearance, shall be used. This criteria is not
intended to restrict imagination, innovation or variety, but rather to assist in focusing on
design principles, which can result in creative solutions that will develop a satisfactory
visual appearance within the Borough, preserve taxable values and promote the public
health, safety and welfare.
In the C-2 zoning district, § 27-703, Subsection 6, shall not apply to public parking
structures with more than one parking level.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 415/505
8.
9.
1.
1.
2.
3.
4.
(1)
(2)
A.
1.
All artificial lighting used to illuminate any parking space or spaces shall be so arranged that no
direct rays from such lighting shall fall upon any neighborhood property.
Compact Car Spaces. Parking lots designed for 10 or more spaces may include 30% of the
spaces for use by compact cars. These spaces shall be not less than eight feet wide and 18 feet
deep. Compact car spaces shall be marked and distinguished from standard spaces.
§ 27-704. Off-Street Loading.
[As amended by Ord. 646, 4/13/1988, § 9]
Off-street loading sufficient to accommodate the maximum demand generated by the use of the lot and
with proper access from the street or alley as determined by the Zoning Officer or another applicable
review agent for the Borough shall be provided on any lot on which a building for business or industry
is hereafter erected. All off-street loading and unloading spaces shall be graded, surfaced with asphalt
or other suitable material and drained to the satisfaction of the Borough Engineer to the extent
necessary to protect adjoining property.
Every building or structure, lot or land hereafter put to a business or industrial use or existing
building or structure enlarged shall provide one off-street truck loading space for the first 10,000
square feet or less of gross floor area, plus a minimum of one additional off-street truck loading
area for each additional 40,000 square feet gross floor area.
§ 27-705. Design and Layout of Off-Street Loading Facilities.
Off-street loading facilities shall be designed to conform to the following specifications:
Each required space shall be no less than 12 feet in width, 30 feet in length, and 14 feet in height,
exclusive of drives and maneuvering space, and located entirely on the lot being served.
There shall be appropriate means of access to a street or alley as well as adequate maneuvering
space.
The maximum width of driveways and sidewalk openings measured at the street lot line shall be
35 feet, the minimum width shall be 20 feet.
Such facilities shall be designed and used in such a manner as to at no time constitute a
nuisance, or a hazard or unreasonable impediment to traffic.
Part 8. SIGN REQUIREMENTS
§ 27-801. Purpose and Intent.
[Ord. No. 1048, 4/3/2018[1]]
The purpose of this Part is to develop a comprehensive system of sign regulations to:
Promote the safety of persons and property by providing that signs:
Do not create traffic hazards by distracting or confusing motorists or impairing motorist's
ability to see pedestrians, other vehicles, or obstacles or to read traffic signs.
Do not create a hazard due to collapse, fire, collision, decay or abandonment.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 416/505
(3)
B.
C.
2.
[1]
1.
A.
B.
C.
D.
2.
Do promote the aesthetic quality, safety, health, and general welfare and the assurance
of protection of adequate light and air within the Borough by regulation of the posting,
displaying, erection, use and maintenance of signs.
Promote the efficient transfer of information through the use of signs and to permit such use,
but not necessarily in the most-profitable form or format available for such use.
Protect the public welfare and enhance the overall appearance and economic value of the
landscape, while preserving the unique natural and historic environment that distinguishes the
Borough, and consistent with Article I, § 27, of the Pennsylvania Constitution. It is also
acknowledged that the Borough's economic well-being is heavily dependent upon the resort
and tourism industry. This dependence makes the protection of the Borough's historic
resources, environment and aesthetics from the impacts of signage a matter of critical
importance to all residential and commercial uses within the Borough, as well as the Borough
as a whole.
It is further declared that these regulations serve to reveal a great deal about the Borough's pride,
aesthetic appreciation, vitality, diversity, originality, culture and sense of order, giving it a distinctive
appearance and reinforcing the character of the Borough and its surrounding environs in its
natural setting as adopted by and set forth in the Comprehensive Plan and as further determined
by the Monroe County 2020 Task Force and the Jacob Stroud Corporation. It is further
acknowledged that these regulations in and of themselves cannot achieve the end result desired
unless the community upholds the terms set forth within an atmosphere of responsible freedom,
utilizing the principles of fairness and mutual cooperation. Minimum standards are thus provided to
safeguard the life, health, property and public welfare by regulating and controlling the design
quality, materials, construction, size, illumination, location and maintenance of all signs and sign
structures while at the same time attempting to provide functional flexibility, encourage variety, and
to create an incentive to relate signage to the basic principles of sound planning, development and
use of residential, commercial and industrial properties.
Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the repeal of former Part 8, Sign Requirements, as
amended.
§ 27-802. Definition of Signs.
[Ord. No. 1048, 4/3/2018]
As used in this chapter, "sign" shall mean any permanent or temporary structure or part of a
structure, or any device attached, represented, projected or applied by paint or otherwise, or any
structure or other surface used to communicate information, a message or advertisement, or to
attract the attention of the public to a subject or location. The term "sign" shall include, but not be
limited to, flat or curved surfaces, all support and/or assembly apparatus, flags, banners,
streamers, pennants, insignias and medals with or without words or pictures. Signs on vehicles
shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter when the vehicle is owned and located or parked
on or in front of a zoning lot under the control of an occupant of the lot.
The following shall not be defined as signs under this chapter:
A surface not exceeding one square foot in area that sets forth the identity of a property by
number, post box number or name(s) of occupants of the property.
Flags and insignia of any municipal, state or federal government.
Legal notices, identification information, or wayfinding information provided by governmental
or legislative authorities.
Integral, decorative or architectural features of buildings.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 417/505
E.
F.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
1.
2.
3.
4.
Actual produce and merchandise displayed for sale that appear in store windows.
Street banners approved under the Stroudsburg Borough Banner Policy.
§ 27-803. Types of Signs.
[Ord. No. 1048, 4/3/2018]
All signs shall be divided according to use types as follows:
Identification Sign. A sign which is greater than one square foot, but less than or equal to 1.5
square feet, in area situated on the zoning lot on which a permanent home occupation is located.
Business Sign. A sign which is greater than 1.5 square feet, but less than or equal to 100 square
feet, in area situated on the zoning lot on which a business, profession, development or
manufacturer is located.
Real Estate Sign. A sign having an area greater than 1.5 square feet, but less than or equal to six
square feet, situated on a zoning lot on which any portion of the improvements thereon is for sale
or rent.
Development Sign. A sign with an area greater than 1.5 square feet, but less than or equal to 16
square feet, situated on a zoning lot which is being developed or under construction. Development
signs shall be permitted for not more than 60 days or when the construction or development is
complete, whichever occurs first. An extension of the time may be granted at the discretion of the
Zoning Officer.
Institutional Sign. A sign having an area greater than 1.5 square feet, but less than or equal to 100
square feet, situated on a zoning lot on which a school, church, hospital or other institution of a
similar public or semipublic nature is located.
Temporary Sign. Any sign having an area greater than 1.5 square feet, but less than or equal to
six square feet, displayed for 30 days or less.
Billboard Sign. A freestanding sign with an area greater than 100 square feet but less than 300
square feet. Billboard signs may only be located within 50 feet of the right-of-way of an interstate
highway. A billboard sign may not be located or constructed within 500 feet of any other billboard
sign.
§ 27-804. Construction Types.
[Ord. No. 1048, 4/3/2018]
All signs shall be divided, according to construction types, into the following categories:
Freestanding Sign. A sign not attached or applied to a principal building but supported by another
structure solely designed for the sign itself.
Wall Sign. A sign attached or applied to the wall of the principal building, not projecting over any
public right-of-way and not extending more than 14 inches from such wall.
Projecting Sign. A sign, any portion of which projects over the public right-of-way or extends more
than 14 inches from the building or structure to which it is attached.
Banner Sign. Any device intended to be hung with or without frames, possessing characters,
letters, illustrations, or ornamentations applied to paper, plastic, or fabric of any kind.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 418/505
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
Window Sign. Any sign placed inside upon the surface facing the outside and which is intended to
be seen from the exterior of the property. Neon shall be permitted for use as a window sign.
Electronic Message Board Sign. Any sign that uses LED or other light-producing elements as the
surface of a sign or to form a sign message or messages wherein the message or messages,
sequence of messages and the rate of change of the messages may be electronically
programmed and/or modified by electronic processes either at the sign or remotely.
Flashing Sign. Any sign which, by method or manner of illumination, flashes on or off, winks, or
blinks with varying light intensity, shows motion, or creates the illusion of motion, or revolves in a
manner to create the illusion of being on or off.
Backlit Panel Sign. An illuminated sign which is lit from behind a face panel on which the lettering
or message is placed.
Backlit Channel Sign. An illuminated sign which is lit only from a channel in the shape of the
lettering or message. Tube neon shall be considered a channel-lit sign. (See § 27-804, Subsection
5, Window Sign.)
§ 27-805. Prohibited Signs.
[Ord. No. 1048, 4/3/2018]
The following signs shall be prohibited in all locations:
Any sign which is not included under the types of signs permitted in district regulations in § 27-807
or in this Part.
Any sign, which, by method or manner of illumination, flashes on or off, winks, or blinks with
varying light intensity, shows motion, or creates the illusion of motion, or revolves in a manner to
create the illusion of being on or off, or otherwise as defined in §§ 27-804, Subsections 6 and 7, of
this chapter.
Any floodlights, flags, banners, twirling, and A-type, sandwich-type, sidewalk, or curb signs or
balloons or other air- or gas-filled device, except as permitted in § 27-809, Subsection 10.
Any sign attached or applied to trees, rocks, or other natural features shall not be permitted.
Any sign, other than projecting signs, which extends beyond any wall or other surface to which it is
mounted.
Any sign erected or constructed upon or over the roof of any building and supported solely by the
roof structure (except for canopy signs as defined in § 27-804, Subsection 6).
Any sign painted directly on the surface of any building, fence or similar structure, paving surfaces
or other man-made or natural features.
Electronic message boards as defined in § 27-804, Subsection 6.
Illuminated signs located in the C-1, C-1A, C-2, I-1 and S-1 Zoning Districts which abut and are
visible to a residential zoning district.
§ 27-806. Permit Required.
[Ord. No. 1048, 4/3/2018]
A zoning permit shall be required for the establishment, erection or reconstruction of any sign. The
issuance of a zoning permit shall not exempt any sign from compliance with the provisions of the
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 419/505
1.
2.
3.
Building Code of the Borough of Stroudsburg. The issuance of a zoning permit for a temporary sign
shall specify the number of signs erected and the location of each sign. The permit may allow erection
of more than one sign.
§ 27-807. Sign Classifications; Permitted and Prohibited Signs.
[Ord. No. 1048, 4/3/2018]
All signs are permitted in accordance with the requirements of Tables I, II, and III and all other
requirements and standards of this chapter, as applied in the zoning district in which the sign is
located.
All permitted sign types and construction types indicated with "P" shall be permitted, provided all
other terms of this chapter have been met.
All sign types and construction types indicated with "SE" shall be permitted by special exception
as set forth in Part 10 of this chapter.
All sign types and construction types without a designation in the column are not permitted.
Table I
Table of Regulations Governing Signs in All Zoning Districts
Type of Sign Zoning Districts
R-1, R-2, R-3, O-1 I-1 C-1, C-1A, C-2, S-1
Identification sign P P P
Business sign P P
Real estate sign P P P
Development sign P P P
Institutional sign P P P
Temporary sign P P P
Billboard sign CU
Notes:
Only institutional signs as defined in § 27-803, Subsection 5, shall be
permitted. They shall not exceed the square feet requirement in Table III.
Temporary signs shall comply with all the requirements for permanent signs.
Table II
Signs Permitted by Construction Type
Construction Type Zoning Districts
R-1, R-2, R-
3, R2-B, O-1 I-1 C-1 C-1A C-2, S-1
Freestanding sign
(100 square feet or
less)
SE P P P SE
Billboard sign SE
Wall sign (100
square feet or less)
SE
Wall sign (greater
than 100 square
feet)
SE SE SE SE
1
1
2 2 2
1
2
1
1
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 420/505
Table II
Signs Permitted by Construction Type
Construction Type Zoning Districts
R-1, R-2, R-
3, R2-B, O-1 I-1 C-1 C-1A C-2, S-1
Window sign: see
§ 27-804, Subsection
5
Projecting sign P P P P
Banner sign SE SE SE SE
Backlit panel sign P P
Backlit channel sign P P
Window sign P P P P
Canopy sign SE SE SE
Notes:
Only institutional signs as defined in § 27-803, Subsection 5, shall be permitted.
They shall not exceed the square feet requirement in Table III.
All projecting signs are subject to review and approval of the Borough Planning
Commission. No sign shall project from the face of the building or structure more
than four feet. Projecting signs shall be securely fastened to prevent them from
moving (swinging) with the wind.
Table III
Maximum Height and Square Footage for Individual Signs in All Zoning Districts
Maximum Height of Sign Above Ground
(feet)
Zoning Districts
Type of Sign
R-1, R-2, R-3, O-
1 I-1 C-1, C-1A C-2, S-1
Identification sign 8 — — —
Development sign 6 12 — —
Institutional sign 6 12 — —
Freestanding sign 6 30 6 6
Wall sign 9 — — —
Projecting sign — — —
Business sign 8 — — —
Canopy sign — —
Maximum square feet
of sign per zoning lot
12 100 130 100
Freestanding sign 100 100 100
Identification sign 1.5
Real estate sign 6 6 6 6
Development sign 16 16 16 16
Institutional sign 12 100 100 100
2 2 2 2
3 3 3 3
1
2
1 1 1
1 1
1 1
1 1 1
1 1 1
1 1 1
1 1
3 3 3
3 3 3
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 421/505
1.
2.
3.
4.
Table III
Maximum Height and Square Footage for Individual Signs in All Zoning Districts
Maximum Height of Sign Above Ground
(feet)
Zoning Districts
Type of Sign
R-1, R-2, R-3, O-
1 I-1 C-1, C-1A C-2, S-1
Business sign re:
nonconforming uses
See § 27-809,
Subsection 9
100 100 100
Projecting sign
Temporary sign 6 100 16 16
Wall sign 100 100 100
Window sign — — —
Notes:
No exterior signs shall block windows or door openings. Note where windows and doors
are trimmed in decorative moldings, the moldings shall not be covered.
Signs larger than 100 square feet will be permitted only when all the requirements of § 27-
1004, Subsection 9, have been met.
See § 27-808, Subsection 1.
Window signs shall not exceed 25% of the total glass area of the ground-floor facade of
the storefront. Window signs shall be allowed in addition to the total square footage of
sign permitted in § 27-808.
§ 27-808. Area Computation of Signs.
[Ord. No. 1048, 4/3/2018]
In addition to the size requirements listed in § 27-807, Tables I, II, and III, the square footage for
signs in the I-1, C-1, C-1A, and S-1 Zoning Districts shall be computed as 1.5 square feet for each
linear foot of lot frontage. Corner properties in the above districts shall be allowed two frontages.
Total square footage for each zoning lot shall be no larger than 100 square feet when combining
wall, projecting, freestanding, and window (interior and exterior) signs. Corner properties shall be
limited to not more than 50 square feet on each additional frontage area. When more than one
commercial use occupies a single building or zoning lot, each use will be allowed a wall sign not to
exceed 12 square feet. The total sign area allowed for each lot shall not be greater than 30 square
feet plus 12 square feet for each commercial use located on the zoning lot or the total allowed
above, whichever is larger.
The area of a sign shall be construed to include all lettering, wording, and accompanying designs
and symbols, together with the background, whether open or enclosed, on which they are
displayed, but not including any supporting framework and bracing which are incidental to the
display itself.
Where the sign consists of individual letters or symbols attached to, or visible inside or outside,
and/or painted on a surface, building, wall, or window, the area shall be considered to be that of
the smallest rectangle which encompasses all of the letters and symbols, including lighted
borders, such as neon surrounding a window.
In computing square-foot area of a double-faced sign, only one side shall be considered, provided
both faces are identical. If the interior angle formed by the two faces of the double-faced sign is
3 3 3
3
2, 3 2, 3 2, 3
4 4 4
1
2
3
4
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 422/505
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
greater than 45°, then both sides of such sign shall be considered in calculating the sign area.
§ 27-809. General Sign Regulations.
[Ord. No. 1048, 4/3/2018]
The following requirements shall apply to all signs:
Signs may be illuminated by direct lighting but shall have such lighting shielded so no direct light
will shine on abutting properties or in the normal line of vision of the public using the streets or
sidewalks. No floodlights or spotlights shall be mounted higher than five feet above the sign which
they are illuminating.
No sign shall be so located or arranged that it interferes with traffic, through glare, through
blocking of reasonable sight lines or streets, sidewalks, or driveways, through confusion with a
traffic control device (by reason of color, location, shape or other characteristic), or through any
other means.
All signs, except temporary signs, shall be constructed of durable material and kept in good
condition and repair. Electrical signs shall be subject to the performance criteria of Underwriters
Laboratories, Inc., and to periodic inspection by the Borough Code Inspection Officer.
Signs existing at the time of passage of this chapter which do not conform to the requirements of
the chapter shall be considered nonconforming signs. Nonconforming signs, once removed for a
period of 30 days, may be replaced only with signs which conform to provisions of this chapter.
When a zoning lot utilized by businesses or occupants has been vacated, all signs shall be
removed from the premises within 30 days. A temporary sign will be permitted for no more than 30
days after the business or occupancy has been vacated. Such temporary sign shall be no larger
than 12 square feet.
No sign, except those owned or constructed by a governmental or legislative authority, may be
placed within street lines unless specifically authorized by other ordinances and regulations of the
Borough.
Any vehicle to which a sign is affixed in such a manner that the carrying of such sign or signs no
longer is incidental to the vehicle's primary purpose, but becomes a primary purpose in itself, shall
be considered a freestanding sign and, as such, shall be subject to the provisions regarding
freestanding signs in the district in which such vehicle is located.
All freestanding signs shall conform to the setbacks required for other buildings and structures. No
freestanding signs in other than a residential or O-1 Zone shall extend within 25 feet of any
residential or O-1 District boundary line. The location of signs at service stations shall not be within
any dedicated street right-of-way.
Signs located on zoning lots with nonconforming uses or institutional and business uses in R and
O-1 Zones may be continued in use but shall not be enlarged. Where the nonconforming use is
lawfully changed to another nonconforming use, there shall be permitted a new sign, the same
size as the old sign, or a sign having an area not greater than 30 square feet, whichever area is
smaller. Such sign shall be placed flat against the building.
Any floodlights, flags, banners, twirling, A-type, sandwich-type, sidewalk, or curb signs or balloons
or other air- or gas-filled devices and special devices shall only be permitted on a zoning lot in a
commercial or industrial zone for a period of not more than 15 days before or 30 days after the
opening of a new business on such zoning lot. At no other time shall such devices be permitted.
Signs prohibited by state or federal laws or regulations shall also be prohibited hereunder.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 423/505
1.
2.
3.
4.
§ 27-810. Applying for Temporary Signs; Security.
[Ord. No. 1048, 4/3/2018]
Temporary signs shall not be located upon Borough, county, or state-owned property or within any
public right-of-way.
(Reserved)
In addition to any fee required to cover the cost of issuing the zoning permit required by § 27-806
hereof, the applicant shall post the sum of $100 with the Borough as security for performance
hereunder. This fee shall be refunded to the applicant provided the applicant removes the
temporary sign upon the expiration of a thirty-day period after the placement of the temporary
sign. In the event the temporary sign or signs have not been timely removed, the Borough may
use any or all of such security to pay the cost of removal.
Temporary signs in the R-1, R-2, R-3, and O-1 Zones shall be a minimum area of six square feet.
Part 9. NONCONFORMING USES, STRUCTURES AND
LOTS
§ 27-901. Purpose.
The regulations governing existing nonconforming uses are set forth in this Part and are intended to
provide a gradual remedy for the incompatibilities resulting from such nonconforming use. While such
uses are generally permitted to continue, these regulations are designed to restrict further investment
in such uses thereby keeping them from becoming more permanent establishments in appropriate
locations.
§ 27-902. Definitions.
AREA NONCONFORMITY
Area nonconformity refers to that aspect of a structure or use as a zoning lot which is not in
compliance with the applicable yard, coverage or other area provisions in this Zoning Chapter or in
an amendment, heretofore or hereafter enacted, where such structure or use lawfully existed in
compliance with such requirements prior to the enactment of this chapter or such amendment.
BULK NONCONFORMITY
Bulk nonconformity refers to the bulk of a structure which does not comply with the applicable
size, height or other bulk provisions in this Zoning Chapter, or in an amendment, heretofore or
hereafter enacted, where such structure lawfully existed in compliance with such provisions prior
to the enactment of this chapter or such amendment.
NONCONFORMING LOT
A nonconforming lot is any lot which does not conform with one or more of the following: minimum
width, depth and area dimensions for the district where such lot is situated.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE
Nonconforming structure means a structure, or part thereof, which is manifestly not designed to
comply with the applicable use provisions in the Zoning Chapter or amendment, heretofore or
hereafter enacted, where such use was lawfully in existence prior to the enactment of this chapter
or such amendment. Nonconforming structures include, but are not limited to, nonconforming
signs.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 424/505
1.
2.
NONCONFORMING USE
Nonconforming use means a use, whether of land or structure, or part thereof, which does not
comply with the applicable use provisions in this Zoning Chapter or amendment, heretofore or
hereafter enacted, where such use was lawfully in existence prior to the enactment of this chapter
or such amendment.
§ 27-903. Continuation.
Nonconforming uses, nonconforming structures, bulk nonconformities and area nonconformities may
be continued except as otherwise set forth in this Part. No nonconforming use or structure shall be
enlarged, reconstructed, structurally altered or changed except as permitted by the provisions of this
Part.
§ 27-904. Registration of Uses.
The owner or occupant of the premises occupied by a nonconforming use shall secure, within one year
after the effective date of this chapter, a Certificate of Nonconformity from the Zoning Officer. The
Zoning Officer shall certify that the use is not in compliance with the presently applicable requirements
of the Borough of Stroudsburg's Zoning Ordinance and is thus a nonconforming use.
§ 27-905. Area and Bulk Requirements to Be Maintained.
No area or bulk nonconformity may be changed or increased in any way so as to depart further from
the presently applicable requirements. Whenever a nonconforming use is permitted to be enlarged or
expanded under the provisions of this chapter or pursuant to judicial decision, such enlargement or
expansion shall not be permitted to violate or to depart further from compliance with, the area and bulk
regulations applicable to permitted uses in the zone in which it is located.
§ 27-906. Existing Lots in Separate Ownership.
[As amended by Ord. 697, 10/10/1990, § 7]
The following development is permitted on a lot having an area nonconformity, if such lot was held in
separate ownership from all adjoining lots on the effective date of the chapter provision which resulted
in the area nonconformity, and if there is no violation of subdivision regulations:
If the lot is located in the R-1, R-2 or R-3 district, a single-family dwelling may be constructed on it
as a permitted use, provided that the lot is in at least 85% compliance with each of the following
requirements for the single-family dwelling, as specified in the district in which the lot is located; lot
area, lot width, and maximum building coverage. All other requirements of this chapter must be
met.
If the lot is located in any remaining district, then a structure not exceeding two stories in height
may be constructed on it, for a use permitted in the district in which it is located — Off-street
parking and loading requirements shall be complied with and front, side and rear yard setback
requirements shall be met except if reduced by the granting of a variance by the Zoning Hearing
Board.
§ 27-907. Changes — General Requirements.
[As amended Ord. 646, 4/13/1988, § 13]
Any proposed changes to nonconforming uses and structures must be in accordance with the following
regulations:
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 425/505
1.
2.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
3.
1.
2.
3.
4.
A nonconforming use or structure shall not be extended to displace a conforming use or structure,
except as provided for in § 27-908 of this chapter.
Structures, buildings or uses, either main or accessory shall not be combined for the purpose of
extending a nonconforming use or creating a different nonconforming use.
When authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board as a special exception, a nonconforming use may
be changed to another nonconforming use if the Zoning Hearing Board finds that all of the
following standards are met:
The applicant shall show that a nonconforming use cannot reasonably be changed to a
permitted use.
The proposed change shall be less objectionable in external effects than the previous
nonconforming use, and will be more consistent physically with its surroundings.
There will be no increase in traffic generation or congestion including both vehicular and
pedestrian traffic.
There will be no increase in the danger of fire or explosion.
There will be no increase in noise, smoke, dust, fumes, vapors, gases, heat, odor, glare,
vibration or electrical disturbance.
There will be no increased threat to public health, safety, and general welfare.
§ 27-908. Enlargement.
[As amended by Ord. 646, 4/13/1988, § 14; and by Ord. 697, 10/10/1990, § 8]
A nonconforming structure or nonconforming use shall not be enlarged except as a Special Exception
approved by the Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with §§ 27-1002 and 27-1003 and the following:
A nonconforming use or structure may not be enlarged more than 20% of the existing floor or
ground area, except for junk yards which may not be enlarged.
A nonconforming structure or use after enlargement shall conform to all area and bulk
requirements applicable to conforming buildings in the zone in which it is located and to all
applicable off-street parking and loading requirements.
No more than one enlargement of a nonconforming use or structure shall be permitted during the
period in which this chapter has been in effect and shall be subject to the 20% overall limitation as
provided in § 27-908, Subsection 1.
Enlargement of a nonconforming use shall be only upon the same lot or any contiguous lot
purchased by the owner of the nonconformity in existence within one year of the date the use
became nonconforming.
§ 27-909. Restoration.
Where a nonconforming structure or structure containing a nonconforming use is legally condemned or
damaged by fire, explosion, flood or other natural causes to an extent not exceeding 50% of its
replacement value at the time of reconstruction, the nonconforming structure may be reconstructed for
such purpose provided that application for all necessary permits is filed within six months of the notice
of condemnation or damage by natural causes and the restoration is completed within 18 months
thereafter.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 426/505
1.
2.
3.
4.
A.
1.
§ 27-910. Termination.
Structures. A nonconforming structure shall not be reconstructed where destroyed by fire or other
natural cause to an extent greater than 50% of the replacement value.
Structure. A nonconforming use in a nonconforming structure shall be deemed abandoned and
shall be terminated if the structure is altered so that it is designed for a conforming use.
Change to Conforming Use. Where a nonconforming use is changed into a conforming use, the
nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed. A change from one nonconforming use to
another without approval of the Zoning Hearing Board shall be considered an abandonment of the
prior nonconforming use, which shall not thereafter be resumed.
Abandonment. The right to a nonconforming use shall be terminated and a nonconforming use
shall not be resumed if a nonconforming use is abandoned. A nonconforming use shall be
deemed to be abandoned if it is changed as set forth in § 27-910, Subsection 3, or if it is
discontinued for a period of one year or more without evidence of intent to resume the
nonconforming use, as by actions to maintain or rent the premises for such nonconforming use or
otherwise.
§ 27-911. Prior Violations Continued.
A nonconforming building altered or erected or a nonconforming use created, in violation of any
previous provision, shall be regarded as continuing in such violation and shall not enjoy the privilege of
legal continuance conferred by this Part upon other nonconforming buildings and uses.
§ 27-912. District Changes.
Whenever the boundaries of a district shall be changed so as to transfer an area from one district to
another district of a different classification, the foregoing provisions shall also apply to any
nonconforming uses or structures existing therein.
Part 10. USES GRANTED UNDER SPECIAL CONDITIONS
§ 27-1001. Purpose.
This Part 10 sets forth special regulations for certain uses permitted as special exceptions in Part 4 of
this chapter. Such use of land or buildings may be permitted by the Zoning Hearing Board following
review and recommendation of the Planning Commission. These regulations are meant to serve as
guidelines for measuring the impact on the community of each application for a special exception. The
provision for special conditions is set forth because special exception uses may have considerable
aesthetic, traffic, environmental, and overall land use impact on the community.
§ 27-1002. Special Exception Use Procedure.
All applicants shall submit three sets of site plans to the Zoning Officer when making application
for a Zoning Permit. The following information shall be included, where applicable:
A statement as to the proposed use of the building or land.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 427/505
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
2.
3.
4.
1.
A site layout drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals 50 feet showing the location,
dimensions and height of proposed buildings, structures, or uses and any existing buildings in
relation to property and street lines. If the application relates to property which is scheduled to
be developed in successive stages, such plans shall show the relationship of the portion
scheduled for initial development to the proposed layout of the entire property.
The location, dimensions, and arrangements of all open spaces and yards and buffer yards
including methods and materials to be employed for screening.
The location, size, arrangement and capacity of all areas to be used for motor vehicle access,
off-street parking, off-street loading and unloading and provisions to be made for lighting such
areas.
The dimensions, location and methods of illumination for signs, if applicable.
The location and dimensions of sidewalks and all other areas to be devoted to pedestrian
use.
Provisions to be made for treatment and disposal of sewage and industrial wastes, water
supply and storm drainage.
The capacity and arrangement of all buildings used or intended to be used for dwelling
purposes, including the proposed density in terms of number of dwelling units per acre of
land.
A description of any proposed industrial or commercial operations in sufficient detail to
indicate effects of those operations in producing noise, glare, air pollution, water pollution, fire
hazards, traffic congestion or other safety hazards.
Description of methods to be employed in controlling any excess noise, air pollution, smoke,
fumes, water pollution, fire hazards or other safety hazards.
The Zoning Officer shall, within 10 days of plan submission, which is in total compliance with the
requirements of this section, submit one copy of said plan to the Zoning Hearing Board and one
copy to the Borough Planning Commission.
The Planning Commission shall, within 45 days of receipt of said plan, review and submit a
recommendation to the Zoning Hearing Board which after a public hearing, approve or disapprove
the proposed use. If disapproved, the reasons for disapproval shall be clearly stated on one copy
of the submission and returned to the applicant. The Zoning Officer shall deny a Zoning Permit for
the proposed development until written approval of the Zoning Hearing Board is obtained.
Approval may be made conditional upon the applicant's adoption of specified changes in the
submission.
The absence of action on the part of the Zoning Hearing Board within the said 45 days is deemed
to constitute a recommendation for approval of the use.
§ 27-1003. Conditions for Special Exception Uses.
The Zoning Hearing Board shall approve any proposed special exception use if they find adequate
evidence that any proposed use will meet all the following general requirements as well as any specific
requirements and standards listed in this chapter for the proposed use. Conditions and requirements
are as follows. The proposed special exception use shall be:
In accordance with stated community development objectives and consistent with the spirit,
purposes, and intent of this chapter.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 428/505
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
A.
B.
C.
D.
1.
A.
B.
C.
2.
A.
B.
3.
4.
In the best interests of the Borough, the convenience and public welfare of the community, and be
an improvement to property in the immediate vicinity.
Suitable for the property in question, and designated, constructed, operated and maintained so as
to be in harmony with, and appropriate in appearance with the existing or intended character of
the general vicinity.
In conformance with all applicable requirements of this chapter.
Suitable in terms of permitting the logical, efficient and economical extension of public services
and facilities such as public water, sewers, police, and fire protection and public schools.
Suitable in terms of effects on street traffic and safety with adequate sidewalks and vehicular
access arrangements to protect major streets from undue congestion and hazard.
In accordance with any additional conditions imposed by the Zoning Hearing Board regarding
layout, circulation and performance it deems necessary to insure that any proposed development
will substantially secure the objectives of this chapter.
§ 27-1004. Specific Requirements for Special Exception Uses.
[As amended by Ord. 646, 4/13/1988, § 15; by Ord. 665, 2/8/1989, § 4; by Ord. 677, 8/8/1989, § 4; by
Ord. 702, 4/10/1991, § 5; by Ord. 722, 11/11/1992, § 4; by Ord. 757, 11/5/1997, § 4 and by Ord. 860,
4/19/2006]
Cemetery. The following minimum requirements shall be met:
The cemetery shall have an area of not less than three acres.
A plan shall be submitted which, in general, shall conform to all the requirements of a
subdivision plan, except that individual lots need not be shown. No plan shall be acceptable
which does not provide for the continuation of existing streets or of streets already projected
or shown on a part of a comprehensive plan for the Borough.
No structures, including fences, shall be built within any yard and, for this purpose, yard
requirements shall conform to the regulations for the respective residential district in which the
cemetery may be located.
Additional setbacks and planting to screen the cemetery from adjacent areas may be required
by the Zoning Hearing Board.
Community Center. The following minimum requirements shall be met:
There shall be a one acre minimum lot size.
The community center shall be located on a major street and primary vehicular access shall
be taken onto a major street from the community center.
A ten-foot buffer yard shall be provided along the side and rear lot lines.
Nursing or Convalescent Home. The following minimum requirements shall be met:
Lot area shall be not less than one acre.
Yard shall be at least twice the distance of the largest required yard space for the district in
which it is located.
Multiple Family Dwellings. The following minimum requirements shall be met:
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 429/505
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
5.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
6.
Density. The overall gross density of occupancy in any permitted multiple family development
shall not exceed the dwelling unit density allowed for multiple family dwellings in Part 5.
Floor area. The minimum floor area per dwelling unit shall be 500 square feet.
Buffer yards. Buffer yard may be required.
Minimum horizontal distance facing walls of any two buildings or one building with facing walls
shall be 50 feet where two facing walls both contain a window or windows and 25 feet
between two facing walls only one of which contains a window or windows. No two buildings
shall be closer than 20 feet to one another.
Water, Sewer and Drainage. The proposed development shall be served by both a public
water system and a public sewage system. A storm run-off and drainage system shall be
installed by the developer. Drainage plans shall be submitted with the application for Zoning
Permit and shall be subject to review and approval by the Borough Engineer.
The proposed use shall be designed as a single architectural project with landscaping as
determined by the Borough Planning Commission.
In addition to the off-street parking provisions of Part 7, the following additional requirements
shall be met:
- All parking spaces and access drives shall be at least 15 feet from any multiple family
dwelling on the lot.
- No one area for off-street parking of motor vehicles shall exceed 40 cars in capacity.
Separate parking areas on a parcel shall be physically separated from one another by a sixfoot
wide planting strip.
Refuse Storage. All refuse receptacles shall be suitably screened from view.
Common Open Space. Adequate provisions for the continuous ownership and maintenance
of any proposed common use areas such as parks, play areas, nondedicated streets, parking
areas, and general open space.
Veterinarian Hospital and Boarding Kennel. No veterinarian hospital or boarding kennel shall be
located closer than 100 feet to any residential district, restaurant or hotel. Adequate measure shall
be taken to prevent offensive noise and odor. Incineration of refuse shall not be permitted on the
premises.
Bed and breakfast home, the following requirements shall be met:
The dwelling shall contain a minimum floor area of 3,000 square feet of habitable space as
defined in the BOCA National Building Code.
There shall be a 1/2 acre minimum lot size.
No more than 1/2 of the available bedrooms in the home, with a maximum of three bedrooms,
shall be utilized for lodging rentals, and not more than two adults shall be permitted to stay in
each room.
The bed and breakfast home use shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the principal
use of the building as an owner-occupied primary dwelling.
In addition to the parking requirements in Part 7 of this chapter for the principal use, off-street
parking shall be provided on the subject property for a number of parking spaces equal to the
number of rooms designated for rental use within the bed and breakfast home.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 430/505
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
M.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
7.
A.
B.
C.
D.
8.
Off-street parking shall be separated from adjoining properties by live evergreen screening
where deemed necessary and approved by the Planning Commission and Zoning Hearing
Board.
No sign or other designation of the bed and breakfast home shall be established except as
may be otherwise allowed under this chapter.
All refuse receptacles shall be completely screened from view.
Guests shall be permitted occupancy for not more than 18 consecutive nights.
Food service shall be limited to breakfast served only to guests lodging at the facility.
Rooms used for overnight accommodations shall be part of the primary residential structure
and shall not have been specifically constructed for rental purposes.
No exterior alterations, other than those necessary to ensure the safety of the structure or its
occupants, shall be made to any building for the purpose of providing a bed and breakfast.
The usable open space requirement shall be 2,500 square feet.
Adult Uses. The following minimum requirements apply:
Adult uses shall not be located closer than 250 feet to any elementary school, secondary
school or other school or educational institution attended by minors, or to any church, chapel,
synagogue or other place of worship or to any monastery, convent, rectory, park or
playground or to any establishment serving alcoholic beverages, or within 1,000 feet of any
other adult use.
The owners within 1,000 feet of a proposed establishment shall be notified of the hearing for
the proposed use. The notice shall be delivered by certified mail and shall be mailed at least
two weeks prior to the hearing.
The total square footage for signs shall be 30 square feet.
Sign messages and other messages visible from outside the property (such as on or within
doors or windows) (1) shall be limited to verbal description of material or services available on
the premises; and (2) shall not include any graphic or pictorial depiction of material or
services available on the premises.
In case of special conditions, or hardship shown, variances may be granted in accordance
with the applicable provisions of the ordinances of the Borough of Stroudsburg.
Gaming Establishments. The following minimum requirements apply:
Gaming establishment shall not be located closer than 250 feet to any elementary school,
secondary school or other school or educational institution attended by minors, or to any
church, chapel synagogue or other place of worship, or to any monastery, convent, rectory,
park or playground, or to any establishment serving alcoholic beverages or within 1,000 feet
of any adult use or other gaming establishment.
The owners within 1,000 feet of a proposed gaming establishment shall be notified of the
hearing for the proposed use. The notice shall be delivered by certified mail and shall be
mailed at least two weeks prior to the hearing.
The total square footage of signs shall be 30 square feet.
Sign messages and other messages visible from outside the property (such as on or within
doors or windows) (i) shall be limited to verbal description of material or services available on
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 431/505
E.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
(1)
(2)
F.
G.
H.
9.
1.
the premises; and (ii) shall not include any graphic or pictorial depiction of material or services
available on the premises.
In case of special conditions or hardship shown, variances may be granted in accordance
with the applicable provisions of the ordinances of the Borough of Stroudsburg.
Gasoline or Filling Station.
[Added by Ord. No. 1055, 7/17/2018]
A site circulation plan shall be devised that separates those patrons awaiting fueling service
from those patrons awaiting other services. The plan shall include the following information:
Location and dimensions of all structures, fuel pumps, or electric charging areas.
Location and dimensions of parking, landscaping areas and signage.
Description of internal circulation and external access.
This use shall comply with all applicable federal, state, and Stroudsburg Borough laws, rules,
ordinances, and/or regulations.
The subject property shall front on a main arterial road (PA Route 191, 209 or 611), and such
frontage shall measure a minimum of 200 feet.
The subject property shall be a minimum of 40,000 square feet in area.
Aboveground and underground fuel storage tanks, fuel dispensers and pumps, filling
connections/caps and piping, and lighted canopies and awnings covering such structures and
components shall be set back at least 300 feet from any lot containing a school, day-care
facility, playground, library, hospital, or nursing home or 100 feet from the lot line of any
dwelling.
Minimum fuel pump setbacks shall be:
Twenty feet from the front yard setback line.
Thirty feet from all parking areas.
A buffer yard/screen planting of no less than 10 feet in depth shall be maintained along all
property lines abutting a residential use.
Parking shall not be permitted between the main entrance of the store and the refueling bays.
Part 11. FLOODING AND FLOOD FRINGE AREAS
§ 27-1101. Purpose.
[Ord. 597, 10/14/1983; as reenacted by Ord. 610, 7/30/1985]
The purpose of these provisions is to prevent the loss of property and life, the creation of health and
safety hazards, the disruption of commerce and governmental services, the extraordinary and
unnecessary expenditure of public funds for flood protection and relief, and the impairment of the tax
base by:
Regulating uses, activities, and development which, acting alone or in combination with other
existing or future uses, activities, and development, will cause unacceptable increases in flood
heights, velocities and frequencies.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 432/505
2.
3.
4.
5.
1.
2.
Restricting or prohibiting certain uses, activities, and development from locating within areas
subject to flooding.
Requiring all those uses, activities, and developments that do occur in flood-prone areas to be
protected and/or floodproofed against flooding and flood damage.
Protecting individuals from buying lands and structures which are unsuited for intended purposes
because of flood hazards.
Protecting the quality and quantity of surface and subsurface water supplies adjacent to and
underlying flood hazard areas.
§ 27-1102. Warning and Disclaimer of Liability.
[Ord. 597, 10/14/1983; as reenacted by Ord. 610, 7/30/1985]
The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this chapter is considered reasonable for
regulatory purposes and is based on acceptable engineering methods of study. Larger floods may
occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such as ice
jams, and bridge openings restricted by debris. This chapter does not imply that areas outside the
flood plain districts, or that land uses permitted within such districts will be free from flooding or flood
damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Borough of Stroudsburg or any officer
or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any
administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
§ 27-1103. Establishment of the Floodplain Districts.
[Ord. 597, 10/14/1983; as amended by Ord. 610, 7/30/1985]
The Floodplain District shall include all areas subject to inundation by waters of the one-hundred-year
flood (regulatory flood). The basis for the delineation of these districts shall be the Type 15 Flood
Insurance Study for the Borough of Stroudsburg, prepared by the U.S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development, which is declared to be a part of this chapter. The Floodplain District shall be
deemed an overlay on any existing, or hereafter established, zones or districts within the Borough. The
provisions of the Floodplain District shall serve as a supplement to the Zoning District Provision. Where
there happens to be any conflict between the provisions or requirements of the Floodplain District and
those of any Zoning District, the more restrictive provisions shall apply. Prior to any revision of the
delineation of any Floodplain Districts, approval must be obtained from the Federal Insurance
Administration. The Floodplain District shall be comprised of three subdistricts as follows:
Floodway (F1). That portion of the Floodplain District required to carry and discharge the waters of
the one-hundred-year flood without increasing the water surface elevations at any point more than
one foot above existing conditions, as demonstrated in the Type 15 Flood Insurance Study for the
Borough of Stroudsburg referenced above.
Floodway Fringe (F2). Those portions of land within the Floodplain District subject to inundation by
the one-hundred-year flood, lying beyond the floodway in areas where detailed study data and
profiles are made available by the Borough's Type 15 Flood Insurance Study. In any Flood-Fringe
area the development and/or use of land shall be permitted in accordance with the regulations of
the underlying district provided that all such cases, activities, and/or development shall be
undertaken in strict compliance with the floodproofing and related provisions contained in all other
applicable codes and ordinances and regulations including the Building Code and the Subdivision
Regulations. For any mobile home park or subdivision within the Flood-Fringe the owner or
operator of the mobile home park or subdivision shall file with the Disaster Preparedness
Authorities of Monroe County and Borough of Stroudsburg, an evacuation plan which indicates
alternate vehicular access routes and escape routes.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 433/505
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
3.
A.
1.
Approximated Floodplain (F3). Those portions of land within the Floodplain District subject to
inundation by the one-hundred-year flood, where a detailed study has not been performed but
where a one-hundred-year floodplain boundary has been approximated by the Borough's Type 15
Flood Insurance Study. In the Approximated Floodplain the development and/or use of land shall
be permitted in accordance with the regulations of the underlying district provided that all such
uses, activities, and/or development shall be undertaken in strict compliance with the floodproofing
and related provisions contained in all other applicable codes and ordinances, including the
Building Code and the Subdivision regulations. For any mobile home park or subdivision within the
approximated floodplain the owner or operator of the mobile home park or subdivision shall file
with the Disaster Preparedness authorities of Monroe County and the Borough of Stroudsburg, an
evacuation plan which indicates alternate vehicular access routes and escape routes.
In addition, whenever a developer intends to alter or relocate a watercourse within the
approximated floodplain, the developer shall notify in writing by certified mail all adjacent
communities and the Pennsylvania Department of Community Affairs of all such intended activities
prior to any alteration or relocation of the watercourse, and shall submit copies of such
notifications to the Federal Insurance Administrator. The developer shall also assure the Borough,
in writing, that the flood-carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of the watercourse
in question will be maintained.
Revisions to Floodplain District Boundaries. The delineation of Floodplain District Boundaries
may be revised, amended and/or modified by the Borough Council in compliance with
provisions of the National Flood Insurance Program when:
There are changes through natural or other causes;
Changes are indicated by future detailed hydrologic and hydraulic studies and/or
When social and economic factors favor a realignment. All such changes shall be subject
to the review and approval of the Federal Insurance Administrator.
§ 27-1104. District Provisions.
[Ord. 597, 10/14/1983; as reenacted by Ord. 610, 7/30/1985]
Under no circumstances shall any use, activity and/or development reduce the carrying capacity of the
channels or floodways of any watercourse, drainage ditch, or any other drainage facility or system.
Prior to any proposed alteration or relocation of any stream, watercourse, or any other drainage facility
within the Borough of Stroudsburg, a permit shall be obtained from the Department of Environmental
Resources, Dams and Encroachment Division. Further notification of the proposal shall be given to all
affected adjacent municipalities. Copies of such notification shall be forwarded to both the Federal
Insurance Administration and the Department of Community Affairs.
§ 27-1105. Floodway District.
[Ord. 597; 10/14/1983; as amended by Ord. 610, 7/30/1985]
In the floodway district no development shall be permitted except where the effect of such
development on flood heights is fully offset by accompanying stream improvements which have been
approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources, Dams and Encroachment
Division.
Permitted Uses. In the floodway district the following uses and activities are permitted provided
that they are in compliance with the provisions of the zoning district and are not prohibited by any
other chapter and provided that they do not require structures, fill, or storage of materials and
equipment.
Agricultural uses such as general farming, pasture, grazing, outdoor plant nurseries,
horticulture, truck farming, forestry, sod farming, and wild crop harvesting.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 434/505
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
2.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(3)
A.
3.
Public and private recreational uses and activities, such as parks, day camps, picnic grounds,
golf courses, boat launching and swimming areas, hiking, and horseback riding trails, wildlife
and nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries and fishing areas.
Miscellaneous uses such as yard areas, gardens, play areas, and pervious parking areas.
Uses Permitted by Special Exception. The following uses and activities may be permitted by
special exception provided that they are not in compliance with the provisions of the underlying
zoning district and are not prohibited by any other ordinance:
Structures accessory to the uses and activities in § 27-1105, Subsection 1.
Utilities and public facilities and improvements, such as railroads, streets, bridges,
transmission lines, pipe lines, and other similar or related uses.
Water-related uses and activities, such as marinas, docks, wharves, piers, etc.
Extraction of sand, gravel, and other materials.
Temporary uses, such as circuses, carnivals, and similar activities.
Refer to section.
Prohibited Uses.
Within any floodway district, the following shall be prohibited:
The commencement of any of the following activities; or the construction, enlargement, or
expansion of any structure used, or intended to be used for any of the following activities:
Hospitals.
Nursing homes.
Jails or prisons.
The commencement of, or any construction of, a new mobile home park or mobile home
subdivision, or substantial improvement to an existing mobile home park or mobile home
subdivision.
The construction, reconstruction, enlargement, or expansion of any structure which will
be used for the production and/or storage of any of the following materials or substances
which are considered to be potentially dangerous to human life:
Acetone.
Ammonia.
Benzene.
Calcium carbide.
Carbon disulfide.
Celluloid.
Chlorine.
Hydrochloric acid.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 435/505
(i)
(j)
(k)
(l)
(m)
(n)
(o)
(p)
(q)
(r)
(4)
(5)
1.
2.
3.
(1)
(2)
A.
4.
Hydrocyanic acid.
Magnesium.
Nitric acid and/or oxides of nitrogen.
Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.).
Phosphorus.
Potassium.
Sodium.
Sulphur and sulphur products.
Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides, herbicides, and rodenticides).
Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not otherwise regulated.
Will be used for any activity requiring the maintenance of a supply of more than 550
gallons, or other comparable volume, of any of those materials or substances listed in
§ 27-1105, Subsection 3A3, above; or
Will involve the production, storage, or use of any amount of radioactive substances.
§ 27-1106. Flood Fringe (F2) or Approximated Floodplain (F3)
District.
[Ord. 597, 10/14/1983; as amended by Ord. 610, 7/30/1985]
In the Flood Fringe or general Floodplain District the development and/or use of land shall be permitted
in accordance with the regulations of the underlying zoning district provided that all such uses,
activities, and/or development shall be undertaken in strict accordance with the flood-proofing and
related provisions contained in all other applicable codes and ordinances. Furthermore, where
permitted within any flood-fringe or general floodplain district, any structure of the kind enumerated in
§ 27-1105, Subsection 3A3, above shall be:
Elevated or designed and constructed to remain completely dry up to at least 1 1/2 feet above the
one-hundred-year flood; and,
Designed to prevent pollution from the structure or activity during the course of a one-hundredyear
flood.
Any such structure or part thereof that will be built below the Regulatory Flood Elevation shall be
designed and constructed in accordance with the standards for completely dry floodproofing
contained in the publication "Flood-Proofing Regulations" (U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, June,
1972), or some other equivalent watertight standard.
Uses Requiring a Special Permit.
The commencement of any of the following activities; or the construction, enlargement, or
expansion of any structure used or intended to be used for any of the following activities:
Hospitals.
Nursing homes.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 436/505
(3)
B.
1.
2.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
3.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
4.
Jails or prisons.
The commencement of, or any construction of, a new mobile home park or mobile home
subdivision, or substantial improvement to an existing mobile home park or mobile home
subdivision.
§ 27-1107. Application Requirements for Special Permits.
[Added by Ord. 610, 7/30/1985]
Applications for Special Permits shall provide five copies of the following:
A written request including a completed Building Permit Application Form.
A small scale map showing the vicinity in which the proposed site is located.
A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one inch being equal to 100 feet or
less, showing the following:
North arrow, scale and date;
Topography based upon the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929, showing existing and
proposed contours at intervals of two feet;
All property and lot lines including dimensions, and the size of the site expressed in acres for
square feet;
The location of all existing streets, drives other accessways, and parking areas, with
information concerning widths, pavement types and construction, and elevations;
The location of any existing bodies of water or water-courses, buildings, structures and other
public or private facilities, including railroad tracks and facilities, and any other natural and
man-made features affecting, or affected by, the proposed activity or development;
The location of the flood plain boundary line, information and spot elevations concerning the
one-hundred-year flood elevations, and information concerning the flow of water including
direction and velocities;
The location of all proposed buildings, structures, utilities and any other improvements; and
Any other information which the municipality considers necessary for adequate review of the
application.
Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other improvements, clearly and legibly drawn at
suitable scale showing the following:
Sufficiently detailed architectural or engineering drawings including floor plans, sections, and
exterior building elevations, as appropriate;
For any proposed building, the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) and, as
required, the elevation of any other floor;
Complete information concerning flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces,
and other factors, associated with the one-hundred-year flood;
Detailed information concerning any proposed flood-proofing measures;
Cross-section drawings for all proposed streets, drives, other accessways, and parking areas,
showing all rights-of-way and pavement widths;
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 437/505
F.
G.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
5.
1.
Profile drawings of all proposed streets, drives, and vehicular accessways including existing
and proposed grades; and;
Plans and profiles of all proposed sanitary and storm sewer systems, water supply systems,
and any other utilities and facilities.
The following data and documentation:
Certification from the applicant that the site upon which the activity or development is
proposed is an existing separate and single parcel, owned by the applicant or the client here
presents;
Certification from a registered professional engineer, architect, or landscape architect that the
proposed construction has been adequately designed to protect against damage from the
one-hundred-year flood;
A statement, certified by a registered professional engineer, architect, landscape architect, or
other qualified person which contains a complete and accurate description of the nature and
extend to pollution that might possibly occur from the development during the course of onehundred-
year flood, including a statement concerning the effects such pollution may have on
human life;
A statement certified by a registered professional engineer, architect, or landscape architect,
which contains a complete and accurate description of the effects the proposed development
will have on one-hundred-year flood elevations and flows;
A statement, certified by a registered professional engineer, architect, or landscape architect,
which contains a complete and accurate description of the kinds and amounts of any loose
buoyant materials or debris that may possibly exist or be located on the site below the onehundred-
year flood elevations and the effects such materials and debris may have on onehundred-
year flood elevations and flows:
The appropriate component of the Department of Environmental Resources "Planning Module
for Land Development";
Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting the requirements of the
Department of Environmental Resources to implement and maintain erosion and
sedimentation control;
Any other application permits such as, but not limited to, a permit for any activity regulated by
the Department of Environmental Resources under § 302 of Act 1978-166; and;
An evacuation plan which fully explains the manner in which the site will be safely evacuated
before or during the course of a one-hundred-year flood.
§ 27-1108. Application Review Procedures for Special Permits.
[Added by Ord. 610, 7/30/1985]
Upon receipt of an application for a Special Permit by the Borough, the following procedures shall
apply in addition to all other applicable permit procedures in effect:
Within three working days following receipt of the application, a complete copy of the application
and all accompanying documentation shall be forwarded to the Monroe County Planning
Commission by registered or certified mail for its review and recommendations. Copies of the
application shall also be forwarded to the Borough Planning Commission and Borough Engineer
for review and comment.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 438/505
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
1.
2.
If an application is received that is incomplete, the Borough shall notify the Applicant in writing,
stating in what respects the application is deficient.
If the Borough decides to disapprove an application, it shall notify the applicant, in writing, of the
reasons for the disapproval.
If the Borough approves an application, it shall file written notification, together with the application
and all pertinent information, with the Department of Community Affairs, by registered mail, within
five working days after the date of approval.
Before issuing the Special Permit, the Borough shall allow the Department of Community Affairs
30 days, after receipt of the notification by the Department, to review the application and the
decision made by the Borough.
If the Borough does not receive any communication from the Department of Community Affairs
during the 30 days review period, it may issue a Special Permit to the applicant.
If the Department of Community Affairs should decide to disapprove an application, it shall notify
the Borough and the applicant, in writing, of the reasons for the disapproval, and the Borough shall
not issue the Special Permit.
§ 27-1109. Technical Requirements for Developments Requiring
a Special Permit.
[Added by Ord. 610, 7/30/1985]
In addition to any other applicable requirements, the following provisions shall also apply to the
activities requiring a Special Permit. If there is any conflict between any of the following requirements
and any otherwise applicable provision, the more restrictive provision will apply.
No application for a Special Permit shall be approved unless it can be determined that the
structure or activity will be located, constructed and maintained in a manner which will:
Fully protect the health and safety of the general public and any occupants of the structure. At
a minimum, all new structures shall be designed, located and constructed so that:
The structure will survive inundation by waters of the one-hundred-year flood without any
lateral movement or damage to either the structure itself, or to any of its equipment or
contents below the one-hundred-year flood elevation.
The lowest floor elevation (including basement) will be at least 1 1/2 feet above the onehundred-
year flood elevation.
The occupants of the structure can remain inside for an indefinite period of time and be
safely evacuated at any time during the one-hundred-year flood.
Prevent any significant possibility of pollution, increased flood levels or flows, or debris
endangering life and property.
All hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by professional engineers or others
of demonstrated qualifications, who shall certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect
currently accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc. shall be submitted in
sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical review by the Borough and the Pennsylvania
Department of Community Affairs.
§ 27-1110. Special Exceptions.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 439/505
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
[Ord. 597, 10/14/1983; as amended by Ord. 610, 7/30/1985]
In passing upon applications for special exceptions, as provided for in § 27-1105, Subsection 2, the
Zoning Hearing Board shall consider all relevant factors specified in other sections of the chapter and:
The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or velocities caused by
encroachments.
The danger that materials may be swept on to other lands or downstream to the injury of others.
The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability of those systems to prevent
disease, contamination, and unsanitary conditions.
The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such
damage on the individual owners.
The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community.
The requirements of the facility for a waterfront location.
The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding for the proposed use.
The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development and development anticipated in
the foreseeable future.
The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and flood plain management
program for the area.
The safety of access to the property in times of flood of ordinary and emergency vehicles.
The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the flood waters
expected at the site.
Such other factors which are relevant to the purpose of this chapter.
§ 27-1111. Special Exception Procedures.
[Ord. 597, 10/14/1983; as reenacted by Ord. 610, 7/30/1985]
Upon receiving an application for a special exception, the Zoning Hearing Board may, prior to
rendering a decision thereon, require the applicant to furnish some of the following material as is
deemed necessary by the Board.
Plans in triplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions and elevation of the lot
and existing and proposed uses; photographs showing existing uses and vegetation; soil types
and other pertinent information.
A series of cross-sections at twenty-five foot intervals along the lot shoreline, showing the stream
channel or the lake or pond bottom, and elevation of adjoining land areas, to be occupied by the
proposed uses, and high water information.
Profile showing the slope of the bottom of the channel, lake or pond.
Specifications for building materials and construction, floodproofing, filling, dredging, grading,
storage, water supply, and sanitary facilities.
Computation of the increase, if any, in the height of flood stages which would be attributable to any
proposed uses.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 440/505
1.
2.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
§ 27-1112. Nonconformities.
[Ord. 597, 10/14/1983; as amended by Ord. 610, 7/30/1985]
A structure or use of a structure or premises which is not in conformity with these provisions may be
continued subject to the following conditions:
Existing nonconformities (structures and/or uses) located in the floodway district shall not be
expanded or enlarged (unless the effect of the proposed expansion or enlargement on flood
heights is fully offset by accompanying stream improvements).
The modification, alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvement of any kind to a nonconformity
(structure and/or use) regardless of location, to an extent or amount of 50% or more of its market
value shall be undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of the Borough Building Code
and any other applicable codes and ordinances.
§ 27-1113. Variances.
[Ord. 610, 7/30/1985]
Except for a possible modification of the freeboard requirements involved, no variance shall be granted
for any of the uses or activities addressed by §§ 27-1106 and 27-1109 of this chapter.
Part 12. ADMINISTRATION, PERMITS AND
ENFORCEMENT
§ 27-1201. Zoning Officer Appointment.
The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the Zoning Officer who shall be
appointed by the Borough Council and may not hold any elective office in the Borough.
§ 27-1202. Enforcement — Power and Duties of Zoning Officer.
It shall be the duty of the zoning Officer and he shall have the power to:
Receive and examine all applications for zoning permits, and issue permits when there is
compliance with the provisions of this chapter;
Receive zoning permit applications for special exceptions, variances, and special use permits and
forward these applications to the Borough Planning Commission and/or the Zoning Hearing Board
for action thereon in accordance with all applicable provisions of this chapter;
Following refusal of a zoning permit, to receive applications for interpretations, appeals and
variances and forward these applications to the Zoning Hearing Board for action thereon;
Conduct inspections and surveys to determine compliance or noncompliance with the terms of this
chapter;
Issue, stop, cease, and desist orders, and order in writing correction of all conditions found to be in
violation of the provisions of this chapter. Such written orders shall be served personally or by
certified mail upon persons, firms, or corporations deemed by the Zoning Officer to be violating the
terms of this chapter. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any such order lawfully issued
by the Zoning Officer, and any person violating such order shall be guilty of a violation of this
chapter;
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 441/505
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
A.
B.
11.
12.
A.
B.
C.
D.
1.
With the approval of the Borough Council, or when directed by them, institute in the name of the
Borough any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent the unlawful erection, construction,
reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or use; to restrain, correct or abate
such violations, so as to prevent the occupancy of or use of any building, structure or land, or to
prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about such premises;
Revoke any order or zoning permit issued under a mistake of fact or contrary to the law of the
provisions of this chapter;
Record and file all applications for zoning permits with the accompanying plans and documents
and keep an official record of all business and activities, including complaints of a violation of any
of the provisions of this chapter and of the subsequent action taken on each such complaint. All
such records shall be open to public inspection. File copies of all applications received, permits
issued, reports and inspections made in connection with any structure, building or land;
Maintain a map or maps showing the current zoning classification of all land in the city;
Upon the request of Borough Council, the Planning Commission or the Zoning Hearing Board,
present facts, records or reports which they may request to assist such body in making decisions;
Review and approve or deny temporary permits which shall be issued for a period not to exceed
one year and which may be renewed annually for the following two years for the following:
For nonconforming uses incidental to housing and construction projects and including such
structures and uses as storage of building supplies and machinery, and a real estate office
located on the tract being offered for sale, provided such permits are issued only upon
agreement by the owner to remove the structure upon expiration of the permit;
For structures or uses which are deemed by the Zoning Officer to be beneficial to the public
health and necessary to the public welfare.
The Zoning Officer shall identify, register and map all nonconforming uses and nonconforming
structures created as a result of the adoption of this chapter or created as a result of amendments
thereto.
§ 27-1203. Zoning Permits.
All applications for zoning permits shall be made in writing by the owner, or authorized agent on a form
supplied by the Borough and shall be filed with the Zoning Officer.
An application for a zoning permit shall include the following information, where applicable:
A statement as to the proposed use of the building or land;
A site layout, drawn to scale, showing the location, dimensions and height of proposed
buildings, structures, or uses and any existing buildings in relation to property and street lines.
If the application relates to property which is scheduled to be developed in successive stages,
such plans shall show the relationship of the portion scheduled for initial development to the
proposed layout of the entire property;
The location, dimensions and arrangements of all open spaces, yards and buffer yards
including methods to be employed for screening;
The location, size, arrangement and capacity of all areas to be used for motor vehicle access,
off-street parking, off-street loading and unloading, and provisions to be made for lighting
such areas;
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 442/505
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
M.
2.
3.
4.
5.
1.
The dimensions, location and methods of illumination for signs if applicable;
The location and dimension of sidewalks and all other areas to be devoted to pedestrian use;
Provisions to be made for treatment and disposal of sewage and industrial wastes, water
supply and storm drainage;
The capacity and arrangement of all buildings used or intended to be used for dwelling
purposes, including the proposed density in terms of number of dwelling units per acre of
land;
A description of any proposed industrial or commercial operations in sufficient detail to
indicate effects of those operations in producing noise, glare, air pollution, water pollution, fire
hazards, traffic congestion, or other safety hazards;
Description of methods to be employed in controlling any excess noise, air pollution, smoke,
fumes, water pollution, fire hazards or other safety hazards;
Any additional information required by the Zoning Officer or Zoning Hearing Board for the
purpose of interpretations, variances, special exceptions or other appeals;
Any data deemed necessary by the Zoning Officer, Planning Commission, Borough Engineer
or Borough Council to enable them to determine the compliance or noncompliance of a
proposed development with the terms of this chapter;
Prior application for and receipt of an Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan Permit when
required by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources.
A zoning permit must be secured prior to starting construction, erection or alteration of any
building, structure or portion thereof;
A zoning permit shall be granted or denied within 30 days of receipt of written application;
Zoning permits shall be issued in duplicate and one copy shall be displayed conspicuously on the
premises at all times;
No zoning permit for construction, erection or alteration of any building, structure or portion
thereof, shall be valid for more than six months unless work at the site has commenced.
§ 27-1204. Fees.
All applications for zoning permits, special exceptions and interpretations, variances and appeals shall,
at the time of making application, pay to the Borough, a fee in accordance with a fee schedule adopted
by resolution of the Borough Council upon the enactment of this chapter or as such schedule may be
changed by subsequent resolution.
Where an appeal for a hearing before the Zoning Hearing Board is withdrawn, a refund shall be
granted only if requested 48 hours prior to the publishing of the legal ad by the local newspaper.
§ 27-1205. Life of a Permit.
Any erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration or removing of a building or other structure
authorized by a zoning permit shall be commenced, and any change in use of a building or land
authorized by a zoning permit shall be undertaken within six months after the date of issuance of the
permit. However, in case of erection or construction of a building, the right to proceed with construction
may be extended annually without payment of additional fees for an aggregate period of not more than
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 443/505
1.
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
C.
D.
2.
A.
B.
C.
3.
30 calendar months, provided that the construction pursuant to said permit has commenced within the
first six-month period.
§ 27-1206. Conditional Use Process.
[As added by Ord. 910, 12/2/2009, § 5]
Purpose. The conditional use approval process is designed to allow the Borough Council to review
and approve certain uses that could have significant impacts upon the community and the
environment.
Procedure. The Borough Council shall consider the conditional use application and render its
decision in accordance with the requirements of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
Submittal. A site plan shall be submitted which shall include sufficient information to
determine compliance with this chapter. If a fully engineered subdivision or land development
plan will be required, it may be submitted separately, such as after a conditional use is
approved:
Reviews.
The Zoning Officer shall provide a review to the Borough Council regarding the
compliance of the application with this chapter.
The Borough Staff shall submit a conditional use application to the Planning Commission
for any review that the Commission may wish to provide. However, the Borough Council
shall meet the time limits for a decision, regardless of whether the Planning Commission
has provided comments.
The only uses that shall be approved as conditional uses shall be those listed as conditional
uses in applicable district.
Time Limit. Borough Council shall render a written decision on each conditional use
application within 45 days after the last hearing on the application or as may be provided
otherwise in § 913.2 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. For a conditional use
application, the same provisions shall apply for notice of persons that apply for a special
exception use application.
Consideration of Conditional Use Applications. The Borough Council shall hear and decide
requests for conditional uses in accordance with standards established by this chapter, including
the following:
Compliance with this chapter. The applicant shall establish by credible evidence that the
application complies with all applicable requirements of this chapter. The applicant shall
provide Borough Council with sufficient plans, testimony, studies or other information to
demonstrate this compliance.
Compliance with Other Laws. The approval may be conditioned upon the applicant later
showing proof of compliance with other specific applicable Borough, state and federal laws,
regulations and permits. Required permits or other proof of compliance may be required to be
presented to the Borough prior to the issuance of any zoning permit, building permit,
certification of occupancy and/or recording of an approved plan.
Traffic. The applicant shall establish that the traffic from the proposed use will be
accommodated in a safe and efficient manner that will minimize hazards and congestion, after
considering any improvements proposed to be made by the applicant as a condition on
approval.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 444/505
D.
E.
4.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
B.
1.
Site Planning. The application shall include proper site layout, internal circulation, parking,
buffering, and all other elements of proper design as specified in this chapter.
Safety. The proposed use shall not create a significant hazard to the public health and safety,
such as fire, toxic or explosive hazards.
Conditions. In approving conditional use applications, the Borough Council may attach conditions
they consider necessary to protect the public welfare and meet the standards of this chapter.
These conditions shall be enforceable by the Zoning Officer and failure to comply with such
conditions shall constitute a violation of this chapter and be subject to the penalties described in
this chapter.
§ 27-1207. Additional Regulations for Conditional Uses.
[As added by Ord. 910, 12/2/2009, § 5; as amended by Ord. 968, 4/17/2013; and by Ord. 969,
4/17/2013]
Commercial Communications Antennae/Tower as principal or accessory use.
Purposes. These provisions for commercial communications antenna/towers are primarily
designed to serve the following purposes, in addition to the overall objectives of this chapter:
To protect property values.
To minimize the visual impact of antenna/towers, particularly considering the importance
of the scenic beauty of the area in attracting visitors for outdoor recreation.
To minimize the number and heights of towers in a manner that still provides for
adequate telecommunications services.
Commercial communications antenna and towers shall not be allowed in a residential district.
Section 27-405, Subsection 4, provides that certain antennas of limited height are allowed in
all commercial and industrial districts. Any other commercial communications antenna/tower
shall only be allowed where provided in § 27-405, Subsection 4, and shall meet the following
additional requirements:
Such antenna/tower shall be set back from each lot line of a lot occupied by an existing
principal dwelling a distance that at least as long as the total height of the antenna/tower,
above the surrounding ground level.
Such antenna/tower shall be set back from street right-of-way line and each lot line that is
not regulated by Subsection 1 above a distance that at least one-half as long as the total
height of the antenna/tower above the surrounding ground level.
An easement or lease arrangement may be used without meeting the setback
requirement from the edge of the easement or leased area, provided that there are legal
safeguards to ensure that the setback will continue to be met over time from a lot line.
A tower attached to the ground shall be surrounded by a security fence/gate with a
minimum height of eight feet and evergreen plantings or preserved vegetation with an
initial minimum height of four feet if the fencing will be visible from a public street or
dwelling.
See structural and wind resistance requirements of the Construction Code.
The applicant shall describe in writing the policies that will be used to offer space on a
tower to other communications providers, which shall serve to minimize the total number
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 445/505
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
C.
of towers necessary in the region. This policy shall be designed to minimize the total
number of towers necessary in the Borough.
An applicant for a new commercial communications tower shall provide written evidence
that they have investigated co-locating their facilities on an existing tower and other tall
structures and have found such alternative to be unworkable. The reasons shall be
provided.
A maximum total height of 150 feet above the ground shall apply.
The application shall describe any proposed lighting. The Borough may require lighting of
an antenna even if it will not be required by the Federal Aviation Administration, to
provide protection for emergency medical helicopters. Strobe lighting shall not be used,
but flashing lights maybe used.
The applicant shall describe in writing any measures that will be used to decrease the
visual intrusiveness of a new tower.
Any antenna and tower that is no longer in active use shall be completely removed within
six months after the discontinuance of use. The operator shall notify the Zoning Officer in
writing after the antenna or tower use is no longer in active use. Any lease shall require
such removal by the owner of the antenna/tower. Any lease should provide that the lease
shall expire once the antenna/tower is removed.
Accessory utility buildings or cabinets shall have a maximum height of 10 feet and meet
principal building setbacks.
Emergency generators shall be installed with sound deading devices.
A communications tower or antenna that is owned and/or operated by the Borough or Monroe
County for emergency communications only is exempt from the requirements of this chapter.
Part 13. ZONING HEARING BOARD
§ 27-1301. Establishment of Board.
The Zoning Hearing Board existing at the time of adoption of this chapter shall continue under and in
accordance with the terms of office as previously appointed. Matters pending before the Board at the
time of effectiveness of this chapter shall continue and be completed under the previous Zoning
Ordinance in effect at the time the Board took jurisdiction.
§ 27-1302. Membership, Terms of Office.
[As amended by Ord. 859, 4/19/2006]
Effective June 21, 2006, the Zoning Hearing Board shall consist of five residents of the Borough of
Stroudsburg appointed by the Borough Council. The terms of office shall be five years and shall be so
fixed that the term of office of one member shall expire each year. Members of the Board shall hold no
other elected or appointed office in the Borough. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of any
member whose place becomes vacant.
§ 27-1303. Removal of Members.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 446/505
1.
2.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
3.
Any Board member may be removed for malfeasance, misfeasance or nonfeasance in office or for
other just cause by a majority vote of the Borough Council, taken after the member has received 15
days' advance notice of the intent to take such vote. A hearing shall be held in connection with the vote
if the member shall request it in writing.
§ 27-1304. Procedures.
Officers. The Board shall elect a Chairman from its membership and appoint a secretary, who shall
serve annual terms as such and may succeed themselves. The Board shall prescribe rules for the
conduct of its officers. These rules shall be in accordance with this chapter, and all applicable
state statutes.
Quorum. For the conduct of any hearing and the taking of any action, a quorum shall be not less
than a majority of all the members of the Board, but where two members are disqualified to act in
a particular matter, the remaining member may act for the Board.
Public Hearings. The Zoning Hearing Board shall conduct public hearings and make decisions in
accordance with the following requirements:
Upon receipt by the Zoning Officer of an application for a special exception, variance,
interpretation, appeal from alleged error of the Zoning Officer, challenge to the validity of the
chapter or unified appeal, the Board shall hold a hearing within 45 days.
Publish a public notice, once each week for two successive weeks, in a newspaper of general
circulation in the Borough. The first publication of such notice shall be not more than 30 days
nor less than 14 days from the date of the hearing and shall state the time and place of the
hearing and the particular nature of the matter to be considered. Notice of the hearing shall
also be conspicuously posted on the affected tract of land.
Notify the applicant, the Zoning Officer and adjoining property owners including those across
the street and any other persons or groups requesting to be so notified.
In any matter which relates to a property which lies within 500 feet of the boundary of another
municipality, the Secretary of the Board shall transmit to the municipal clerk of this other
municipality a copy of the official notice of the public hearing on such matters, not later than
seven days after publication thereof. The other municipality shall have the right to appear and
to be heard at the public hearing.
All hearings shall be open to the public and shall be held at the call of the Chairman and at
such other times as the Board shall specify in its rules of procedure. The Chairman, or in his
absence, the Acting Chairman, shall have the power to administer oaths and compel the
attendance of witnesses.
All appeals and applications made to the Board shall be in writing, and on a form prescribed
by the Board.
The Board shall not communicate, directly or indirectly, with any party or his representative in
connection with any issue involved except upon notice and opportunity for all parties to
participate, shall not take notice of any communication, reports, staff memoranda, or other
materials unless the parties are afforded an opportunity to contest the material so noticed and
shall not inspect the site or its surroundings after the commencement of hearings with any
party or his representative unless all parties are given the opportunity to be present.
The Board shall keep a stenographic record of the proceedings: a transcript of the
proceedings and copies of graphic or written material received in evidence shall be made
available to any party at cost.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 447/505
I.
J.
K.
1.
A.
B.
C.
2.
The Board shall render a written decision or, when no decision is called for, make written
findings on the application within 45 days after the last hearing before the Board. Each
decision shall be accompanied by findings of fact and conclusions based thereon together
with the reasons therefor. Conclusions based on any provisions of this act or of any
ordinance, rule or regulation shall contain a reference to the provision relied on and the
reasons why the conclusion is deemed appropriate in the light of the facts found. Where the
Board fails to render the decision within 45 days after the conclusion of the hearing, or fails to
hold the required hearing within 45 days from the date of the applicant's request for a hearing,
the decision shall be deemed to have been rendered in favor of the applicant unless the
applicant has agreed in writing to an extension of time. When a decision has been rendered in
favor of the applicant because of the failure of the Board to meet or render a decision as
hereinabove provided, the municipality shall give notice of said decision within 10 days in the
same manner as provided in Subsection 3above.
A copy of the final decision or, where no decision is called for, of the findings shall be
delivered to the applicant personally or mailed to him not later than the day following its date.
To all other persons who have filed their name and address with the Board not later than the
last day of the hearing, a Board shall provide by mail or otherwise, brief notice of the decision
or findings and a statement of the place at which the full decision or findings may be
examined.
The Board shall keep a record of all proceedings which shall contain evidence and data
relevant to every case considered together with the votes of the members and the final
decisions of each case. Each decision of the Board shall bear the signature of the Chairman
or Acting Chairman on the original thereof. These proceedings shall become public record
and the Board shall submit a report of its activities to the Borough Council once a year.
§ 27-1305. Board Functions.
The Zoning Hearing Board shall be authorized to perform five major functions: 1) hear and act on
appeals from the Borough Zoning Officer; 2) hear and act on requests for special exceptions; 3) hear
and act on requests for variances; 4) hear and act on challenges to the validity of this chapter; and 5)
hear and act upon unified appeals.
Appeal from the Zoning Officer. Upon appeal from a decision by the Zoning Officer, the Board
shall decide any question involving the interpretation of any provision of this chapter, including
determination of the exact location of any district boundary line if uncertainty exists with respect
thereto; where it is alleged there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination
made by the Zoning Officer in the enforcement of this chapter.
Special Exception. The Board shall have the power to approve special exceptions for any of the
uses for which this chapter requires the obtaining of such exceptions and for no other use or
purpose. In granting a special exception, the Board shall make findings of fact, consistent with the
provisions of this chapter. The Board shall grant a special exception only if it finds adequate
evidence that the proposed use meets the special requirements and standards listed for the
proposed use. The Board shall, among other things, require that any proposed use and location
be:
In accordance with the Community Development Objectives and consistent with the spirit,
purposes and intent of this chapter;
In the best interests of the Borough, the convenience of the community, the public welfare and
be an improvement to property in the immediate vicinity;
Suitable for the property in question, and designed, constructed, operated and maintained so
as to be in harmony with and appropriate in appearance with the existing or intended
character of the general vicinity;
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 448/505
D.
E.
F.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
3.
4.
In conformance with all applicable requirements of this chapter;
Suitable in terms of permitting the logical, efficient and economical extension of public
services and facilities such as public water, sewers, police and fire protection and public
schools;
Suitable in terms of effects on street traffic and safety with adequate sidewalks and vehicular
access arrangements to protect major streets from undue congestion and hazard. The Zoning
Hearing Board may impose whatever conditions regarding layout, circulation and
performance it deems necessary to insure that any proposed development will substantially
secure the objectives of this chapter.
Variances. Upon appeal from a decision by the Zoning Officer, the Board shall have the power to
vary or adapt the strict application of any of the requirements of this chapter in the case of
exceptionally irregular, narrow, shallow or steep lots, or other exceptional physical conditions
whereby such strict applications would result in practical difficulty and unnecessary hardship
depriving the owner of the reasonable use of land or building involved but in no other case. In
general, the power to authorize a variance from the terms of this chapter shall be sparingly
exercised and only under peculiar and exceptional circumstances.
No variance in the strict application of the provisions of this chapter shall be granted by the Board
unless the Board finds that all the below requirements and standards are satisfied:
That the granting of the variance shall be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of
this chapter, and shall not be injurious to the neighborhood or otherwise detrimental to the
public welfare.
That the granting of the variance will not permit the establishment within a district of any use
which is not permitted in that district.
There must be proof of unique circumstances: there are special circumstances or conditions,
fully described in the findings, applying to the land or buildings for which the variance is
sought, which circumstances or conditions are peculiar to such land or buildings and do not
apply generally to land or buildings in the neighborhood, and that said circumstances or
conditions are such that the strict application of the provisions of this chapter would deprive
the applicant of the reasonable use of such land or building.
There must be proof of unnecessary hardship: if the hardship is general, that is, shared by
neighboring property, relief can be properly obtained by legislative action or by court review of
an attack on the validity of the chapter.
That the granting of the variance is necessary for the reasonable use of the land or building
and that the variance as granted by the Board is the minimum variance that will accomplish
this purpose. It is not sufficient proof of hardship to show that greater profit would result if the
variance were awarded.
Furthermore, hardship complained of cannot be self-created; it cannot be claimed by one who
purchases with or without knowledge of restrictions and it must be suffered directly by the
property in question; and evidence of variance granted under similar circumstances shall not
be considered. The Board may prescribe any safeguard that it deems to be necessary to
secure substantially the objectives of the regulation or provisions to which the variance
applies.
Challenges to the Validity of this chapter. The Board shall hear challenges to the validity of this
chapter from persons aggrieved by a use or development permitted on the land of another person
by this chapter or by any provision of this chapter. In all such challenges, the Board shall take
evidence and make a record thereon as provided for in § 27-1304. At the conclusion of the
hearing, the Board shall decide all contested questions and shall make findings on all relevant
issues of fact which shall become part of the record on appeal to the court.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 449/505
5.
1.
2.
3.
4.
Unified Appeals. When the Board has jurisdiction over zoning matters pursuant to Subsections 1,
3 and 4 above of this section, the Board shall also hear all appeals which an applicant may elect
to bring before it with respect to any ordinance or requirement pertaining to the same development
plan or development. In any such case, the Board shall have no power to pass upon the nonzoning
issues, but shall take evidence and make a record thereon as provided in § 27-1304. At the
conclusion of the hearing, the Board shall make findings on all relevant issues of fact which shall
become part of the record on appeal to the court.
§ 27-1306. Rules and Procedures for Application to the Zoning
Hearing Board.
All appeals and applications made to the Board shall be in writing, on forms prescribed by the Board.
Every appeal or application shall refer to the specific provision of this chapter involved and shall
exactly set forth the interpretation that is claimed, the grounds for any challenges to the validity of this
chapter, the use for which a special exception is sought, or the details of the variance that is applied for
and the grounds on which it is claimed that the variance should be granted, as the case may be.
Applications and appeals together with the required filing fee, as established by resolution of the
Borough Council, shall be submitted to the Secretary of the Zoning Hearing Board.
Parties Appellant Before the Zoning Board. Appeals under § 27-1305, Subsection 1, and
proceedings to challenge the chapter under § 27-1305, Subsection 1, may be filed with the Board
in writing by any officer or agency of the Borough or any person aggrieved. Requests for a
variance under and for special exception may be filed with the Board by any landowner or any
tenant with the permission of such landowner.
Time Limitations. No person shall be allowed to file any proceeding with the Board later than 30
days after any application for development, preliminary or final, has been approved by the
appropriate Borough officer, agency or body if such proceeding is designed to secure reversal or
to limit the approval in any manner unless such person alleges and proves that he had no notice,
knowledge or reason to believe such approval had been given. If such person has succeeded to
his interest after such approval, he shall be bound by the knowledge of his predecessor in interest.
Stay of Proceedings. Upon filing of any proceeding referred to in § 27-1306, Subsection 1, and
during its pendency before the Board, all land development pursuant to any challenged ordinance,
order or approval of the Zoning Officer or of any agency or body, and all official action thereunder
shall be stayed unless the Zoning Officer or any other appropriate agency or body certifies to the
Board facts indicating that such stay would cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case
the development or official action shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which
may be granted by the Board or by the court having jurisdiction of zoning appeals on petition after
notice to the Zoning Officer or other appropriate agency or body.
When an application for development, preliminary or final, has been duly approved and
proceedings designed to reverse or limit the approval are filed with the Board by persons other
than the applicant, the applicant may petition the court having jurisdiction of zoning appeals to
order such persons to post bond as a condition to continuing the proceedings before the Board.
The question whether or not such petition should be granted and the amount of the bond shall be
within the sound discretion of the court.
Court Appeals. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Zoning Hearing Board or any
taxpayer or the Borough Council may, within 30 days after such decision of the Board, appeal the
Court of Common Pleas of Monroe County, setting forth that such decision is illegal in whole or in
part, specifying the grounds of the illegality.
Part 14. AMENDMENTS, REMEDIES AND PENALTIES
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 450/505
1.
2.
3.
4.
1.
§ 27-1401. Power of Amendment.
The Borough Council may from time to time amend, supplement, change, modify or repeal this chapter
including the Zoning Map. When doing so, the Borough Council shall proceed in the manner
prescribed in this Part.
§ 27-1402. Initiation.
[As amended by Ord. 659, 12/6/1988, § 1]
Proposals for amendment, supplement, change, modification or repeal may be initiated by the Borough
Council on its own motion, by the Planning Commission or by application by one or more owners of
property to be affected by the proposed amendment, subject to the following provisions:
Proposals Originated by the Borough Council. The Borough Council shall refer every proposed
amendment, supplement, change, modification or repeal originated by the Board to the Borough
Planning Commission and the County Planning Commission at least 45 days prior to the hearing
to provide the Commissions an opportunity to submit recommendations. The recommendations of
the Planning Commission shall be submitted in writing to the Council. The recommendations of
the County Planning Commission shall be submitted in writing to the Council. The
recommendations of the County Planning Commission shall be made within 45 days.
Proposals Originated by the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission may at any time
transmit to the Borough Council any proposal for amendment, supplement, change, modification
or repeal of chapter. The procedures with regard to County Planning Commission review and
recommendations shall be as required in § 27-1402, Subsection 1, above.
Proposals Originated by a Citizen's Application. Each application shall be by one or more owners
of property to be affected by a proposal for amendment, supplement, change, or modification and
shall be submitted to the Secretary of the Borough Council in writing on forms provided by the
Borough. The application shall state the name, address, telephone number, and signature of the
person requesting the amendment. If the amendment is a rezoning, the application shall require
the applicant to provide: a copy of a tax map showing the lots to be rezoned, the names and
addresses of all property owners whose property would be rezoned, and the names and address
of all property owners to be notified as required by § 27-1403, Subsection 2, of this chapter. The
applicant shall provide a draft of the amending ordinance in the Borough's customary form. The
applicant shall pay a $150 fee to the Borough of Stroudsburg when submitting the application. The
procedures with regard to the Borough Planning Commission and County Planning Commission
review and recommendation shall be as required in § 27-1402, Subsection 1, above.
Any general challenges or appeals to this Zoning Chapter shall be made in accordance with the
provisions of Articles IX and X of Act No. 247 of the Pennsylvania General Assembly of 1968,
effective January 1, 1969, and amendments and supplements thereto, known as the
"Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code". All provisions thereof and procedures thereunder
are hereby incorporated by reference.
§ 27-1403. Notice of Hearings.
No such amendment, supplement, change, modification or repealer shall become effective until after a
public hearing in relation thereto at which parties in interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be
heard. Notice shall be given as follows:
Notice shall be published once each week for two successive weeks in a newspaper of general
circulation in the Borough. Such notice shall state the time and place of the hearing, the particular
nature of the matter to be considered at the hearing, a brief summary setting forth the principal
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 451/505
2.
3.
1.
2.
3.
provisions in reasonable detail and a reference to a place within the Borough where copies of the
proposed ordinance or amendment may be examined. The first publication shall be not more than
30 days or less than 14 days from the date of the hearing.
When such hearing concerns a zoning map change, at least 15 days' written notice shall be given
to abutting property owners, who shall be those persons whose properties adjoin or are across the
street from the property in question.
If a proposed amendment affects any land or building within 500 feet of an adjoining municipality,
notice of the hearing and a copy of the proposal shall be forwarded to the secretary of the
governing body of that municipality at least 15 days prior to the hearing.
§ 27-1404. Vote on Amendment or Change.
The vote on the amendment or change by the Borough Council shall be within 90 days after the last
public hearing. A decision shall not be made by the Borough Council until County Planning
Commission and Borough Planning Commission recommendations have been received unless the
Planning Commissions have not responded within 45 days. If, after any public hearing held upon an
amendment, the proposed amendment is revised, or further revised, to include land previously not
affected by it, the Council shall hold another public hearing, pursuant to public notice, before
proceeding to vote on the amendment.
§ 27-1405. Remedies.
In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or
maintained or any building, structure or land is used in violation of this chapter, the Borough Council or
the Zoning Officer, with the approval of the Borough Council, may institute in the name of the Borough,
any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction,
alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or use; to restrain, correct or abate such violation; to
prevent the occupancy of said building, structure or land or to prevent any illegal act, conduct,
business, or use in or about such premises. The rights and remedies provided in this chapter are
cumulative and are in addition to all other remedies provided by law.
§ 27-1406. Fines and Penalties.
[As amended by Ord. 685, 11/8/1989, § 1]
Except as specifically provided elsewhere in this chapter, any person, partnership or corporation
who shall violate the provisions of this zoning chapter shall, upon conviction thereof in a civil
enforcement proceeding, be sentenced to pay a civil judgment of not more than $500 plus court
costs and reasonable attorney fees incurred by the Borough. Each day that a violation is
continued shall constitute a separate offense.
[Amended by Ord. No. 1075, 4/16/2019]
Such fines may be collected by suit or summary proceeding brought in the name of the Borough
before the District Justice having jurisdiction over the Borough.
Whenever the Zoning Officer shall give notice to any such person specified in Subsection 1 above
that said person is violating this chapter, such person shall commence and compete correction of
all violations within the time frame set forth in writing in the notice from the Zoning Officer. If
corrections are not commenced or completed within the time frame set forth in the notice, each
day that a violation continues shall be considered a separate offense punishable by the like fine or
penalty.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 452/505
§ 27-1407. Complaints of Violations.
Whenever a violation of this chapter occurs, any person may file a complaint in regard thereto. All such
complaints must be in writing and shall be filed with the Zoning Officer who shall properly record such
complaint and immediately investigate and report thereon to the Borough Council.
Appendix
Appendix A. Agreements and Contracts
§ A-101. Agreements and Contracts.
Ord./Res. Date Description
Ord. 39 5/1/1895 Granting to the Stroudsburg and Bushkill Telephone Company
the right to enter and occupy the streets and highways of the
Borough of Stroudsburg
Ord. 42 4/6/1896 Granting to the Pennsylvania Telephone Company the right to
occupy the streets and highways of the Borough of Stroudsburg
with such poles and wires as may be required for conducting its
business
Ord. 53 4/3/1901 Granting the right-of-way through Main Street in the Borough of
Stroudsburg to the Stroudsburg Passenger Railway Company
Ord. 55 9/20/1901 Granting the right-of-way through Main Street in the Borough of
Stroudsburg to the Stroudsburg Passenger Railway Company
Ord. 67 8/3/1904 Granting to the Monroe County Water Power and Supply
Company the right to erect poles and string wires in the streets
and alleys of the Borough of Stroudsburg for the conduct of its
business
Ord. 70 2/14/1905 Granting the right-of-way through Dreher Avenue and a portion of
Main Street in the Borough to the Stroudsburg and Wind Gap
Electric Street Railway Company
Ord. 81 6/1/1910 Granting to the Monroe County Water Power and Supply
Company the right to erect poles and string wires in the streets
and alleys of the Borough for the conduct of its business
Ord. 82 6/11/1910 Granting to the Monroe County Water Power and Supply
Company the right to erect poles and string wires in the streets
and alleys of the Borough for the conduct of its business
Ord. 83 6/11/1910 Granting to the Stroudsburg Electric Light and Power Company
the right to erect poles and string wires in the streets and alleys
of the Borough for the conduct of its business
Ord. 89 5/19/1911 Granting to the Indian Queen Power Company the right to erect
poles and string wires in the streets and alleys of the Borough for
the conduct of its business
Ord. 106 9/1/1915 Authorizing the officials of the Borough to execute and deliver to
the Stroudsburg Passenger Railway Company a lease, for the
term of 50 years, for a portion of a street in the Borough
Ord. 136 6/11/1925 Granting the right to the Stroudsburg Traction Company to lay
tracks, erect and maintain its poles and string wires and cables
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 453/505
for the operation of its railway as lessee of the Stroudsburg
Passenger Railway Company
Ord. 163 1/2/1929 Authorizing the Bell Telephone Company of Pennsylvania to
construct, maintain and operate such conduits, cables, wires,
manholes, poles and all other necessary appliances, in, on,
under, across and along the streets and alleys of the Borough as
it may require in the maintenance and operation of its system
Ord. 164 1/25/1929 Authorizing the American Telegraph and Telephone Company of
Pennsylvania to acquire and use such portions of the aerial and
underground works now or in the future constructed or in place
by the Bell Telephone Company of Pennsylvania, for connecting
through line purposes, as said AT&T Co. may require in the
operation of its business
Ord. 215 7/7/1936 Providing for the furnishing of electric service to the Borough of
Stroudsburg, for the operation of the Borough's sewage disposal
plant
Ord. 241 6/14/1939 Providing for a contract of the installation, rental and purchase of
parking meters.
Ord. 262 12/10/1941 Providing for the furnishing of electric service to the Borough of
Stroudsburg, for the operation of the Borough's sewage disposal
plant
Ord. 266 2/4/1942 Providing for the purchase of additional parking meters
Ord. 269 5/6/1942 Providing for a public dumping ground for a period of five years
Ord. 365 9/2/1953 Granting to the Pennsylvania Power and Light Company
permission to erect and maintain electric lines and
appurtenances upon certain property of the Borough of
Stroudsburg
Ord. 389 7/6/1955 Providing for the furnishing of electric service to the Borough for
the operation of its sewage disposal plant
Ord. 426 12/2/1959 Granting to the Pennsylvania Power and Light Company
permission to construct, operate and maintain its electric lines on
certain property of the Borough of Stroudsburg
Ord. 978 11/6/2013 Approve the execution of a street light system purchase and sale
agreement with PPL Electric Utilities Corporation for the
purchase of the street light system and for PPL Electric Utilities
Corporation to perform a "make ready work" on the system to
prepare it for turnover to the Borough
Ord. 994 11/18/2014 Authorizing execution of a cable franchise agreement between
the Borough and Blue Ridge Cable Technologies, Inc. D/B/A Blue
Ridge Communications
Appendix B. Bond Issues and Loans
§ B-101. Bond Issues and Loans.
Ord./Res. Date Description
Ord. 63 4/7/1903 Expressing the desire of the Borough authorities to increase the
indebtedness of said Borough by the amount of $29,000 for the
purpose of constructing a general sewage system; providing for
an election to obtain the consent of the electors
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 454/505
Ord./Res. Date Description
Ord. 88 4/5/1911 Authorizing the issuance of coupon bonds to an amount not
exceeding $10,000 for the purpose of redeeming outstanding
bonds payable May 1, 1911; providing for the sale thereof, and
assessing and levying an annual tax for the payment of the
principal and interest thereof
Ord. 93 5/7/1913 Authorizing the issuance of coupon bonds to an amount not
exceeding $11,000 for the purpose of redeeming outstanding
bonds payable June 1, 1913 and June 1, 1914; providing for the
sale thereof; and assessing and levying an annual tax for the
payment of the principal and interest thereof
Ord. 98 7/1/1914 Expressing the desire of the Borough authorities to increase the
indebtedness of said Borough by the amount of $20,000 for the
purpose of paying the Borough's share to permanently improve
Main Street; providing for an election to obtain the consent of the
electors
Ord. 104 6/2/1915 Authorizing the issuance of coupon bonds to an amount not
exceeding $20,000 for the purpose of providing funds to pay the
Borough's share to permanently improve Main Street; authorizing
the State and County to bear the major portion of the expense
Ord. 110 9/13/1916 Authorizing the issuance of coupon bonds to an amount not
exceeding $15,000 for the purpose of providing funds for
redeeming outstanding notes to the amount of $15,000; providing
for the sale thereof, and assessing an annual tax for the payment
of the principal and interest thereof
Ord. 123 8/12/1920 Authorizing the issuance of coupon bonds to an amount not
exceeding $30,000 for the purpose of providing funds for
redeeming promissory notes to the amount of $30,000; providing
for the sale thereof, and assessing an annual tax for the payment
of the principal and interest thereof
Ord. 129 8/1/1923 Authorizing the issuance of coupon bonds to an amount not
exceeding $25,000 for the purpose of providing funds for
redeeming outstanding and unpaid bonds; providing for the sale
thereof, and assessing an annual tax for the payment of the
principal and interest thereof
Ord. 148 11/3/1926 Authorizing the issuance of coupon bonds to an amount not
exceeding $30,000 for the purpose of funding the floating
indebtedness of the Borough; providing for the sale thereof, and
assessing an annual tax for the payment of the principal and
interest thereof
Ord. 161 7/12/1928 Authorizing an increase in the bonded indebtedness of the
Borough, in the amount of $50,000 for the purpose of providing
funds for the payment of the Borough's share of the cost of
construction and improvement of bridges and highways within the
Borough; approving the form of the bond and coupon; and
levying a tax for the payment of the principal of said bonds at
maturity, and the interest and sate tax thereon meanwhile
Ord. 177 5/6/1931 Expressing the desire of the Borough authorities to increase the
bonded indebtedness of said Borough by the amount of $70,000
for the purpose of providing funds for constructing a municipal
building for the use of the Borough and for the housing of the five
companies and their equipment; providing for the holding of an
election to obtain the consent of the electors
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 455/505
Ord./Res. Date Description
Ord. 178 11/1/1931 Authorizing an increase in the bonded indebtedness of the
Borough in the amount of $70,000 for the purpose of providing
funds for constructing a municipal building for the use of the
Borough and for the housing of the five companies and their
equipment; approving the form of the bond and coupon; and
levying a tax for the payment of the principal of said bonds at
maturity, and the interest and state tax thereon meanwhile
Ord. 179 1/11/1932 Authorizing an increase in the bonded indebtedness of the
Borough in the amount of $70,000 for the purpose of providing
funds for constructing a municipal building for the use of the
Borough and for the housing of the five companies and their
equipment; approving the form of the bond and coupon; and
levying a tax for the payment of the principal of said bonds at
maturity, and the interest and state tax thereon meanwhile
Ord. 198 7/13/1934 Authorizing an increase in the bonded indebtedness of the
Borough in the amount of $24,000 for the purpose of providing
funds for the payment of the Borough's share of the costs of
sewer construction on Ann Street and flood control on Pocono
Creek and Brodheads Creek; approving the form of the bond and
coupon; and levying a tax for the payment of the principal of said
bonds at maturity, and the interest and state tax thereon
meanwhile
Ord. 203 9/4/1935 Expressing the desire of the Borough authorities to increase the
bonded indebtedness of said Borough by the amount of $82,500
for the purpose of providing funds for paying part of the cost of
constructing sewage treatment works and an extension of the
present sanitary sewage system; providing for the holding of an
election to obtain the consent of the electors
Ord. 207 11/21/1935 Authorizing an increase in the bonded indebtedness of the
Borough in the amount of $82,500 for the purpose of providing
funds for constructing sewage treatment works and installing
several sewer lines in the Borough; approving the form of the
bond and coupon; and levying a tax for the payment of the
principal of said bonds at maturity, and the interest and state tax
thereon meanwhile
Ord. 208 12/13/1935 Amending Ordinance 207, providing for an increase in the
bonded indebtedness of the Borough of Stroudsburg. For
ordinance amended, see 2-15
Ord. 211 2/19/1936 Further amending Ordinance 207, providing for an increase in the
bonded indebtedness of the Borough of Stroudsburg. For
ordinance amended, see 2-15
Ord. 222 9/22/1937 Expressing the desire of the Borough authorities to increase the
bonded indebtedness of said Borough by the amount of $85,000
for the purpose of providing funds for paying part of the costs of
constructing extensions to the present sanitary sewer system;
providing for the holding of an election to obtain the consent of
the electors
Ord. 236 9/21/1938 Expressing the desire of the Borough authorities to increase the
bonded indebtedness of said Borough by the amount of $75,000
for the purpose of providing funds for paying part of the costs of
constructing extensions to the present sanitary sewer system;
providing for the holding of an election to obtain the consent of
the electors
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 456/505
Ord./Res. Date Description
Ord. 305 3/3/1948 Expressing the desire of the Borough authorities to increase the
bonded indebtedness of said Borough by the amount of
$190,000 for the purpose of providing funds for the construction
of extensions to the present sanitary sewer system; providing for
the holding of an election to obtain the consent of the electors
Ord. 309 9/2/1948 Authorizing the issuance of general obligation bonds in the
maximum amount of $140,000 for the purpose of providing funds
for the construction of extensions to the present sanitary sewer
system; providing for the execution of all required legal action
pursuant to the issuance, sale and payment of said bonds
Ord. 310 9/25/1948 Amending Ordinance 309, authorizing the issuance of general
obligation bonds to provide funds for the construction of
extensions to the sanitary sewer system. For ordinance
amended, see 2-21
Ord. 376 6/16/1954 Authorizing the issuance of general obligation bonds in the
maximum amount of $80,000 for the purpose of providing funds
for the construction of streets and drainage facilities; providing for
the execution of all required legal action pursuant to the
issuance, sale and payment of said bonds
Ord. 402 11/8/1956 Authorizing the issuance of general obligation bonds in the
maximum amount of $34,000 for the purpose of providing funds
for the purchase of fire engines and other fire apparatus and
expenses incidental thereto; providing for the execution of all
required legal action pursuant to the issuance, sale and payment
of said bonds
Ord. 414 9/3/1958 Cancelling to the extent of $50,000 the authorization granted by
the electors to increase the debt of the Borough in the amount of
$190,000 for the construction of extensions to the sanitary sewer
system. For ordinance amended, see 2-20
Ord. 415 11/3/1958 Expressing the desire of the Borough authorities to increase the
bonded indebtedness of said Borough by the amount of
$125,000 for the purpose of providing funds for the acquisition of
land and rights of way, the construction of sewers, dikes,
embankments and other structures pertaining to flood control
work in the Borough; providing for the holding of an election to
obtain the consent of the electors
Ord. 421 5/6/1959 Authorizing an increase in the bonded indebtedness of the
Borough in the amount of $125,000 for the purpose of providing
funds for the acquisition of land and rights-of-way, the
construction of sewers, dikes, embankments and other
structures, and all other costs incidental to certain flood control
work in the Borough; approving the form of the bond and coupon;
and levying a tax for the payment of the principal of said bonds at
maturity, and the interest and state tax thereon meanwhile
Ord. 590 7/8/1982 Authorizing the issuance of a general obligation note in the
maximum amount of $500,000 for the purpose of providing funds
for making renovations and capital improvements to the
Stroudsburg Municipal Building; providing for the execution of all
required legal action pursuant to the issuance, sale and payment
of said bonds
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 457/505
Ord./Res. Date Description
Ord. 607 1/31/1985 Increasing the indebtedness of the Borough of Stroudsburg,
County of Monroe, Pennsylvania, by the issue of a general
obligation note in the amount of $465,500 for the purpose of
fixing the form, number, date, interest and maturity of the general
obligation note; making a covenant for the payment of the debt
service on the note; providing for the filing of the required
document providing for the appointment of sinking fund
depository for the note; and authorizing execution, sale and
delivery thereof
Ord. 613 12/3/1985 Increasing the debt of the Borough of Stroudsburg in the amount
of $2,710,000 without the assent of the electors for the purpose
of providing funds for and toward the construction and acquisition
of improvements to the Borough's sewage collection and
treatment system
Ord. 658 11/7/1988 Authorizing the making of capital improvements to the sewer
system and financing a portion of the costs, together with the
refunding of certain notes issued for such purposes, by the
issuance of $1,700,000 Borough of Stroudsburg guaranteed
sewer revenue bonds
Ord. 667 3/21/1989 Authorizing the financing of the cost of improvements to the
sewer system for the Borough of Stroudsburg by the issuance of
$1,162,800 Borough of Stroudsburg guaranteed sewer revenue
bonds
Ord. 674 7/12/1989 Increasing the debt of the Borough of Stroudsburg in the amount
of $2,600,000
Ord. 731 11/2/1994 Increasing the debt of the Borough of Stroudsburg in the amount
of $3,262,800
Ord. 758 3/4/1998 Increasing the indebtedness of the Borough by the issue of a
general obligation note in the amount of $100,000
Ord. 766 6/17/1998 Increasing the indebtedness of the Borough by the issuance of
general obligation bonds in the amount of $2,691,326.75
Ord. 800 8/1/2001 Increasing the indebtedness of the Borough in the amount of
$7,065,000, as nonelectoral debt, for the purpose of acquisition
and construction of a regional police station, the acquisition and
construction of a parking facility for the Borough and the
improvement of certain public streets in the Borough, the
refunding of the Borough's general obligation bond, Series B of
1994, and the costs of issuance of the bonds
Ord. 846 1/19/2005 Increasing the indebtedness of the Borough in the amount of
$6,645,000 as nonelectoral debt for the purpose of refunding
some of the Borough's general obligation bonds and paying the
costs of the issuance of the bonds
Ord. 866 9/6/2006 Increasing the indebtedness of the Borough in the amount of
$87,799 as nonelectoral debt for sundry purposes
Ord. 880 12/19/2007 Increasing the indebtedness of the Borough in the amount of
$510,106 for purchase of the existing streetlighting system in the
Borough
Ord. 885 2/6/2008 Amending Ord. 880 to provide for a reduction in the rate of
interest on the note
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 458/505
Ord./Res. Date Description
Ord. 913 2/3/2010 Authorizing and directing issuance of general obligation bonds,
series of 2010 of this Borough in the aggregate principal amount
of $5,215,000 pursuant to the Pennsylvania Local Government
Unit Debt Act, as amended, for the purpose of refunding this
Borough's general obligation bonds, series of 2005
Ord. 932 12/16/2010 Authorizing and directing issuance of general obligation bonds,
series of 2011 of this Borough in the aggregate principal amount
of $5,255,000 pursuant to the Pennsylvania Local Government
Unit Debt Act, as amended
Ord. 933 12/16/2010 Incurring $1,535,000 principal amount of lease rental debt under
the Pennsylvania Local Government Unit Debt Act, to be
evidenced by the several (not joint) guaranty of 15.35% of the
payments due on a $10,000,000 debt obligation of the Brodhead
Creek Regional Authority (BCRA), to construct improvements to
its sanitary sewage treatment plant, and pay related expenses
Ord. 974 8/7/2013 Authorizing and directing issuance of a general obligation bond,
series of 2013 of this Borough in the aggregate principal amount
of $590,500 pursuant to the Pennsylvania Local Government Unit
Debt Act, as amended
Ord. 977 11/6/2013 Authorizing and directing issuance of a general obligation note,
Series A of 2013 of this Borough in the aggregate principal
amount of $2,030,000 pursuant to the Pennsylvania Local
Government Unit Debt Act, as amended
Ord. 999 2/17/2015 Authorizing and directing issuance of a general obligation note,
Series A of 2015, in the aggregate principal amount of
$3,265,360 pursuant to the Pennsylvania Local Government Unit
Debt Act, as amended
Ord. 1000 2/17/2015 Authorizing and directing issuance of a general obligation note,
Series AA of 2015, in the aggregate principal amount of
$5,876,000 pursuant to the Pennsylvania Local Government Unit
Debt Act, as amended
Ord. 1016 3/1/2016 Authorizing and directing issuance of a general obligation note,
series of 2016, in the aggregate principal amount of $490,379.03
pursuant to the Pennsylvania Local Government Unit Debt Act,
as amended
Appendix C. Governmental and Intergovernmental Affairs
§ C-101. Governmental and Intergovernmental Affairs
Ord./Res. Date Description
Res. 103 7/25/1913 Accepting the provisions of an Act amending § 1 of an Act
approved June 21, 1911, enabling the Borough to validate certain
ordinances which were not published, or for which proof of
publication cannot be made
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 459/505
Ord./Res. Date Description
7/31/1929 Entering into an agreement between the Borough of Stroudsburg
and the County of Monroe, whereby the Borough agrees to pay
50% of the costs of purchasing and repairing or condemning the
toll bridge over McMichaels Creek, now owned by the
Stroudsburg Bridge Company, as an inducement to the
Pennsylvania State Department of Highways to improve and
construct, at its own cost, a concrete highway between the
Borough of Stroudsburg and the Borough of Delaware Water Gap
Ord. 171 10/20/1929 Requiring permits from the Pennsylvania Department of
Highways for excavations upon state highways in the Borough
Ord. 192 1/12/1934 Providing for flood control of the Pocono Creek, in the Borough of
Stroudsburg
Ord. 202 7/3/1935 Authorizing the Pennsylvania Department of Highways to issue
permits for the opening or tearing up of all streets which are
continuations of State Highway Routes in the Borough
Ord. 353 8/6/1952 Providing for participation of certain employees and officers of the
Borough of Stroudsburg in the provisions of the Old Age and
Survivors Insurance System embodied in the Social Security Act
making an appropriation in connection therewith
Ord. 367 11/24/1953 Organizing the Stroudsburg Municipal Authority; setting forth the
articles of incorporation, and designating the first project of said
authority
Ord. 391 11/2/1955 Approving the application for a preliminary loan for low-rent
public housing in the borough and authorizing a cooperation
agreement
Ord. 396 4/4/1956 Approving the application for a preliminary loan for low-rent
public housing in the Borough, and authorizing a cooperation
agreement
Res. 4/4/1956 Approving the proposed action of the Stroudsburg Municipal
Authority to acquire the water supply company, and approving the
proposed revised purchase agreement between the shareholders
of the Monroe County Water Supply Company and the
Stroudsburg Municipal Authority
Ord. 398 5/16/1956 Organizing the Stroudsburg Parking Authority; and setting forth
the articles of incorporation
Ord. 413 8/6/1958 Approving the agreement and lease dated 7/1/1958 between
Stroudsburg Parking Authority and the Borough of Stroudsburg,
providing for the acquisition of a parking lot, the construction and
installation of improvements on such lot, while leasing to and
operation by the Borough of such lot
Ord. 418 10/1/1958 Approving the agreement and lease dated 10/1/58 between
Stroudsburg Parking Authority and the Borough of Stroudsburg,
providing for the acquisition of a parking lot, the construction and
installation of improvements on such lot, while leasing to and
operation by the Borough of such lot
Ord. 433 1/4/1961 Approving the agreement and lease dated 12/1/60 between
Stroudsburg Parking Authority and the Borough of Stroudsburg,
providing for the acquisition of a parking lot, the construction and
installation of improvements on such lot, while leasing to and
operation by the Borough of such lot
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 460/505
Ord./Res. Date Description
Ord. 459 11/6/1963 Approving lease between Stroud Union School District as lessor,
and the Borough of Stroudsburg as lessee; authorizing execution
of same on behalf of the Borough
Ord. 472 10/13/1965 Approving the agreement and lease dated 10/15/65 between
Stroudsburg parking Authority and the Borough of Stroudsburg,
providing for the acquisition of a parking lot, the construction and
installation of improvements on such lot, while leasing to and
operation by the Borough of such lot
Ord. 500 8/7/1968 Providing for the adoption of an amendment to the Articles of
Incorporation of the Stroudsburg Municipal Authority, so as to
increase the term of existence of said Authority
Ord. 547 5/7/1975 Adopting the Joint Cooperation Agreement between the
Boroughs of Stroudsburg and East Stroudsburg and the
Township of Stroud, establishing the Bureau of Criminal
Investigation
Ord. 551 11/5/1975 Adopting the Joint Cooperation Agreement between the
Boroughs of Stroudsburg and East Stroudsburg and the
Township of Stroud, establishing and maintaining the Monroe
County Control Center
Ord. 582 5/13/1981 Authorizing the Borough of Stroudsburg to join with other local
government units as a settlor of the Pennsylvania Local
Government Investment Trust for the purpose of purchasing
shares of the trust
Ord. 602 3/26/1984 Amending the Articles of Incorporation of the Stroudsburg
Municipal Authority (For ordinance amended, see Appendix 3-7,
above)
Ord. 628 9/10/1986 Authorizing appropriate officials of the Borough of Stroudsburg to
join with other governmental units in delegating the Emmaus
General Authority power to raise capital on a pooled basis by
issuing bonds, for the benefit of all cooperating governmental
units
Ord. 686 11/8/1989 Authorizing the Borough of Stroudsburg to join with other local
government units as settlor of PLIGT Investment Trusts A, B and
C for the purposes of purchasing shares to such trusts
Ord. 687 12/13/1989 Authorizing execution of a Curbside Recycling Collection,
Processing and Marketing Agreement with the Borough of East
Stroudsburg
Ord. 798 4/18/2001 Electing to withdraw the Municipal Employees Pension Plan from
the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System effective June 1,
2001
Ord. 799 5/16/2001 Amending the intergovernmental cooperation agreement
establishing a regional police department
Ord. 810 11/7/2001 Entering into an intermunicipal cooperation agreement for a
multimunicipal comprehensive plan between the Townships of
Stroud, Hamilton and Pocono, and the Borough of Stroudsburg
Ord. 832 3/19/2003 Approving the adoption of an intergovernmental agreement of
cooperation establishing the Stroud Region Park Commission
and authorizing the appropriate officers to execute the agreement
on behalf of the Borough
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 461/505
Ord./Res. Date Description
Ord. 838 1/21/2004 Authorizing an amendment to the intermunicipal agreement
between Stroud Township, Stroudsburg Borough and East
Stroudsburg Borough dated May 24, 1999, governing the Stroud
Area Regional Police Department, and the subsequent
amendment thereof, dated June 4, 2001, to maintain the
payment formula application for fiscal year 2004 at the rate that
was utilized in 2003
Ord. 844 12/30/2004 Entering into a joint agreement between Stroudsburg Borough,
East Stroudsburg Borough and Stroud Township for amendments
to the intergovernmental cooperation agreement establishing the
Regional Police Department
Ord. 851 5/18/2005 Approving applications to join Stroudsburg Municipal Authority,
approving intermunicipal agreement and proposed amendment to
Articles of Incorporation of said Authority to increase the
municipal members, change the name of the Authority and make
other changes in said Articles
Ord. 871 1/17/2007 Entering into a local government mutual aid agreement for police
protection
Ord. 872 4/18/2007 Adding the Borough of Delaware Water Gap to the local
government mutual aid agreement for police protection
Ord. 873 5/16/2007 Entering into a joint agreement between the Townships of
Hamilton, Stroud, and Pocono and the Borough of Stroudsburg,
known as the "HSPS Intergovernmental Cooperative
Implementation Agreement"
Ord. 879 12/5/2007 Authorizing the Borough to join with other political subdivisions as
a member of the Northeast Pennsylvania Municipal Insurance
Cooperative (NEPMIC) and the Pennsylvania Municipal
Insurance Cooperative (PMHIC)
Ord. 892 8/21/2008 Amending the intergovernmental cooperation agreement
establishing the Stroud Region Open Space and Recreation
Commission providing that members may serve unlimited terms
at the discretion of their respective governing bodies
Ord. 895 11/20/2008 Authorizing a memorandum of understanding and addendum to
memorandum of understanding among several townships,
boroughs and authorities to implement a comprehensive solution
to the wastewater disposal needs of the Townships of Hamilton,
Pocono and Stroud and the Borough of Stroudsburg
Ord. 908 8/5/2009 Providing for entering into a joint agreement between the
Borough of Stroudsburg, the Borough of East Stroudsburg, and
Township of Stroud for the Amendment of Article V, Section B (1)
(B)(3), entitled "Initial Base Line Formula Level" of the
Intergovernmental Cooperation Agreement establishing Regional
Police Department, dated May 24, 1999
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 462/505
Ord./Res. Date Description
Ord. 919 5/13/2010 Signifying the intention of the Borough of Stroudsburg of Monroe
County, Pennsylvania, to (I) enact and ordain amendments to the
Articles of Incorporation of the Brodhead Creek Regional
Authority under the provisions of the Municipality Authorities Act
(The Act of the General Assembly of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania approved May 2, 1945, P.L. 382, as continued by
an Act of the General Assembly of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania approved June 19, 2001, P.L. 22 (53 PA.Cons. Stat
§§ 5601 et seq.) to amend the powers and purposes of said
authority; (II) approve the execution of an amended and restated
intermunicipal cooperation agreement among the municipalities;
(III) authorize the negotiation and execution of one or more bulk
sewage treatment agreements with the Brodhead Creek
Regional Authority; (IV) authorize the doing of all things
necessary and appropriate to effect and establish said
amendments; and (V) repeal or rescind all ordinances or
resolutions or parts thereof which are inconsistent herewith
Ord. 930 11/18/2010 Signifying the intention of the Borough of Stroudsburg, Monroe,
County, Pennsylvania, to (I) approve the execution of a first
amendment to the amended and restated Intermunicipal
Cooperation Agreement among the member municipalities of the
Brodhead Creek Regional Authority, the Authority and the Stroud
Township Sewer Authority and establish the effective date of
such first amendment; (II) provide for the severability of the
provisions of said ordinance; (III) repeal or rescind all ordinances
or resolutions or parts thereof which are inconsistent herewith;
and (IV) establish the effective date of said ordinance
Ord. 939 3/17/2011 Signifying the intention of the Borough to approve the execution
of a sewage treatment agreement between the Brodhead Creek
Regional Authority and the Borough of Stroudsburg and establish
the effective date of such sewage treatment agreement
Ord. 957 10/17/2012 Authorizing the entity to amend the intergovernmental
cooperation agreement and the addenda thereto establishing the
Stroud Area Regional Police Department to grant powers to the
Stroud Area Regional Police Commission to contract with third
parties including private and governmental agencies to provide
police educational services, to establish hearing boards, to
establish foundations, to enter into property sharing agreements,
and to ratify the actions of the Stroud Area Regional Police
Department
Ord. 1038 8/1/2017 Amending the Articles of Incorporation of the Brodhead Creek
Regional Authority; approving the execution of a restated
intermunicipal cooperation agreement among the municipalities;
and authorizing the execution of bulk sewage treatment
agreements with the Authority
Ord. 1076 5/6/2019 Authorizing Amendment No. 7 to the intergovernmental
cooperation agreement and addenda thereto establishing the
Stroud Area Regional Police Department
Appendix D. Annexation of Property
§ D-101. Annexation of Property.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 463/505
Ord./Res. Date Description
Ord. 47 8/5/1896 Admitting a certain section of property in the Township of Stroud,
adjacent to the Borough of Stroudsburg, as part of the said
Borough; providing a legal description of said property
Ord. 686 11/8/1989 Authorizing the Borough of Stroudsburg to join with other local
governmental units as a settlor of PLGIT Investment Trust
Ord. 687 12/13/1989 Approving and authorizing execution of an intermunicipal
agreement for the curb side collection, processing and marketing
of recyclable materials
Appendix E. Public Property
§ E-101. Public Property.
Ord./Res. Date Description
Ord. 138 11/4/1925 Authorizing and directing the sale of the real and personal
property and equipment owned by the Stroudsburg Poor District
and the transfer of the title thereto; providing a legal description
of said property
Res. 5/4/1927 Authorizing the purchase by the Borough of certain real property
of John DeVito, situate on the south side of Main Street
Ord. 237 12/7/1938 Authorizing the purchase by the Borough of certain premises on
North Fourth Street in the Borough
Ord. 270 5/6/1942 Providing for the sale of certain property on North Fifth Street
owned by the Borough to Mr. Leonard Torzillo; providing a legal
description of said property
Ord. 286 1/2/1946 Authorizing the sale of a certain lot owned by the Borough, at the
southerly terminus of South Sixth Street; providing a legal
description of said property
Ord. 311 11/3/1948 Ratifying and confirming a quitclaim deed for certain land within
the Borough, said deed executed and delivered to Carl G. and
Mamie E. Howe
Ord. 340 11/7/1951 Providing for the exchange of land between the Borough of
Stroudsburg and R. F. Kistler, Inc.
Ord. 347 6/5/1952 Providing for the purchase of certain land, situate in the Borough
of Stroudsburg, by the Borough; providing a legal description of
said land
Ord. 354 3/4/1953 Providing for the exchange of quitclaim deeds for certain lands
between the Borough of Stroudsburg and Henry K. Norton, acting
as trustee of the property of the New York, Susquehanna and
Western Railroad Company
Ord. 372 3/3/1954 Authorizing the conveyance of certain real estate of the Borough
of Stroudsburg to Russell R. and Granville Shiffer, copartners of
Shiffers Bituminers Service; providing a legal description of said
property; and executing and delivering a deed for the same
Ord. 374 6/2/1954 Authorizing the conveyance of certain real estate of the Borough
of Stroudsburg to the Stroudsburg Septic Tank Company;
providing a legal description of said property; executing and
delivering a deed for the same
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 464/505
Ord./Res. Date Description
Ord. 397 5/2/1956 Authorizing the conveyance of certain real estate of the Borough
of Stroudsburg to Lewis W. Scheller, Jr.; providing a legal
description of said property; executing and delivering a deed for
the same.
Ord. 416 9/3/1958 Approving a purchase agreement between the Borough of
Stroudsburg and Graydon E. and Mildred E. Labar, for the
purchase by the Borough of a certain tract of land situate on the
easterly side of Knob (now Sarah) Street in said Borough
Ord. 417 9/3/1958 Approving a sublease between the Borough of Stroudsburg and
the American Stores Company for the sublease by the Borough
of a certain tract known as 18-20 South Sixth Street in said
Borough
Ord. 429 5/20/1960 Providing for the acquisition of perpetual easements and rightsof-
way over certain lands along Brodhead and McMichaels
Creeks in the Borough of Stroudsburg and the Township of
Stroud, for the purpose of construction of a flood protection
project along said creeks
Ord. 439 12/6/1961 Authorizing the conveyance of certain real estate of the Borough
of Stroudsburg to Rebecca and Walter O. Duggins; providing a
legal description of said property; executing and delivering a
deed for the same
Ord. 464 5/6/1954 Authorizing the quitclaiming of certain real estate of the Borough
of Stroudsburg to the County of Monroe; providing a legal
description of said property; executing and delivering a quitclaim
deed for the same
Ord. 467 2/3/1965 Authorizing the conveyance of certain real estate of the Borough
of Stroudsburg to Nap Realty, Inc.; providing a legal description
of said property.
Appendix F. Sewers and Sewage Disposal
§ F-101. Sewers and Sewage Disposal.
Ord./Res. Date Description
Ord. 36 5/17/1893 Providing for the laying out, establishing and constructing of a
sewer in the Borough of Stroudsburg
Ord. 59 8/6/1902 Providing for the laying out, establishment, construction and
operation of a sewer on Broad Street in the Borough of
Stroudsburg
Ord. 61 2/18/1903 Providing for the location, establishment, laying, building,
regulation and maintenance of a system of sewerage on certain
streets and parts of streets in the Borough of Stroudsburg
Ord. 62 4/7/1903 Providing for an additional system of sewerage in the Borough of
Stroudsburg
Ord. 64 7/1/1903 Authorizing the execution and delivery of a contract for the
construction of a general system of sewerage on certain streets
and parts of streets in the Borough of Stroudsburg
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 465/505
Ord./Res. Date Description
Ord. 68 10/5/1904 Amending § 13 of Ordinance 61, providing for the laying,
construction and maintenance of a system of sewerage on
certain streets and parts of streets in the Borough of
Stroudsburg. For ordinance amended, see 6-3
Ord. 173 4/2/1930 Authorizing the construction and maintenance of a storm water
sewer system on North Second Street in the Borough of
Stroudsburg
Res. 206 11/6/1935 Accepting the offer of the United States to aid, by way of grant, in
financing the construction of a sewage treatment works and the
installation of several sewer lines
Ord. 214 5/8/1936 Establishing extensions to the sanitary sewage system of the
Borough of Stroudsburg, and providing for the construction of a
sewage disposal plant
Res. 217 Accepting the offer of the United States to aid, by way of grant, in
financing the construction of sewage treatment works and
improvements and extensions to the sewer system
Ord. 249 6/12/1940 Establishing extensions to the sanitary sewage system of the
Borough of Stroudsburg
Ord. 255 3/5/1941 Establishing extensions to the sanitary sewage system of the
Borough of Stroudsburg
Ord. 258 5/7/1941 Establishing as a public sewer of the Borough of Stroudsburg, a
certain sewer line on North Seventh Street and Main Street in the
Borough
Ord. 280 1/3/1945 Providing for an extension of the Borough storm water sewer
system through an alley from Colbert Street to Lee Avenue in the
Borough
Ord. 283 6/6/1945 Establishing an extension to the storm water sewer system of the
Borough from the east side of North Second Street to Brodheads
Creek
Ord. 308 9/1/1948 Establishing extensions to the sanitary sewer system of the
Borough of Stroudsburg
Ord. 368 1/25/1954 Authorizing the conveyance of the existing sewage treatment
plant and sanitary sewage system of the Borough of Stroudsburg
and all real and personal property pertaining thereto to the
Borough of Stroudsburg Municipal Authority; executing and
delivering to said Authority a deed for the same
Ord. 369 1/25/1954 Approving the contract and lease between the Borough of
Stroudsburg and the Stroudsburg Municipal Authority, providing
for the construction by said Authority of certain improvements to
the sanitary sewer system and the leasing to and operation by
the Borough of the existing sewage treatment plant and sanitary
sewage system
Ord. 707 8/14/1991 Adopting the PA Act 209 of 1990 study entitled "Calculation of the
Tapping Fee in accordance with PA Act 209 of 1990"
Appendix G. Street Lighting
§ G-101. Street Lighting.
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 466/505
Ord./Res. Date Description
Ord. 73 7/3/1906 Authorizing the President and Secretary of the Borough of
Stroudsburg to execute a contract with the Citizens Gas and
Electric Company of Stroudsburg for the lighting of the streets of
said Borough for a term of five years
Ord. 111 11/7/1916 Authorizing Council of the Borough of Stroudsburg to execute a
contract with the Stroudsburg Electric Light and Power Company
for lighting the streets of said Borough for a term of five years
Ord. 146 9/2/1926 Providing for the furnishing of ornamental electric street lighting
service to the Borough of Stroudsburg
Ord. 147 9/2/1926 Providing for the furnishing of electric street lighting service to the
Borough of Stroudsburg
Ord. 199 11/15/1934 Providing for the furnishing of electric lighting service to the
Borough of Stroudsburg, for the lighting of the Seventh Street
Viaduct located in said Borough
Ord. 216 9/4/1936 Providing for the furnishing of electric street lighting service to the
Borough of Stroudsburg
Ord. 279 12/27/1944 Providing for the furnishing of all the electric lighting service to
the Borough of Stroudsburg, for the lighting of the Seventh Street
Viaduct in said Borough
Ord. 290 4/3/1946 Providing for the furnishing of all the electric lighting service to
the Borough of Stroudsburg
Ord. 399 5/16/1956 Providing for the furnishing of electric street lighting service to the
Borough of Stroudsburg
Ord. 411 5/7/1958 Providing for the furnishing of electric street lighting service to the
Borough of Stroudsburg
Ord. 454 3/20/1963 Providing for the furnishing of electric street lighting service to the
Borough of Stroudsburg
Ord. 489 4/3/1968 Providing for the furnishing of electric street lighting service to the
Borough of Stroudsburg.
Appendix H. Streets and Sidewalks
§ H-101. Streets and Sidewalks.
Ord./Res. Date Description
Ord. 27 7/11/1890 Relating to paving and repairing pavements on the several streets
within the Borough of Stroudsburg
Ord. 28 12/25/1890 Relating to paving and repairing pavements on the several streets
within the Borough of Stroudsburg
Ord. 29 5/2/1891 Straightening and defining the line of Sarah Street in the Borough
of Stroudsburg
Ord. 30 5/7/1891 Relating to paving and repairing pavements on the several streets
within the Borough of Stroudsburg
Ord. 31 3/2/1892 Requiring the New York, Susquehanna and Western Railroad
Company to erect and operate safety gates where its railroad
tracks cross Walnut Street (now Main Street) at grade
Ord. 33 4/11/1893 Naming Broad Street in the Borough of Stroudsburg
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 467/505
Ord./Res. Date Description
Ord. 34 4/25/1893 Relating to the paving of Sarah or Susan Street in the Borough of
Stroudsburg
Ord. 35 5/10/1893 Widening, straightening and defining the line of Broad Street in the
Borough of Stroudsburg
Ord. 41 5/1/1895 Relating to the renaming of certain Borough streets
Ord. 46 7/1/1896 Relating to the paving of Ann Street in the Borough of Stroudsburg
Ord. 48 8/11/1896 Relating to the paving of sidewalks along Scott Street and
Thomas Street in the Borough of Stroudsburg
Ord. 49 8/11/1896 Providing for the laying to grade of a sidewalk on the north side of
Main Street from Walton Street east to the Borough line in the
Borough of Stroudsburg
Ord. 51 10/3/1900 Accepting as public streets Colombia Avenue, Lincoln Avenue,
Jackson Street, Garfield Street, Washington Street, and Grant
Street in the Borough of Stroudsburg
Ord. 52 2/6/1901 Renaming certain streets in the Borough of Stroudsburg, and
outlining a system for the numbering of the buildings and lots
thereon
Ord. 57 2/5/1902 Providing for the laying to grade of sidewalks on Main Street and
Dreher Avenue in the Borough of Stroudsburg
Ord. 58 8/6/1902 Providing for the laying to grade of a sidewalk on both sides of
Sixth Street in the Borough of Stroudsburg
Ord. 60 8/13/1902 Widening, straightening and defining the line of Main Street west
of Pocono Creek in the Borough of Stroudsburg
Ord. 65 10/7/1903 Providing for the laying to grade of a sidewalk on both sides of
Broad Street in the Borough of Stroudsburg
Ord. 66 2/23/1904 Accepting as a public street Stofflet Street in the Borough of
Stroudsburg
Ord. 71 5/3/1905 Providing for the laying to grade of a sidewalk on the south side of
Main Street from Fourth Street east to the railroad crossing in the
Borough of Stroudsburg
Ord. 76 8/7/1907 Providing for the taking up and relaying to grade of sidewalks on
parts of Ann Street and South Seventh Street in the Borough of
Stroudsburg
Ord. 77 8/7/1907 Providing for the taking up and relaying to grade of sidewalks on
parts of Ann Street and South Seventh Street in the Borough of
Stroudsburg
Ord. 78 10/8/1907 Providing for the laying to grade of sidewalks on Broad Street in
the Borough of Stroudsburg
Ord. 79 10/8/1907 Widening, straightening and defining the lines of West Main Street
in the Borough of Stroudsburg
Ord. 80 8/4/1909 Providing for the laying to grade of sidewalks on both sides of
Second Street, from Main Street north to the end of said street, in
the Borough of Stroudsburg
Ord. 84 9/7/1910 Providing for the laying to grade of a sidewalk on the south side of
Dreher Avenue in the Borough of Stroudsburg
Ord. 85 11/2/1910 Providing for the laying to grade of a sidewalk on Thomas Street
in the Borough of Stroudsburg
Ord. 87 4/5/1911 Providing for the laying to grade of a sidewalk on both sides of
Scott Street in the Borough of Stroudsburg
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 468/505
Ord./Res. Date Description
Ord. 92 3/24/1913 Establishing and defining the lines of Quaker Alley in the Borough
as they now exist on the ground, and vacating as much of said
alley as previously established but not included in said alley as
actually laid out and opened
Ord. 94 6/4/1913 Providing for the laying to grade of a sidewalk on West Main
Street in the Borough of Stroudsburg
Ord. 97 5/16/1914 Widening and defining the lines of North Fifth Street from Main
Street north to the Borough line
Ord. 102 8/12/1914 Providing for the paving of Main Street from the Pocono Creek
Bridge east to the Broadheads Creek Bridge; providing for the
making or adjusting of all pipes and conduits in and under said
street, and prohibiting any person or firm from digging up any
portion of said street except in case of emergency
Ord. 108 6/7/1916 Providing for the laying to grade of sidewalks on both sides of
Sarah Street, North Fifth Street, Tenth Street, Elm Street, William
Street and Church Alley in the Borough of Stroudsburg
Ord. 109 8/8/1916 Accepting, fixing and defining the lines of an alley extending from
North Seventh Street to North Sixth Street, and accepting said
alley as a public alley pursuant to a petition of the property owners
abutting thereon
Ord. 115 5/2/1917 Providing for the laying to grade of sidewalks on Seventh Street
Eighth Street, Ninth Street, Fourth Street and Sarah Street in the
Borough of Stroudsburg
Ord. 116 3/6/1918 Accepting as a public street Park Avenue in the Borough of
Stroudsburg
Ord. 117 3/6/1918 Accepting as a public street that street extending from Ann Street
to the northern end of the South Seventh Street Bridge in the
Borough of Stroudsburg
Ord. 120 3/3/1920 Requiring all public service companies and abutting property
owners to lay all necessary pipes and make all necessary
connections before the work of reconstruction or improvement on
Ninth Street, by paving, shall be started; prohibiting the tearing up
or opening of said street for any purpose within a period of five
years after said reconstruction is completed
Ord. 121 4/7/1920 Accepting as a public street Bryant Street in the Borough of
Stroudsburg
Ord. 125 12/7/1921 Accepting as public streets parts of Wallace Street, King Street
and Brown Street in the Borough of Stroudsburg
Ord. 126 2/1/1922 Accepting as a public street Lee Avenue in the Borough of
Stroudsburg
Ord. 127 2/1/1922 Accepting as a public street Colbert Street in the Borough of
Stroudsburg
Ord. 128 9/6/1922 Accepting as a public street a proposed street extending from
Broad Street west to Park Avenue in the Borough of Stroudsburg
Ord. 131 8/6/1924 Providing for the laying to grade of a sidewalk on Stofflet Street in
the Borough of Stroudsburg
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 469/505
Ord./Res. Date Description
Ord. 133 3/4/1925 Requiring all public service companies and abutting property
owners to lay all necessary pipes and make all necessary
connections before the work of reconstruction or improvement on
West Main Street, by paving, shall be started; prohibiting the
tearing up or opening of said street for any purpose within a period
of five years after said reconstruction is completed
Ord. 134 5/6/1925 Approving the plans of the Pennsylvania Department of Highways
showing proposed construction on State Route 164, along with the
lines, grades, drainage structures and all other structures thereon,
said grade however to conform to the established grade of said
street
Ord. 137 7/1/1925 Approving and establishing the grades, structures and all other
structures on the plan of the Pennsylvania Department of
Highways showing proposed improvements on State Route 164
from the Pocono Creek Bridge to the Borough line in the Borough
of Stroudsburg; adopting said plan as the official Borough plan
Ord. 141 6/2/1926 Accepting as a public street an extension of South Eighth Street in
the Borough of Stroudsburg
Ord. 142 6/2/1926 Providing for the taking up and relaying to grade of sidewalks on
portions of the north side of Sarah Street and of the east side of
North Seventh Street in the Borough of Stroudsburg
Ord. 143 7/7/1926 Accepting as a public street East Clermont Avenue, in the
Borough of Stroudsburg; fixing the grade and width of the street,
gutters and sidewalks
Ord. 144 7/7/1926 Accepting as a public street East Bryant Street in the Borough of
Stroudsburg
Ord. 145 8/4/1926 Accepting as a public street an extension of Tenth Street in the
Borough of Stroudsburg
Ord. 149 5/9/1927 Accepting as public streets parts of Wallace Street and King Street
in the Borough of Stroudsburg
Ord. 153 11/2/1929 Requiring all public service companies and abutting property
owners to lay all necessary pipes and make all necessary
connections before the work of reconstruction or improvement on
portions of South Seventh Street and Park Avenue by paving,
shall be started; prohibiting the tearing up or opening of said street
for any purpose within a period of five years after said
reconstruction is completed
Ord. 154 2/1/1928 Accepting as a public street Lindbergh Avenue in the Borough of
Stroudsburg
Ord. 155 3/30/1928 Providing for the paving of South Seventh Street and Park Avenue
(State Route 498) from Main Street to Broad Street in the Borough
of Stroudsburg
Res. 156 4/30/1928 Petitioning for improvements to State Rte. 498 in the Borough,
and providing for the payment of costs for the additional width of
said improvement beyond that portion to be paid for by the State
Ord. 157 5/2/1928 Approving and establishing the grades, structures and all other
structures on the plan of the Pennsylvania Department of
Highways showing proposed improvements on State Route 498
(South Seventh Street and Park Avenue) in the Borough of
Stroudsburg; adopting said plan as the official Borough plan
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 470/505
Ord./Res. Date Description
Ord. 158 5/7/1928 Requesting the improvement of portions of South Seventh Street
and Park Avenue (State Rte. 498) in the Borough, and agreeing to
contribute to the cost thereof
Ord. 159 6/11/1928 Vacating a portion of West Main Street in the Borough of
Stroudsburg
Ord. 165 4/3/1929 Accepting as a public street Collins Street in the Borough of
Stroudsburg and providing for the laying of sidewalks to grade on
both sides of said street
Ord. 166B 5/7/1929 Providing for the curbing and guttering of Bryant Street in the
Borough of Stroudsburg
Ord. 168 8/7/1929 Accepting as a public street Willow Street in the Borough of
Stroudsburg and providing for the laying of sidewalks to grade on
both sides of said street
Ord. 169 8/7/1929 Accepting as a public street an extension of Ann Street and
providing for the laying of sidewalks to grade on both sides of said
street
Ord. 170 9/4/1929 Accepting as a public street Linden Street in the Borough of
Stroudsburg
Ord. 174 2/4/1931 Accepting as a public street a portion of Club Court in the Borough
of Stroudsburg
Ord. 176 3/4/1931 Accepting as a public street an extension of Brown Street in the
Borough of Stroudsburg
Ord. 187 2/3/1933 Requesting the improvement of Main Street and agreeing to
contract and pay therefor
Ord. 190 Accepting as a public street an extension of Queen Street in the
Borough and establishing the grades and widths therefor
Ord. 194 4/27/1934 Providing for the improvement of South Seventh Street, and
agreeing to contract and pay therefor
Ord. 205 10/9/1935 Establishing the lines, widths and grades of a sidewalk extending
from the east side of North Fifth Street to the west side of North
Third Street in the Borough of Stroudsburg
Res. 209 12/30/1935 Petitioning for county aid for an improvement to North Sixth Street
from Main Street to Monroe Street in the Borough of Stroudsburg
Res. 220 7/19/1937 Petitioning for county aid for improvements to portions of Ann
Street, Second Street, South Sixth Street, North Sixth Street,
North Seventh Street and Monroe Street in the Borough of
Stroudsburg
Ord. 229 5/18/1936 Establishing curb lines of Ann Street, between Main Street and
South Eighth Street in the Borough of Stroudsburg; and the grade
of the roadway between said curb lines
Ord. 231 7/25/1938 Establishing curb lines of North Fifth Street from Main Street north
to the Borough line in the Borough of Stroudsburg; and the grade
of the roadway between said curb lines
Ord. 232 7/25/1938 Establishing curb lines of South Sixth Street between Main Street
and Ann Street in the Borough of Stroudsburg; and the grade of
the roadway between said curb lines
Ord. 234 8/11/1938 Establishing curb lines of Thomas Street, between North Fifth
Street and North Ninth Street in the Borough of Stroudsburg; and
the grade of the roadway between said curb lines
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 471/505
Ord./Res. Date Description
Ord. 235 9/7/1938 Establishing curb lines of Monroe Street between North Sixth
Street and North Ninth Street in the Borough of Stroudsburg; and
the grade of the roadway between said curb lines
Ord. 239 6/7/1939 Accepting as a public street Foundry Street in the Borough of
Stroudsburg and establishing the grade, width and curb and
sidewalk lines thereof
Ord. 240 6/7/1939 Accepting as a public alley Hood Alley and establishing the grade
and fixing the curb lines thereof
Res. 245 3/25/1940 Approving and establishing the grades, structures and all other
structures on the plan of the Pennsylvania Department of
Highways showing proposed improvements on Main Street in the
Borough of Stroudsburg; adopting said plan as the official
Borough plan
Ord. 246 3/25/1940 Approving and establishing the grades, structures and all other
structures on the plan of the Pennsylvania Department of
Highways showing proposed improvements on Main Street in the
Borough of Stroudsburg; adopting said plan as the official
Borough plan for said street; approving and opening as a public
street the relocation of said street
Ord. 247 6/12/1940 Establishing curb lines of North Fourth Street and Knob Street in
the Borough of Stroudsburg; and revising the grade of the
roadway between said curb lines
Ord. 248 6/12/1940 Establishing curb lines of Sarah Street from North Ninth Street to
North Eighth Street in the Borough of Stroudsburg; and revising
the grade of the roadway between said curb lines
Res. 252 10/2/1940 Petitioning for county aid for improvements of streets and alleys in
the Borough of Stroudsburg
Ord. 253 2/5/1941 Providing for the removal of railroad tracks on and in Main Street
between the bridges over Pocono and Broadhead Creeks and the
paving of the same
Ord. 256 5/7/1941 Approving and establishing the grades, drainage structures and all
other structures on the plan of the Pennsylvania Department of
Highways showing proposed improvements on Fifth Street in the
Borough of Stroudsburg; adopting said plan as the official
Borough plan of said street; opening as a public street the
relocation of said street
Ord. 259 11/12/1941 Approving and establishing the grades, drainage structures and all
other structures on the plan of the Pennsylvania Department of
Highways showing proposed improvements on North Sixth Street
in the Borough of Stroudsburg; adopting said plan as the official
Borough plan of said street; opening as a public street the
relocation of said street
Ord. 263 9/3/1941 Accepting as a public street a proposed street to be known as
Kraemer Avenue in the Borough of Stroudsburg
Ord. 271 5/6/1942 Establishing curb lines of North Sixth Street from Main Street
north to Scott Street in the Borough of Stroudsburg; and the grade
of the roadway between said curb lines
Ord. 272 7/15/1942 Establishing the lines, widths and grades of the sidewalks on
North Ninth Street in the Borough of Stroudsburg
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 472/505
Ord./Res. Date Description
Ord. 273 12/2/1942 Accepting as a public street an extension of Kraemer Avenue
pursuant to a petition of the property owners abutting thereon;
establishing the lines, widths and grades of said street; authorizing
the grading and paving thereof
Res. 275 7/27/1943 Authorizing an agreement between the Borough of Stroudsburg
and the Pennsylvania Department of Highways regarding the
resurfacing of portions of Main Street and West Main Street in the
Borough
Ord. 276 10/6/1943 Approving and establishing the grades, drainage structures and all
other structures on the plan of the Pennsylvania Department of
Highways showing proposed improvements on Main Street in the
Borough of Stroudsburg; adopting said plan as the official
Borough plan for said street; opening as a public street the
relocation of said street
Res. 10/6/1943 Approving the plans of the Pennsylvania Department of Highways
showing proposed improvements to Main Street in the Borough of
Stroudsburg
Ord. 277 4/5/1944 Amending Ordinance 271, which established curb lines and grade
of a portion of North Sixth Street in the Borough of Stroudsburg
Ord. 282 3/7/1945 Establishing the building line on the south side of Main Street
Ord. 288 5/14/1946 Amending Ordinance 277, which established curb lines and
grades of a portion of North Sixth Street; establishing the widths,
lines and grades of North Sixth Street in the Borough of
Stroudsburg; providing for the grading, paving and curbing of the
same
Ord. 289 5/14/1946 Establishing curb lines of North Seventh Street from Monroe
Street to Scott Street in the Borough of Stroudsburg; and the
grade of the roadway between said curb lines; providing for the
grading, paving and guttering of the same
Ord. 291 6/6/1946 Accepting as a public street a proposed street to be known as
Ramsey Street in the Borough of Stroudsburg
Ord. 292 8/28/1946 Providing for the grading, paving, curbing, guttering and otherwise
improving of Scott Street, between North Fifth Street and North
Ninth Street in the Borough of Stroudsburg
Ord. 293 11/7/1946 Establishing the lines, widths and grades of the sidewalks on the
east sides of North Seventh Street and North Sixth Street between
Sarah Street and Thomas Street in the Borough of Stroudsburg;
providing for the paving of the same
Ord. 297 2/24/1947 Establishing the widths, lines and grades of the roadway, curbs
and sidewalks of Sarah Street from North Tenth Street to North
Eighth Street in the Borough of Stroudsburg; providing for the
grading, paving and curbing of the same
Ord. 302 10/1/1947 Approving and establishing the grades, structures and all other
structures on the plan of the Pennsylvania Department of
Highways showing proposed improvements on Main Street in the
Borough of Stroudsburg; adopting said plan as the official
Borough plan
Ord. 306 7/13/1948 Establishing the widths, lines and grades of the roadway, curbs
and sidewalks of South Eighth Street between Main Street and
Ann Street in the Borough of Stroudsburg; providing for the
grading, paving and curbing of the same
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 473/505
Ord./Res. Date Description
Ord. 307 7/13/1948 Establishing the widths, lines and grades of the roadway, curbs
and sidewalks of North Tenth Street between Main Street and
North Ninth Street in the Borough of Stroudsburg; providing for the
grading, paving and curbing of the same
Ord. 315 3/2/1949 Accepting as a public street Kane Street; establishing the lines,
widths and grades of the roadway, curb and gutters of said street
Ord. 318 4/6/1949 Accepting as a public alley an extension of Hood Alley pursuant to
a petition of the property owners abutting thereon; establishing the
lines, widths and grades of said alley
Ord. 321 9/7/1949 Accepting as a public street Lee Avenue; establishing the lines,
widths and grades of said street; authorizing the grading and
paving thereof
Ord. 322 10/5/1949 Accepting as a public street a portion of Oak Street; establishing
the lines, widths and grades of said street; authorizing the grading
and paving thereof
Ord. 327 5/3/1950 Amending Ordinance 315, accepting Kane Street and establishing
the lines, widths and grades of the same
Ord. 328 7/5/1950 Amending Ordinance 234, setting grade and curb lines for a
portion of Thomas Street
Ord. 329 7/5/1950 Changing the name of Willow Street to South Ninth Street;
establishing the lines, widths and grades of the roadway, curbs
and sidewalks of said street between Main Street and Ann Street;
providing for the grading, paving, curbing and guttering of said
street
Ord. 330 7/5/1950 Approving and establishing the grades, structures and all other
structures on the plan of the Pennsylvania Department of
Highways showing proposed improvements on a portion of Main
Street in the Borough of Stroudsburg; adopting said plan as the
official Borough plan of said street
Ord. 331 7/5/1950 Approving and establishing the grades, structures and all other
structures on the plan of the Pennsylvania Department of
Highways showing proposed improvements on a portion of Phillips
Street in the Borough of Stroudsburg; adopting said plan as the
official Borough plan for said street; opening as a public highway
the relocation of said street
Ord. 334 10/4/1950 Establishing the widths, lines and grades of Ann Street from South
Eighth Street to South Tenth Street in the Borough of Stroudsburg;
providing for the grading, paving and curbing of the same
Ord. 335 11/1/1950 Establishing the widths, lines and grades of South Tenth Street
from Main Street to Ann Street in the Borough of Stroudsburg;
providing for the grading, paving and curbing of the same
Ord. 336 12/6/1950 Establishing the widths, lines and grades of portions of Coolbach
Street, Kautz Street and Glenview Avenue in the Borough of
Stroudsburg; providing for the grading, paving and curbing of the
same
Ord. 339 7/9/1951 Accepting as public streets Elizabeth Street, Hamilton Street and
Wayne Street pursuant to a petition of the property owners
abutting thereon; establishing the lines, widths and grades of said
streets; authorizing the grading and paving thereof
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 474/505
Ord./Res. Date Description
Ord. 343 3/5/1952 Establishing the widths, lines and grades of Mill Alley in the
Borough of Stroudsburg; providing for the grading, paving and
curbing of the same
Ord. 344 4/2/1952 Establishing the widths, lines and grades of William Street in the
Borough of Stroudsburg; providing for the grading, paving and
curbing of the same
Ord. 345 4/2/1952 Amending Ordinance 229, which established curb lines of a
portion of Ann Street and the grade of the roadway
Ord. 348 6/5/1952 Establishing the widths, lines and grades of the curb, sidewalk and
roadway of a portion of Scott Street in the Borough of
Stroudsburg; providing for the grading, paving and curbing of the
same
Ord. 349 6/5/1952 Establishing the widths, lines and grades of roadway and curbs of
a certain street connecting North Third Street with North Second
Street in the Borough of Stroudsburg; providing for the grading,
paving and curbing of the same
Ord. 350 6/5/1952 Establishing the widths, lines and grades of a portion of North
Third Street in the Borough of Stroudsburg; providing for the
grading, paving and curbing of the same
Ord. 351 7/16/1952 Approving and establishing the grades, structures and all other
structures on the plan of the Pennsylvania Department of
Highways showing proposed improvements on a portion of State
Rte. 498-1 on Foxtown Hill in the Borough of Stroudsburg;
adopting said plan as the official Borough plan
Ord. 359 7/1/1953 Accepting as public streets Garden Street, Eric Street and
Greenway Avenue; establishing the lines, widths and grades of
said streets; authorizing the grading and paving thereof
Ord. 360 7/1/1953 Accepting as a public street Stokes Avenue; establishing the lines,
widths and grades of said street; authorizing the grading and
paving thereof
Ord. 361 7/1/1953 Accepting as a public street Huston Avenue; establishing the
lines, widths and grades of said street; authorizing the grading and
paving thereof
Ord. 362 7/1/1953 Accepting as a public street Collins Street; establishing the lines,
widths and grades of said street; authorizing the grading and
paving thereof
Ord. 366 10/7/1953 Accepting as a public street Bell Terrace; establishing the lines,
widths and grades of said street; authorizing the grading and
paving thereof
Ord. 377 7/7/1954 Accepting as a public street Grove Street; establishing the lines,
widths and grades of said street; authorizing the grading and
paving thereof
Ord. 383 4/6/1955 Accepting as a public street a portion of North Eighth Street;
establishing the lines, widths and grades of said street; authorizing
the grading and paving thereof
Ord. 384 5/4/1955 Establishing the lines, widths and grades of the curbs and
sidewalks on a portion of Phillips Avenue in the Borough of
Stroudsburg; and providing for the construction of said curbs and
sidewalks
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 475/505
Ord./Res. Date Description
Ord. 385 5/4/1955 Accepting as a public street a portion of Wallace Street;
establishing the lines, widths and grades of said street; authorizing
the grading and paving thereof
Ord. 390 7/6/1955 Establishing the lines, widths and grades of the sidewalks on both
sides of Phillips Street between North Fifth Street and Lindbergh
Avenue in the Borough of Stroudsburg
Ord. 400 11/7/1956 Accepting as a public street a portion of Lenox Street; establishing
the lines, widths and grades of said street; authorizing the grading
and paving thereof
Ord. 412 7/10/1958 Establishing the widths, lines and grades of the curb, sidewalk and
roadway of South Eighth Street south of Ann Street in the
Borough of Stroudsburg; providing for the grading, paving and
curbing of the same
Ord. 424 8/26/1959 Laying out, opening, adopting and constructing McConnell Street
in the Borough of Stroudsburg; establishing the lines, widths and
grades of the same; appropriating real property necessary for said
purpose; providing for the grading, paving and curbing of said
street
Ord. 430 6/1/1960 Accepting as a public street Garden Street in the Borough of
Stroudsburg pursuant to a petition of the property owners abutting
thereon; establishing the lines, widths and grades of said street;
authorizing the grading and paving thereof
Ord. 437 7/5/1961 Establishing the widths, lines and grades of Fetherman Street
from West Main Street to Dreher Street in the Borough of
Stroudsburg; providing for the grading, paving and curbing of the
same
Ord. 444 4/4/1962 Accepting as a public street Manor Drive pursuant to a petition of
the property owners abutting thereon; establishing the lines,
widths and grades of said street; authorizing the grading and
paving thereof
Ord. 446 4/4/1962 Establishing the widths, lines and grades of the curbs on both
sides of West Main Street from Dreher Avenue to the Little
Pocono Creek Bridge in the Borough of Stroudsburg; providing for
the grading, paving and curbing of the same
Ord. 447 5/2/1962 Approving and establishing the grades, structures and all other
structures on the plan of the Pennsylvania Department of
Highways showing proposed improvements on West Main Street
in the Borough of Stroudsburg; adopting said plan as the official
Borough for said street
Ord. 455 7/3/1963 Approving and establishing the grades, structures and all other
structures on the plan of the Pennsylvania Department of
Highways showing proposed improvements on Main Street in the
Borough of Stroudsburg; adopting said plan as the official
Borough plan
Ord. 456 7/3/1963 Accepting as a public street Kautz Street from Coolbaugh Street
to Cedar Street pursuant to a petition of the property owners
abutting thereon; establishing the lines, widths and grades of said
street; authorizing the grading and paving thereof
Ord. 457 8/7/1963 Authorizing the Borough to enter into an agreement with the
Secretary of Highways, and a contract with the highest bidder,
providing for improvements to portions of several state routes
within the Borough
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 476/505
Ord./Res. Date Description
Ord. 458 8/7/1963 Amending Ordinance 339, which accepted Elizabeth Street,
Hamilton Street and Wayne Street; established the lines, widths
and grades thereof; and provided for the grading, paving, curbing
and guttering of the same
Ord. 470 4/19/1965 Widening the west side of a portion of McConnell Street;
accepting such portion as a public street; establishing the lines
and grades and providing for the paving, grading and curbing of
the same
Ord. 471 8/4/1965 Approving and establishing the grades, structures and all other
structures on the plan of the Pennsylvania Department of
Highways showing proposed improvements on a portion of North
Ninth Street in the Borough of Stroudsburg; adopting said plan as
the official Borough plan for said street
Ord. 477 9/7/1966 Accepting as a public street Spring Garden Street pursuant to a
petition of the property owners abutting thereon; establishing the
lines, widths and grades of said street; authorizing the grading and
paving thereof
Ord. 478 10/6/1966 Accepting as a public street an extension of Wayne Street
pursuant to a petition of the property owners abutting thereon;
establishing the lines, widths and grades of said street; authorizing
the grading and paving thereof
Ord. 483 4/5/1967 Approving and establishing the grades, structures and all other
structures on the plan of the Pennsylvania Department of
Highways showing proposed improvements on Park Avenue and
Seventh Street in the Borough of Stroudsburg; adopting said plan
as the official Borough plan for said streets
Ord. 484 9/6/1967 Accepting as a public street Borough Road pursuant to a petition
of the property owners abutting thereon; establishing the lines,
widths and grades of said street; authorizing the grading and
paving thereof
Ord. 486 12/6/1967 Accepting as a public street an extension of Bell Terrace pursuant
to a petition of the property owners abutting thereon; establishing
the lines, widths and grades of said street; authorizing the grading
and paving thereof
Ord. 492 5/1/1968 Approving and establishing the grades, structures and all other
structures on the plan of the Pennsylvania Department of
Highways showing proposed improvements on Main Street in the
Borough of Stroudsburg; adopting said plan as the official
Borough plan of said street
Ord. 501 10/2/1968 Accepting as a public street Woodcliff Avenue pursuant to a
petition of the property owners abutting thereon; establishing the
lines, widths and grades of said street; authorizing the grading and
paving thereof
Ord. 502 10/2/1968 Accepting as a public street Clermont Avenue pursuant to a
petition of the property owners abutting thereon; establishing the
lines, widths and grades of said street; authorizing the grading and
paving thereof
Ord. 507 1/7/1970 Accepting as a public street Sunset Lane pursuant to a petition of
the property owners abutting thereon; establishing the lines,
widths and grades of said street; authorizing the grading and
paving thereof
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 477/505
Ord./Res. Date Description
Ord. 513 3/3/1971 Providing for the vacation of Washington Street from North First
Street to the flood control project adjoining the banks of
Broadhead Creek; providing for a perpetual right to use and
maintain an easement for storm sewer pipes in and through the
street to be vacated
Ord. 515 7/7/1971 Accepting as a public street an extension of Manor Drive pursuant
to a petition of the property owners abutting thereon; establishing
the lines, widths and grades of said street; authorizing the grading
and paving thereof
Ord. 527 12/6/1972 Accepting as a public street Robeson Street pursuant to a petition
of the property owners abutting thereon; establishing the lines,
widths and grades of said street; authorizing the grading and
paving thereof
Ord. 535 8/1/1973 Accepting as a public street an extension of Borough Street
pursuant to a petition of the property owners abutting thereon;
establishing the lines, widths and grades of said street; authorizing
the grading and paving thereof
Ord. 542 10/2/1974 Accepting as a public street Dewberry Drive pursuant to a petition
of the property owners abutting thereon; establishing the lines,
widths and grades of said street; authorizing the grading and
paving thereof
Ord. 543 10/2/1974 Accepting as a public street Kautz Street pursuant to a petition of
the property owners abutting thereon; establishing the lines,
widths and grades of said street; authorizing the grading and
paving thereof
Ord. 552 11/5/1975 Vacating Stofflet Street in the Borough of Stroudsburg
Ord. 562 5/16/1977 Amending Ordinance 92, which established and defined Quaker
Alley, to create a two-foot wide easement on the north side of the
southerly line of said alley
Ord. 581 4/8/1981 Accepting as a public street Snyder Drive pursuant to a petition of
the property owners abutting thereon; establishing the lines,
widths and grades of said street; authorizing the grading and
paving thereof
Ord. 615 12/11/1985 Accepting as a public street Bank Alley in the Borough of
Stroudsburg; establishing the lines, widths, and grades of the
roadway for said street; and providing for the grading, paving,
curbing, and gutters of the same
Ord. 645 4/13/1988 Renaming as a public street a portion of Grove Street to Somers
Lane. Beginning at point 3.69.43 to a point at Station 6.89.48
Ord. 694 7/5/1990 Vacating street titled Chestnut Street in the Borough of
Stroudsburg
Ord. 735 3/15/1995 Vacating a certain portion of an Unnamed Alley in the Borough of
Stroudsburg
Ord. 738 11/15/1995 Opening a certain street titled Highland Drive located in the
Elizabeth South Wyckoff subdivision plan recorded at Monroe
County Plat Book Number 25, Page 1
Ord. 755 10/1/1997 Opening certain streets previously laid out as Glenview Avenue,
Fulmer Court, Stone Street, Honeysuckle Lane and Rose Briar
Lane, and establishing lines and widths of said streets
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 478/505
Ord./Res. Date Description
Ord. 756 10/1/1997 Accepting Anna Court; Wade Court East and Wade Court West as
shown on the Final Subdivision Plan — Phase I and Phase II,
Drewberry Park, Section 2
Ord. 765 5/6/1998 Renaming as a public street a portion of Fulmer Court to Fulmer
Avenue as shown on the plan titled "Subdivision of Lands and
Redevelopment Authority of Monroe County, First Ward Urban
Renewal Area, Borough of Stroudsburg, Monroe County, PA"
Ord. 832 9/4/2002 Opening a certain street denominated Palmer Street and
establishing the lines, widths and grades of the roadway for said
street and providing for the grading, paving, curbing and gutters of
the same
Ord. 900 12/18/2008 Renaming as public streets Erie Street to Garden Street; Jackson
Street to North First Street; and East Bryant Street to Bryant
Street; and naming an alley running north off of Kraemer Avenue
as Sophie's Way
Ord. 947 7/6/2011 Opening and ordaining Storm Street, previously laid out as
Veterans Place, as a public street and establishing the lines and
width of said street
Ord. 948 7/21/2011 Vacating a certain portion of Kitson Street
Ord. 1005 8/18/2015 Vacating portions of Hamilton Street and Linden Street and all of
Elizabeth Street and Wayne Street and opening Elizabeth Street
Appendix I. Water
§ I-101. Water.
Ord./Res. Date Description
Ord. 378 12/1/1954 Specifying the undertaking by Stroudsburg Municipal Authority as
an additional project the acquiring, constructing, improving,
maintaining, operating, owning and leasing of water works, water
supply works, water distribution systems and property and
equipment for use in connection therewith for the Borough of
Stroudsburg and for such other territory as it may be authorized
to serve
Appendix J. Zoning Reclassifications
§ J-101. Reclassifications.
Ord. No. Date Change
546 2/5/1975 (a) From R-2 zone to C-1 zone premises adjacent to Hess
Service Station at corner of Ninth and Sarah Streets,
measuring 100 feet by 260 feet by 500 feet by 240 feet
(b) From R-2 zone to R-3 zone, triangular area formed by the
intersection of West Main Street and Dreher Avenue and
extending approximately 200 feet deep
(Councilmanicaction)
1/25/1977 From C-3 to C-1, the section of the First Ward from
McMichaels Creek to the south side of McConnell Street
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 479/505
Ord. No. Date Change
(Councilmanicaction)
6/2/1977 Part of Third Street between Fulmer Avenue and Jackson
Street north to Washington Street, changed from I-1 to R-2a
567 1/3/1979 From R-2 zone to C-1 zone, a parcel location between North
Ninth Street and Phillips Street
583 6/10/1981 From R-2 zone to R-3 zone lots on north side of Sarah Street
from North Fifth Street west to rear line of lots fronting on east
side of North Sixth Street
652 7/13/1988 From R-2 and C-1 zones to R-1 zone, all the area bounded by
a line beginning at southwest corner of the land of Ottaway
Newspapers, Inc., to point of beginning
653 7/13/1988 From R-2 zone to C-1 zone, the parcel of land owned by the
Monroe County Home Association known as lot 184/2/1/12
675 8/9/1989 From R-2 to R-3, the property bearing Tax Code 18-3-1-4-52
which is owned by Jack Muehlhan and lies between the C-2
Zone on North Ninth Street and Phillip Street
842 12/1/2004 Changing the district lines to include Monroe County Tax
Parcel Number 18730005176735, containing 0.41 acres, in
the C-1 Zoning District
870 2/7/2007 From R-2 to C-1, the property at the rear of 1189 to 1203 Main
Street
898 12/18/2008 From I-1 to C-2, the property known as Monroe County Tax
Parcel Numbers 1873000685545, 1873000685578,
1873000686601, 1873000686622, 1873000687703,
1873000685744, 1873000689822, and 1873000689822
934 11/18/2010 From the R-2 Medium Density Residential to the C-1 General
Commercial Zoning District, the property known as Tax Map
Numbers 18730005177692, 18730005178652,
18730005177861, 18730005177621, 18730005178632,
18730005177774
1006 9/1/2015 From the C-1 Zoning District to the R-1 Zoning District, the
properties at 1312, 1314 and 1318 Dreher Avenue
Key to the Disposition of All Ordinances
Chapter KO. Key to the Disposition of All Ordinances
§ KO-101. Key to the Disposition of All Ordinances.
Ord. Disposition
1 Repealed by Ord. 24
2 Repealed by Ord. 24
3 Repealed by Ord. 24
4 Superseded by Ord. 40
5 Superseded by Ord. 50
6 Superseded by Ord. 599
7 Repealed by Ord. 599
8 Repealed by Ord. 599
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 480/505
Ord. Disposition
9 Repealed by Ord. 599
10 Repealed by Ord. 599
11 Repealed by Ord. 599
12 Repealed by Ord. 599
13 Repealed by Ord. 599
14 Superseded by Ord. 599
15 Repealed by Ord. 90
16 Repealed by Ord. 599
17 Superseded by Ord. 599
18 Repealed by Ord. 599
19 Ch. 1, § 1-101
20 Repealed by Ord. 599
21 Repealed by Ord. 151
22 Repealed by Ord. 90
23 Repealed by Ord. 599
24 Repealer
25 Repealed by Ord. 90
26 Repealed by Ord. 90
27 Appendix H
28 Appendix H
29 Appendix H
30 Appendix H
31 Appendix H
32 Repealed by Ord. 54
33 Appendix H
34 Appendix H
35 Appendix H
36 Appendix F
37 Repealed by Ord. 599
38 Repealed by Ord. 151
39 Appendix A
40 Repealed by Ord. 50
41 Appendix H
42 Appendix A
43 Repealed by Ord. 599
44 Repealed by Ord. 90
45 Repealed by Ord. 387
46 Appendix H
47 Appendix D
48 Appendix H
49 Appendix H
50 Superseded by Ord. 130
51 Appendix H
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 481/505
Ord. Disposition
52 Appendix H
53 Appendix A
54 Repealer
55 Appendix A
56 Repealed by Ord. 162
57 Appendix H
58 Appendix H
59 Appendix F
60 Appendix H
61 Appendix F
62 Appendix F
63 Appendix B
64 Appendix F
65 Appendix H
66 Appendix H
67 Appendix A
68 Appendix F
69 Repealed by Ord. 162
70 Appendix A
71 Appendix H
72 Repealed by Ord. 497
73 Appendix G
74 Superseded by Ord. 599
75 Repealed by Ord. 112
76 Appendix H
77 Appendix H
78 Appendix H
79 Appendix H
80 Appendix H
81 Appendix A
82 Appendix A
83 Appendix A
84 Appendix H
85 Appendix H
86 Ch. 7, §§ 7-201 to 7-226
87 Appendix H
88 Appendix B
89 Appendix A
90 Ch., Parts 2, 3, 5 thru 8
91 Repealed by Ord. 166
92 Appendix H
93 Appendix B
94 Appendix H
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 482/505
Ord. Disposition
95 Repealed by Ord. 599
96 Repealed by Ord. 599
97 Appendix H
98 Appendix B
99 Repealed by Ord. 166
100 Repealed by Ord. 166
101 Repealed by Ord. 162
102 Appendix H
103 Res. Appendix C
104 Appendix B
105 Repealed by Ord. 599
106 Appendix A
107 Repealed by Ord. 599
108 Appendix H
109 Appendix H
110 Appendix B
111 Appendix G
112 Repealed by Ord. 510
113 Repealed by Ord. 162
114 Repealed by Ord. 599
115 Appendix H
116 Appendix H
117 Appendix H
118 Repealed by Ord. 166
119 Repealed by Ord. 139
120 Appendix H
121 Appendix H
122 Repealed by Ord. 599
123 Appendix B
124 Ch. 1, §§ 1-311 to 1-314
125 Appendix H
126 Appendix H
127 Appendix H
128 Appendix H
129 Appendix B
130 Repealed by Ord. 183
131 Appendix H
132 Repealed by Ord. 150
133 Appendix H
134 Appendix H
135 Repealed by Ord. 150
136 Appendix A
137 Appendix H
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 483/505
Ord. Disposition
138 Appendix E
139 Repealed by Ord. 599
140 Repealed by Ord. 375
141 Appendix H
142 Appendix H
143 Appendix H
144 Appendix H
145 Appendix H
146 Appendix G
147 Appendix G
148 Appendix B
149 Appendix H
5/4/27 Res. Appendix E
150 Repealed by Ord. 584
151 Repealed by Ord. 517
152 Repealed by Ord. 599
153 Appendix H
154 Appendix H
155 Appendix H
156 Appendix H
157 Res. Appendix H
158 Appendix H
159 Appendix H
160 1928 Tax/Budget
161 Appendix B
162 Repealer
163 Appendix A
164 Appendix A
165 Appendix H
166 Superseded by Ord. 599
166B Appendix H
167 1929 Tax/Budget
168 Appendix H
169 Appendix H
7/31/29 Agr. Appendix C
170 Appendix H
171 Appendix C
172 1930 Tax/Budget
173 Appendix F
174 Appendix H
175 1931 Tax/Budget
176 Appendix H
177 Appendix B
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 484/505
Ord. Disposition
178 Appendix B
179 Appendix B
180 1932 Tax/Budget
181 Repealed by Ord. 599
182 Repealed by Ord. 314
183 Repealed by Ord. 528
184 Repealed by Ord. 599
185 Repealed by Ord. 528
186 1933 Tax/Budget
187 Appendix H
188 Ch. 1, § 1-104
189 Superseded by Ord. 223
190 Appendix H
191 Repealed by Ord. 200
192 Appendix C
193 1934 Tax/Budget
194 Appendix H
195 Superseded by Ord. 599
196 Superseded by Ord. 599
197 Repealed by Ord. 213
198 Appendix B
199 Appendix G
200 Repealed by Ord. 210
201 1935 Tax/Budget
202 Appendix C
203 Appendix B
204 Ch. 21, §§ 21-241 to 21-258
205 Appendix H
206 Res. Appendix F
207 Appendix B
208 Appendix B
209 Res. Appendix H
210 Repealed by Ord. 599
211 Appendix B
212 1936 Tax/Budget
213 Repealed by Ord. 588
214 Appendix F
215 Appendix A
216 Appendix G
217 Res. Appendix F
218 1937 Tax/Budget
219 Ch. 18, §§ 18-101 to 18-113
220 Res. Appendix H
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 485/505
Ord. Disposition
221 Superseded by Ord. 599
222 Appendix B
223 Superseded by Ord. 261
224 Res. Repealed by Ord. 599
225 1938 Tax
226 Repealed by Ord. 230
227 Ch. 7, §§ 7-203, 7-204
228 1938 Tax
229 Appendix H
230 Repealer
231 Appendix H
232 Appendix H
233 Repealed by Ord. 338
234 Appendix H
235 Appendix H
236 Appendix B
237 Appendix E
238 1939 Tax
239 Appendix H
240 Appendix H
241 Appendix A
242 Repealed by Ord. 440
243 Superseded by Ord. 599
244 1940 Tax
245 Res. Appendix H
246 Appendix H
247 Appendix H
248 Appendix H
249 Appendix F
250 Superseded by Ord. 599
251 Res. Superseded by Ord. 599
252 Appendix H
253 Appendix H
254 1941 Tax
255 Appendix F
256 Appendix H
257 Missing
258 Appendix F
259 Appendix H
260 Repealed by Ord. 313
261 Superseded by Ord. 323
262 Appendix A
263 Appendix H
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 486/505
Ord. Disposition
264 Superseded by Ord. 599
265 Superseded by Ord. 599
266 Appendix A
267 Repealed by Ord. 440
268 1942 Tax
269 Appendix A
270 Appendix E
271 Appendix H
272 Appendix H
273 Appendix H
274 1943 Tax
275 Res. Appendix H
276 Appendix H
10/6/43 Res. Appendix H
277A 1944 Tax
277 Appendix H
278 Repealed by Ord. 599
279 Appendix G
280 Appendix F
281 1945 Tax
282 Appendix H
283 Appendix F
284 Repealed by Ord. 588
285 Superseded by Ord. 940
286 Appendix E
287 1946 Tax
288 Appendix H
289 Appendix H
290 Appendix G
291 Appendix H
292 Appendix H
293 Appendix H
294 Repealed by Ord. 392
295 1941 Tax
296 Superseded by Ord. 599
297 Appendix H
298 Repealed by Ord. 338
299 Repealed by Ord. 599
300 Ch. 16, §§ 16-101, 16-102
301 Superseded by Ord. 319
302 Appendix H
303 Superseded by Ord. 319
304 1948 Tax
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 487/505
Ord. Disposition
305 Appendix B
306 Appendix H
307 Appendix H
308 Appendix F
309 Appendix B
310 Appendix B
311 Appendix E
312 Repealed by Ord. 381
313 Repealer
314 Superseded by Ord. 734
315 Appendix H
316 1949 Tax
317 Superseded by Ord. 326
318 Appendix H
319 Superseded by Ord. 495
320 Repealed by Ord. 440
321 Appendix H
322 Appendix H
323 Superseded by Ord. 461
324 Repealed by Ord. 588
325 1950 Tax
326 Superseded by Ord. 363
327 Appendix H
328 Appendix H
329 Appendix H
330 Appendix H
331 Appendix H
332 Repealed by Ord. 599
333 Repealed by Ord. 588
334 Appendix H
335 Appendix H
336 Appendix H
337 1951 Tax
338 Repealer
339 Appendix H
340 Appendix E
341 1952 Tax
342 Superseded by Ord. 599
343 Appendix H
344 Appendix H
345 Appendix H
346 Repealed by Ord. 375
347 Appendix E
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 488/505
Ord. Disposition
348 Appendix H
349 Appendix H
350 Appendix H
351 Appendix H
352 Repealer
353 Appendix C
354 Appendix E
355 Superseded by Ord. 370
356 1953 Tax
357 Repealed by Ord. 440
358 Repealed by Ord. 588
359 Appendix H
360 Appendix H
361 Appendix H
362 Appendix H
363 Superseded by Ord. 371
364 Repealed by Ord. 588
365 Appendix A
366 Appendix H
367 Appendix C
368 Appendix F
369 Appendix F
370 Ch. 18, §§ 18-107, 18-110 to 18-113
371 Superseded by Ord. 380
372 Appendix E
373 1954 Tax
374 Appendix E
375 Repealed by Ord. 599
376 Appendix B
377 Appendix H
378 Appendix I
379 1955 Tax
380 Superseded by Ord. 395
381 Superseded by Ord. 745
382 Vetoed
383 Appendix H
384 Appendix H
385 Appendix H
386 Repealed by Ord. 550
387 Ch. 2, §§ 2-101 to 2-103
388 Repealed by Ord. 545
389 Appendix A
390 Appendix H
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 489/505
Ord. Disposition
391 Appendix C
392 Repealed by Ord. 440
393 Repealed by Ord. 440
394 1956 Tax
395 Superseded by Ord. 405
396 Appendix C
4/4/56 Res. Appendix C
397 Appendix E
398 Appendix C
399 Appendix G
400 Appendix H
401 Repealed by Ord. 440
402 Appendix B
403 Repealed by Ord. 563
404 1957 Tax
405 Superseded by Ord. 409
406 Superseded by Ord. 408
407 Repealed by Ord. 440
408 Superseded by Ord. 441
409 Superseded by Ord. 422
410 1958 Tax
411 Appendix G
412 Appendix H
413 Appendix C
414 Appendix B
415 Appendix B
416 Appendix E
417 Appendix E
418 Appendix C
419 Superseded by Ord. 745
420 Repealed by Ord. 599
421 Appendix B
422 Superseded by Ord. 428
423 1959 Tax
424 Appendix H
425 Superseded by Ord. 599
426 Appendix A
427 1960 Tax
428 Superseded by Ord. 434
429 Appendix E
430 Appendix H
431 Superseded by Ord. 745
432 Repealed by Ord. 438
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 490/505
Ord. Disposition
433 Appendix C
434 Superseded by Ord. 442
435 1961 Tax
436 Repealed by Ord. 588
437 Appendix H
438 Repealed by Ord. 584
439 Appendix E
440 Superseded by Ord. 599
441 Repealed by Ord. 564
442 Superseded by Ord. 453
443 1962 Tax
444 Appendix H
445 Repealed by Ord. 570
446 Appendix H
447 Appendix H
448 Ch. 6, §§ 6-901 to 6-903
449 Ch. 3, §§ 3-101 to 3-115
450 Superseded by Ord. 577
451 Repealed by Ord. 570
452 1963 Tax
453 Superseded by Ord. 462
454 Appendix G
455 Appendix H
456 Appendix H
457 Appendix H
458 Appendix H
459 Appendix C
460 Repealed by Ord. 584
461 Superseded by Ord. 488
462 Superseded by Ord. 469
463 1964 Tax
464 Appendix E
465 Repealed by Ord. 599
466 Repealed by Ord. 518
467 Appendix E
468 1965 Tax
469 Superseded by Ord. 474
470 Appendix H
471 Appendix H
472 Appendix C
473 1966 Tax
474 Superseded by Ord. 481
475 Repealed by Ord. 545
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 491/505
Ord. Disposition
476 Superseded by Ord. 598
477 Appendix H
478 Appendix H
479 Superseded by Ord. 599
480 1967 Tax
481 Ch. 24, §§ 24-101 to 24-112
482 Repealed by Ord. 597
483 Appendix H
484 Appendix H
485 Repealed by Ord. 584
486 Appendix H
487 1968 Tax
488 Superseded by Ord. 531
489 Appendix G
490 Repealed by Ord. 876
491 Ch. 24, § 24-101
492 Appendix H
493 Ch. 24, §§ 24-401 to 24-413
494 Superseded by Ord. 597
495 Superseded by Ord. 532
496 Repealed by Ord. 524
497 Repealed by Ord. 523
498 Repealed by Ord. 520
499 Repealed by Ord. 521
500 Appendix C
501 Appendix H
502 Appendix H
503 1969 Tax
504 Superseded by Ord. 597
505 1970 Tax
506 Repealed by Ord. 588
507 Appendix H
508 Repealed by Ord. 584
509 Superseded by Ord. 597
510 Ch. 21, §§ 21-201 to 21-203
511 Superseded by Ord. 745
512 1971 Tax
513 Appendix H
514 Superseded by Ord. 597
515 Appendix H
516 Superseded by Ord. 745
517 Superseded by Ord. 744
518 Superseded by Ord. 599
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 492/505
Ord. Disposition
519 Ch. 5, §§ 5-101 to 5-106
520 Repealed by Ord. 584
521 Repealed by Ord. 584
522 Repealed by Ord. 584
523 Repealed by Ord. 584
524 Repealed by Ord. 584
525 1972 Tax
526 Repealed by Ord. 584
527 Appendix H
528 Superseded by Ord. 603
529 Ch. 21, §§ 21-121, 21-122
§§ 2 — 5 Superseded by Ord. 964
530 Repealed by Ord. 597
531 Superseded by Ord. 536A
532 Superseded by Ord. 572
533 Ch. 5, §§ 5-102(3)
534 1973 Tax
535 Appendix H
536 Superseded by Ord. 599
536A Superseded by Ord. 571
537 1974 Tax
538 Superseded by Ord. 599
539 Superseded by Ord. 745
540 Superseded by Ord. 745
541 Repealed by Ord. 545
542 Appendix H
543 Appendix H
544 1975 Tax
545 Repealer 664
546 Repealed by Ord. 597
547 Appendix C
548 Ch. 5, §§ 5-103, 5-104 (1-C)
549 Repealed by Ord. 599
550 Repealed by Ord. 580
551 Appendix C
552 Appendix H
553 1976 Tax
554 Superseded by Ord. 599
555 Superseded by Ord. 599
556 Ch. 10, §§ 10-201 to 10-204
557 Superseded by Ord. 847
558 1977 Tax
559 Superseded by Ord. 598
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 493/505
Ord. Disposition
560 Superseded by Ord. 966
561 Repealed by Ord. 597
562 Appendix H
563 Ch. 1, §§ 1-201 to 1-208
564 Repealer
565 Superseded by Ord. 599
566 Ch. 18, § 18-111
567 Repealed by Ord. 597
568 1979 Tax
569 1980 Tax
570 Ch. 1, § 1-301
571 Ch. 1, § 1-103
572 Ch. 1, § 1-102
573 Ch. 5, § 5-103(3)
574 Superseded by Ord. 599
575 Repealed by Ord. 599
576 Ch. 13, §§ 13-101 to 13-105
577 Ch. 18, § 18-105
578 Missing
579 1981 Tax
580 Superseded by Ord. 813
581 Appendix H
582 Appendix C
583 Repealed by Ord. 597
584 Ch. 5, §§ 5-201 to 5-205
585 Repealed by Ord. 876
586 Ch. 5, § 5-201 (1.G)
587 1982 Tax
588 Repealed by Ord. 596
589 Ch. 1, §§ 1-321 to 1-329
590 Appendix B
591 Superseded by Ord. 597
592 Ch. 10, §§ 10-101 to 10-106
593 Ch. 6, §§ 6-401 to 6-406
594 1983 Tax/Budget 24, 501, 502
595 Ch. 11, §§ 11-101 to 11-105
596 Ch. 20, §§ 20-101 — 20-112
§§ 4, 5 Superseded by 962
597 Ch. 27, Parts 1 to 14
598 Repealed by Ord. 714
599 Adopting Ordinance
600 1984 taxes
601 Ch. 1, § 1-105
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 494/505
Ord. Disposition
602 Appendix C
603 Ch. 13, §§ 13-201 to 13-205
604 Superseded by 1003
605 1985 taxes
606 Superseded by 1003
607 Appendix B
608 Ch. 27, § 27-612(3, 4)
609 Superseded by 1003
610 Ch. 27, §§ 27-1101 to 27-1113
611 Ch. 18, § 18-111
612 Superseded by 966
613 Appendix B
614 Ch. 27, § 27-303
615 Appendix H
616 Superseded by Ord. 745
617 Ch. 1, § 1-509
618 1986 taxes
619 Ch. 18, § 18-105
620 Superseded by 1003
621 Superseded by 1003
622 Ch. 27, §§ 27-801 to 27-810
623 Superseded by 1003
624 Superseded by 1003
625 Superseded by 1003
626 Superseded by 1003
627 Superseded by 1003
628 Appendix C
629 Superseded by 1003
630 Superseded by 1003
631 Superseded by 1003
632 Superseded by 1003
633 1987 taxes
634 Superseded by 1003
635 Repealed by Ord. 714
636 Superseded by 1003
637 Superseded by 1003
638 Superseded by 1003
639 Superseded by 1003
640 Superseded by 1003
641 Superseded by 1003
642 1988 taxes
643 Ch. 5, §§ 5-201 — 5-203
644 Superseded by 1003
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 495/505
Ord. Disposition
645 Appendix H
646 Ch. 27, §§ 27-109, 27-202, 27-402, 27-605, 27-612, 27-701 — 27-704, 27-
803, 27-806, 27-807, 27-907, 27-908, 27-1004
647 Ch. 1, § 1-322
648 Ch. 3, §§ 3-201 — 3-204
649 Ch. 18, §§ 18-201 — 18-207
650 Superseded by 1003
651 Superseded by 1003
652 Appendix J
653 Appendix J
654 Superseded by 1003
655 Superseded by 1003
656 Superseded by 1003
657 Superseded by 1003
658 Appendix B
659 Ch. 27, § 27-1402
660 1989 Taxes
661 Superseded by 1003
662 Superseded by 1003
663 Superseded by 1003
664 Superseded by Ord. 737
665 Ch. 27, §§ 27-401(1)(B) — 27-403(1)(B), 27-1004(2)
666 Superseded by 1003
667 Appendix B
668 Superseded by 1003
669 Superseded by Ord. 906
670 Ch. 10, §§ 10-102, 10-105
671 Ch. 10, § 10-303
672 Superseded by 1003
673 Superseded by 1003
674 Appendix B
675 Appendix J
676 Repealed by Ord. 714
677 Ch. 27, §§ 27-202, 27-402(1)(B), 27-502, 27-1004(2)
678 Superseded by Ord. 745
679 Superseded by 1003
680 Superseded by 1003
681 Superseded by Ord. 813
682 Superseded by 1003
683 Ch. 18, §§ 18-101 — 18-112, 18-301 — 18-308
684 Superseded by 1003
685 Ch. 27, §§ 27-1406(1), 27-1406(3)
686 Appendix C
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 496/505
Ord. Disposition
687 Appendix C
688 Tax 1990
689 Superseded by 1003
690 Ch. 1, § 1-101
691 Superseded by 1003
692 Superseded by 1003
693 Superseded by 1003
694 Appendix H
695 Superseded by 1003
696 Ch. 24, § 24-414
697 Ch. 27, §§ 27-401, 27-403, 27-501, 27-803, 27-807, 27-809, 27-906, 27-908
698 Superseded by 1003
699 Ch. 20, §§ 20-201 — 20-207
700 Superseded by 1003
701 Tax 1991
702 Ch. 27, §§ 27-202, 27-401, 27-402, 27-403, 27-1004
703 Ch. 21, § 21-201
704 Superseded by 1003
705 Ch. 18, § 18-206
706 Ch. 13, §§ 13-401 — 13-407
707 Appendix F
708 Ch. 18, § 18-307
709 Superseded by 1003
710 Ch. 20, § 20-202
711 Ch. 5, §§ 5-201, 5-203
712 Ch. 20, §§ 20-101, 20-102, 20-104, 20-105, 20-106, 20-109, 20-112
§ 3 Superseded by 962
713 Superseded by 1003
714 Ch. 22, §§ 22-101 — 22-705, Appendix A
715 Tax 1992
716 Ch. 22, § 22-502
717 Superseded by Ord. 906
718 Ch. 1, § 1-203
719 Superseded by 1003
720 Ch. 13, §§ 13-501 — 13-507
721 Tax 1993
722 Ch. 27, §§ 27-202, 27-701, 27-1004
723 Ch. 1, § 1-101
724 Ch. 13, §§ 13-601 — 13-605
725 Superseded by 778
726 Tax 1994
727 Superseded by Ord. 745
728 Superseded by 1003
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 497/505
Ord. Disposition
729 Superseded by 1003
730 Superseded by 1003
731 Appendix B
732 Not adopted
733 Tax Rate 1995
734 Superseded by 787
735 Appendix H
736 Superseded by 856
737 Repealed by 776
738 Appendix H
739 Superseded by 1003
740 Superseded by 1003
741 Ch. 1, §§ 1-601 — 1-605
742 1996 Tax
743 Ch. 21, § 21-258
744 Superseded by 782
745 Superseded by 791
746 1997 Tax
747 Superseded by 1003
748 Ch. 1, §§ 1-102, 1-103
749 Superseded by 791
750 Ch. 5, §§ 5-201, 5-203
751 Superseded by 966
752 Superseded by 1003
753 Ch. 2, § 2-101
754 Ch. 2, §§ 2-301 — 2-304
755 Appendix H
756 Appendix H
757 Ch. 27, §§ 27-202, 27-404, 27-701, 27-1004
758 Appendix B
759 Superseded by 1003
760 Superseded by 1003
761
762 Superseded by Ord. 861
763 Ch. 10, §§ 10-501 — 10-507
764 Superseded by 1003
765 Appendix H
766 Appendix B
767 Superseded by 1003
768 Superseded by 1003
769 Ch. 10, § 10-506
770 Ch. 27, §§ 27-801 — 27-810
771 Superseded by 1003
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 498/505
Ord. Disposition
772 Tax Rate 1999
773 Ch. 27, §§ 27-702, 27-703
774 Ch. 18, § 18-204
775 Ch. 1, §§ 1-351 — 1-353
776 Repealed by 785
777 Superseded by 1003
778 Ch. 10, §§ 10-401 — 10-405
779 Ch. 27, § 27-703
780 Superseded by Ord. 813
781 Superseded by 1003
782 Ch. 21, §§ 21-101 — 21-109
783 Tax Rate 2000
784 Ch. 2, § 2-102; Ch. 3, §§ 3-102, 3-103, 3-105, 3-108, 3-109; Ch. 6, § 6-404,
6-405; Ch. 20, § 20-207
Ch. 15, superseded by 1003
785 Superseded by Ord. 798
786 Superseded by 1003
787 Ch. 21, §§ 21-222, 21-223
788 Superseded by 1003
789 Superseded by Ord. 813
790 Superseded by 1003
791 Ch. 1, §§ 1-401 — 1-414
792 Tax Rate 2001
793 Superseded by 1003
794 Superseded by 1003
795 Ch. 13, §§ 13-501 — 13-503, 13-506
796 Superseded by 1003
797 Superseded by 1003
798 Appendix C
799 Appendix C
800 Appendix B
801 Ch. 27, §§ 27-804, 27-807
802 Superseded by Ord. 808
803 Superseded by 1003
804 Superseded by 1003
805 Superseded by 1003
806 Superseded by 1003
807 Superseded by 1003
808 Superseded by Ord. 814
809 Ch. 1, §§ 1-404, 1-407
810 Appendix C
811 Superseded by 1003
812 Tax Rate, 2002
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 499/505
Ord. Disposition
813 Ch. 7, §§ 7-101 — 7-107
814 Superseded by 1003
815 Superseded by 1003
816 Superseded by 1003
817 Ch. 1, §§ 1-501 — 1-514
818 Superseded by 1003
819 Superseded by 1003
820 Ch. 3, §§ 3-201 — 3-204
821 Superseded by 1003
822 Superseded by 1037
823 Appendix H
824 Ch. 22, § 22-613
825 Superseded by 1003
826 Ch. 1, §§ 1-371 — 1-376
827 Superseded by 1003
828 Tax Rate 2003
829 Ch. 27, §§ 27-605, 27-703
830 Ch. 13, §§ 13-603, 13-604
831 Ch. 18, § 18-202
832 Appendix C
833 Superseded by 1003
834 Superseded by 1003
835 Ch. 1, § 1-311
836 Superseded by 1003
837 Tax Rate 2004
838 Appendix C
839 Ch. 7, §§ 7-201, 7-203 — 7-205
840 Superseded by 1009
841 Superseded by Ord. 889
842 Appendix J
843 Ch. 27, § 27-810
844 Appendix C
845 Tax rate 2005
846 Appendix B
847 Repealed by Ord. 882
848 Ch. 27, §§ 27-202, 27-404
849 Superseded by 1003
850 Superseded by 1003
851 Appendix C
852 Superseded by 1003
853 Superseded by 1003
854 Superseded by 1003
855 Tax rate 2006
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 500/505
Ord. Disposition
856 Ch. 26, §§ 26-301 — 26-342
857 Repealed by Ord. 882
858 Tax rate 2006
859 Ch. 27, § 27-1302
860 Ch. 27, §§ 27-202, 27-402, 27-404, 27-501, 27-1004
861 Ch. 25, §§ 25-101 — 25-122
862 Ch. 4, §§ 4-201 — 4-220
863 Ch. 21, §§ 21-261 — 21-264
864 Superseded by 966
865 Ch. 4, § 4-208
866 Appendix B
867 Superseded by 1003
868 Ch. 18, § 18-202
869 Tax rate 2007
870 Appendix J
871 Appendix C
872 Appendix C
873 Appendix C
874 Superseded by 1003
875 Superseded by 1003
876 Ch. 24, Part 2
877 Ch. 3, § 3-204
878 Ch. 3, § 3-115
879 Appendix C
880 Appendix B
881 Ch. 18, § 18-202
882 Ch. 24, Part 3
883 Tax Rate 2008
884 Superseded by 1003
885 Appendix B
886 Superseded by 1003
887 Ch. 10, Part 2
888 Superseded by 1003
889 Ch. 19, Part 1
890 Superseded by 1003
891 Ch. 1, Part 4
892 Appendix C
893 Superseded by 1003
894 Ch. 1, § 1-516
895 Appendix C
896 Ch. 18, § 18-202
897 Tax Rate 2009
898 Appendix J
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 501/505
Ord. Disposition
899 Superseded by 1003
900 Appendix H
901 Ch. 4, Part 2
902 Superseded by 976
903 Superseded by 1003
904 Superseded by 1003
905 Ch. 20, §§ 20-102, 20-108
906 Ch. 26, §§ 26-101 — 26-186
907 Ch. 27, § 27-404
908 Appendix C
909 Ch. 21, §§ 21-201 — 21-203
910 Ch. 27, §§ 27-202, 27-404, 27-611, 27-1206, 27-1207
911 Tax Rate 2010
912 Superseded by 1003
913 Appendix B
914 Superseded by 1003
915 Superseded by 1003
916 Superseded by 1003
917 Ch. 1, § 1-402
918 Superseded by 1003
919 Appendix C
920 Ch. 21, § 21-221
921 Superseded by 1003
922 Superseded by 1003
923 Superseded by 1003
924 Superseded by 1003
925 Ch. 13, §§ 13-301, 13-302, 13-304, 13-305, 13-306
926 Ch. 19, §§ 19-101 — 19-104
927 Superseded by 1003
928 Superseded by 1003
929 Superseded by 1003
930 Appendix C
931 Superseded by 1003
932 Appendix B
933 Appendix B
934 Appendix J
935 Superseded by 1003
936 Tax Rate 2011
937 Ch. 18, § 18-202
938 Ch. 1, § 1-509
939 Appendix C
940 Ch. 4, §§ 4-101, 4-102
941 Ch. 21, § 21-221
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 502/505
Ord. Disposition
942 Superseded by 1003
943 Superseded by 1003
944 Superseded by 1003
945 Superseded by 1003
946 Superseded by 1003
947 Appendix H
948 Appendix H
949 Superseded by 1003
950 Ch. 27, § 27-611
951 Tax Rate 2012
952 Ch. 18, § 18-202
953 Superseded by 1003
954 Superseded by 1003
955 Ch. 13, §§ 13-203, 13-204, 13-205
956 Superseded by 1003
957 Appendix C
958 Ch. 18, § 18-202
959 Tax Rate 2013
960 Superseded by 1003
961 Ch. 1, §§ 1-503, 1-504, 1-506, 1-516
962 Ch. 20, §§ 20-103 — 20-112, 20-201, 20-202, 20-207
963 Superseded by 1003
964 Ch. 21, §§ 21-121, 21-122
965 Ch. 21, §§ 21-221, 21-222
966 Ch. 8, §§ 8-101 — 8-902
967 Superseded by 1003
968 Ch. 27, §§ 27-302, 27-308, 27-404, 27-405, 27-805, 27-807, 27-808, 27-1207
969 Ch. 27, §§ 27-302, 27-308, 27-404, 27-405, 27-1207
970 Superseded by 1003
971 Superseded by 1003
972 Ch. 21, § 21-221
973 Ch. 10, § 10-101
974 Appendix B
975 Superseded by 1003
976 Ch. 1, § 1-411
977 Appendix B
978 Appendix A
979 Superseded by 1003
980 Tax Rate 2014
981 Ch. 18, § 18-202
982 Ch. 1, §§ 1-701 — 1-707
983 Superseded by 1003
984 Superseded by 1003
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 503/505
Ord. Disposition
985 Superseded by 1003
986 Superseded by 1003
987 Superseded by 1003
988 Ch. 13, §§ 13-501, 13-502
989 Superseded by 1003
990 Ch. 4, §§ 4-208, 4-212 — 4-218, 4-222
991 Ch. 27, §§ 27-202, 27-308, 27-405, 27-501
992 Superseded by 1003
993 Ch. 4, § 4-210
994 Appendix A
995 Tax Rate 2015
996 Ch. 18, § 18-202
997 Ch. 27, § 27-501
998 Number Not Used
999 Appendix B
1000 Appendix B
1001 Superseded by 1003
1002 Ch. 21, §§ 21-101, 21-102, 21-103, 21-104, 21-106
1003 Superseded by 1010
1004 Ch. 5, §§ 5-201, 5-203, 5-205
1005 Appendix H
1006 Appendix J
1007 Not Approved
1008 Superseded by 1010
1009 Ch. 5, Part 5
1010 Ch. 15
1011 Ch. 18, § 18-202
1012 Tax Rate 2016
1013 Ch. 22, § 22-202
1014 Ch. 27, § 27-501
1015 Ch. 15, §§ 15-306, 15-307
1016 Appendix B
1017 Ch. 15, §§ 15-304, 15-316
1018 Ch. 15, §§ 15-101, 15-308, 15-316, 15-317, 15-318, 15-501.8
1019 Ch. 27, § 27-202, Table of Nonresidential Zoning District Use Regulations
1020 Ch. 15, §§ 15-312, 15-316, 15-714, 15-808
1021 Ch. 21, § 21-201
1022 Tax Rate 2017
1023 Ch. 15, § 15-412
1024 Ch. 27, § 27-701
1025 Ch. 15, §§ 15-309, 15-401, 15-501.8
1026 Ch. 15, § 15-316
1027 Ch. 1, Part 3G
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 504/505
Ord. Disposition
1028 Ch. 4, § 4-213
1029 Ch. 15, § 15-316
1030 Ch. 21, § 21-221
1031 Ch. 20, § 20-109
1032 Ch. 10, §§ 10-203, 10-304
1033 Ch. 21, § 21-203
1034 Ch. 6, § 6-502
1035 Ch. 21, Part 2A
1036 Ch. 20, § 20-109
1037 Ch. 5, Part 4
1038 Appendix C
1039 Ch. 15, §§ 15-308, 15-401
1040 Ch. 15, § 15-308
1041 Ch. 13, §§ 13-101, 13-102, 13-103
1042 Ch. 4, §§ 4-208, 4-213, 4-214
1043 Ch. 21, § 21-109
1044 Ch. 15, Pt. 3
1045 Ch. 15, Pt. 3
1046 Tax Rate 2018
1047 Ch. 18, Pt. 2
1048 Ch. 27, Pt. 8
1049 Ch. 1, Pt. 3
1050 Ch. 15, Pt. 2
1051 Ch. 15, Pt. 2
1052 Ch. 15, Pt. 3
1053 Ch. 18, Pt. 4
1054 Ch. 15, Pt. 3
1055 Ch. 27, Pts. 2, 7, 10, Att. 1
1056 Ch. 15, Pt. 2
1057 Ch. 15, Pt. 7
1058 Ch. 15, Pts. 3, 4, 6, 7, 8
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
1059 10/16/2018 Motor Vehicles and Traffic Ch. 15 3
1060 12/4/2018 Taxation, Special: Earned
Income Tax
Ch. 24, Pt. 4 3
1061 12/18/2018 Tax Rate 2019 NCM 3
1062 12/18/2018 Sewers and Sewage
Disposal: Sewer Rentals
Ch. 18, Pt. 2 3
1063 1/2/2019 Code Enforcement:
Uniform Construction
Code; Properties and
Storefronts, Vacant and
Abandoned
Ch. 5, Pt. 5 3
8/17/2020 Borough of Stroudsburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/ST0247?guid=ST0247&children=true 505/505
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
1064 1/2/2019 Motor Vehicles and Traffic Ch. 15 3
1065 2/5/2019 Motor Vehicles and Traffic Ch. 15 3
1066 6/4/2019 Motor Vehicles and Traffic Ch. 15 3
1067 3/5/2019 Motor Vehicles and Traffic Ch. 15 3
1068 3/5/2019 Motor Vehicles and Traffic Ch. 15 3
1069 3/5/2019 Motor Vehicles and Traffic Ch. 15 3
1070 3/5/2019 Motor Vehicles and Traffic Ch. 15 3
1071 3/5/2019 Motor Vehicles and Traffic Ch. 15 3
1072 3/5/2019 Motor Vehicles and Traffic Ch. 15 3
1073 4/2/2019 Motor Vehicles and Traffic Ch. 15 3
1074 3/19/2019 Motor Vehicles and Traffic Ch. 15 3
1075 4/16/2019 Zoning Ch. 27 3
1076 5/6/2019 Governmental and
Intergovernmental Affairs
Appendix C 3
1077 4/16/2019 Motor Vehicles and Traffic Ch. 15 3
1078 5/7/2019 Buildings: Historic
Preservation District
Ch. 4, Pt. 2 3
1079 6/18/2019 Administration and
Government:
Nonuniformed Borough
Employee Pension Plan
Ch. 1, Pt. 5 3
1080 7/16/2019 Motor Vehicles and Traffic Ch. 15 3
1081 8/6/2019 Motor Vehicles and Traffic Ch. 15 3
1082 10/15/2019 Motor Vehicles and Traffic Ch. 15 3
1083 11/19/2019 Motor Vehicles and Traffic Ch. 15 3
1084 11/19/2019 Motor Vehicles and Traffic Ch. 15 3

ZONING
27 Attachment 2
Borough of Stroudsburg
TABLE I
TABLE OF REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE SIZE OF LOTS, YARDS, AND BUILDINGS FOR PERMITTED USES
Types of Regulations
ZONING DISTRICT
R-1 R-2 R-3 C-11 C-1A C-2 MU-A MU-B I-1 O-1
1 fam. 2 fam. 1 fam. 2 fam.
Minimum Lot Size
Minimum Area (square feet) 8,500 6,500 12,000 6,000 6,000 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000 10,000 20,00
0
Minimum Width (feet) 75 60 80 40 40 40 40 40 403 403 80 90
Minimum Depth (feet) 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 170
Minimum Yards (feet)
Front 25 20 20 20 20 10 10 10 10 10 20 30
Rear 25 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 30
Encl. Side Yard 15 10 10 8 8 10 10 — 10 10 15 25
Usable Open Space per Dwelling
Unit (sq.)
1,000 1,000 1,000 800 800 — — — 1004 1004 — 500
Minimum Building Height 36 36
Minimum # of Stories 2 2
Maximum Building Height for the
Principal Building Height
35 35 35 35 35 40 40 465 656 655 50 35
Maximum Building Coverage (%) 30 40 30 40 45 60 80 80 75 75 50 25
NOTES:
1 Shopping Centers in C-1, C-1A and MU require a minimum lot area of two acres, a minimum lot width of 300 feet, a maximum building height of 40 feet,
and maximum lot coverage of 30%.
2 Allowed dwelling units shall include a minimum of 1,800 square feet of lot area per dwelling unit, except if a building includes four or more stories, such a
lot area shall be reduced to 1,000 square feet.
3 Minimum lot width for townhouses is 18 feet, and 20 feet for single and two family dwellings.
4 For the first 10 dwelling units after which no additional open space is required.
5 See the C-O Overlay District provisions in subsection .3, which may allow a taller height.
6 Buildings over 35 feet in height, with a maximum height of 65 feet require special exception approval.
27 Attachment 2:1 5/17/2016
STROUDSBURG CODE
27 Attachment 2:2 5/17/2016