2012 International Property Maintenance Code/Ordinance 279 1
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Chapter 1 Scope and Administration………………………………………………..2 Chapter 6 Mechanical and Electrical Requirements…………….36
Part 1 Scope and Administration………………………………………………….2 Section 601 General……………………………………………………….36
Section 101 General…………………………………………………………………….2 Section 602 Heating Facilities…………………………………………36
Section 102 Applicability………………………………………………………………2 Section 603 Mechanical Equipment………………………………..37
Section 604 Electrical Facilities……………………………………….37
Part 2 Administration and Enforcement……………………………………….3 Section 605 Electrical Equipment……………………………………39
Section 103 Department of Property Maintenance Inspection…….3 Section 606 Elevators, Escalators and Dumbwaiters…….…39
Section 104 Duties and Powers of the Code Official……………………..4 Section 607 Duct Systems…………………………………………….…39
Section 105 Approval……………………………………………………………………5
Section 106 Violations………………………………………………………………….6 Chapter 7 Fire Safety Requirements……………………………………40
Section 107 Notices and Orders……………………………………………………6 Section 701 General……………………………………………………….40
Section 108 Unsafe Structures and Equipment…………………………….7 Section 702 Means of Egress………………………………………….40
Section 109 Emergency Measures………………………………………………10 Section 703 Fire-resistance Ratings………………………………..40
Section 110 Demolition………………………………………………………………11 Section 704 Fire Protection Systems………………………………41
Section 111 Means of Appeal…………………………………………………….12
Section 112 Stop Work Order…………………………………………………….13 Chapter 8 Referenced Standards…………………………………………43
Chapter 2 Definitions……………………………………………………………………..14 Appendix A Boarding Standard…….……………………………………..44
Section 201 General…………………………………………………………………..14 A101 General………………………………………………………………….44
Section 202 General Definitions…………………………………………………14 A102 Materials……………………………………………………………….44
A103 Installation…………………………………………………………….44
Chapter 3 General Requirements……………………………………………………18 A104 Referenced Standards……………………………………………44
Section 301 General…………………………………………………………………..18
Section 302 Exterior Property Areas…………………….…………………….18 Index…………………………………………………………………………………..46
Section 303 Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs……………………….20
Section 304 Exterior Structure……………………………………………………20
Section 305 Interior Structure………………………………….…………………23
Section 306 Component Serviceability……………………………………….25
Section 307 Handrails and Guardrails…………………………………………27
Section 308 Rubbish and Garbage………………………………………………27
Section 309 Pest Elimination………………………………………………………27
Chapter 4 Light, Ventilation and Occupancy Limitations…………………29
Section 401 General…………………………………………………………………..29
Section 402 Light……………………………………………………………….……….29
Section 403 Ventilation………………………………………………………………30
Section 404 Occupancy Limitations………….…………………………………30
Chapter 5 Plumbing Facilities and Fixture Requirements………………..33
Section 501 General…………………………………………………………………..33
Section 502 Required Facilities…………………………………………………..33
Section 503 Toilet Rooms…………………………………………………………..33
Section 504 Plumbing Systems and Fixtures……………………………….34
Section 505 Water System………………………………………………………….34
Section 506 Sanitary Drainage System……………………………………….35
Section 507 Storm Drainage……………………………………………………….35
2012 International Property Maintenance Code/Ordinance 279 2
CHAPTER 1
SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION
PART 1 – SCOPE AND APPLICATION
SECTION 101: GENERAL
101.1 Title: These regulations shall be known as the ‘Borough of Sugarcreek Property Maintenance
Code’, hereinafter referred to as ‘This code’.
101.2 Scope: The provisions of this code shall apply to all existing residential and nonresidential
structures and all existing premises, and constitute minimum requirements and standards for
premises, structures, equipment and facilities for light, ventilation, space, heating, sanitation,
protection from the elements, lift safety, safety from fire and other hazards, and for safe and sanitary
maintenance; the responsibilities of owners, operators and occupants, the occupancy of existing
structures and premises, and for administration, enforcement and penalties.
101.3 Intent: This code shall be construed to secure its expressed intent, which is to ensure public
health, safety and welfare insofar as they are affected by the continued occupancy and maintenance of
structures and premises. Existing structures and premises that do not comply with these provisions
shall be altered or repaired to provide a minimum level of health and safety as required herein.
101.4 Severability: If a section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is, for any reason,
held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this
code.
SECTION 102: APPLICABILITY
102.1 General: Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement,
the specific requirement shall govern. Where differences occur between provisions of this code and
the referenced standards, the provisions of this code shall apply. Where, in a specific case, different
sections of this code specify different requirements, the most restrictive shall govern.
102.2 Maintenance: Equipment, systems, devices and safeguards required by this code or a previous
regulation or code under which the structure or premises was constructed, altered or repaired shall be
maintained in good working order. No owner, operator or occupant shall cause any service, facility,
equipment or utility which is required under this section to be removed from or shut off from or
discontinued for any occupied dwelling, except for such temporary interruption as necessary while
repairs or alterations are in progress. The requirements of this code are not intended to provide the
basis for removal or abrogation of fire protection and safety systems and devices in existing structures.
Except as otherwise specified herein, the owner or owner’s designated agent shall be responsible for
the maintenance of buildings, structures and premises.
102.3 Application of other codes: Repairs, additions or alterations of a structure, or changes of
occupancy, shall be done in accordance with the procedures and provisions of all other applicable laws,
ordinances, codes, rules and regulations, including, without limitation, the Pennsylvania Construction
Code, the Uniform Construction Code adopted under Section 301 of the Pennsylvania Construction
Code and the Borough of Sugarcreek Zoning Code.
2012 International Property Maintenance Code/Ordinance 279 3
102.4 Existing Remedies: The provisions in this code shall not be construed to abolish or impair
existing remedies of the jurisdiction or its officers or agencies relating to the removal or demolition of
any structure which is dangerous, unsafe and insanitary.
102.5 Workmanship: Repairs, maintenance work, alterations or installations which are caused directly
or indirectly by the enforcement of this code shall be executed and installed in a workmanlike manner
and installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.
102.6 Historic Buildings: The provisions of this code shall not be mandatory for existing buildings or
structures designated as historic buildings when such buildings or structures are judged by the code
official to be safe and in the public interest of health, safety and welfare.
102.7 Referenced Codes and Standards: The codes and standards referenced in this code shall be
those that are listed in Chapter 8 and considered part of the requirements of this code ot the
prescribed extent of each such reference as further regulated in Sections 102.7.1 and 102.7.2
Exceptions: Where enforcement of a code provision would violate the conditions of the listing
of the equipment or appliance, the conditions of the listing shall apply.
102.7.1 Conflicts: Where conflicts occur between provisions of this code and the referenced
standards, the provisions of this code shall apply.
102.7.2 Provisions in Referenced Codes and Standards: Where the extent of the reference to a
referenced code or standard includes subject matter that is within the scope of this code, the
provisions of this code, as applicable, shall take precedence over the provisions in the
referenced code or standard.
102.8 Requirements Not Covered by Code: Requirements necessary for the strength, stability or
proper operation of an existing fixture, structure or equipment, or for the public safety, health and
general welfare, not specifically covered by this code, shall be determined by the code official.
102.9 Application of References: References to chapter or section numbers, or to provisions not
specifically identified by number, shall be construed to refer to such chapter, section or provision of
this code.
102.10 Other Laws: The provisions of this code shall not be deemed to nullify any provisions of local, or
federal law.
PART 2 – ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION 103: DEPARTMENT OF PROPERTY MAINTENANCE INSPECTION
103.1 General: The Department of Property Maintenance Inspections (‘the department’) is hereby
created. The Zoning Officer of the Borough of Sugarcreek shall be in charge thereof and shall be
referred to for the purposes of this code as the ‘code official’.
103.2 Appointment: The code officer shall be appointed by the chief appointing authority of the
jurisdiction.
2012 International Property Maintenance Code/Ordinance 279 4
103.3 Deputies: In accordance with the prescribed procedures of this jurisdiction and with the
concurrence of the appointing authority, the code official shall have the authority to appoint a
deputy(s). Such employees shall have powers as delegated by the code official.
103.4 Liability: The code official, member of the board of appeals or employee charged with the
enforcement of this code, while acting for the jurisdiction, in good faith and without malice in the
discharge of the duties required by this code or other pertinent law or ordinance, shall not thereby be
rendered liable personally, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage accruing to
persons or property as a result of an act or by reason of an act or omission in the discharge of official
duties. Any suit instituted against any officer or employee because of an act performed by the officer
or employee in the lawful discharge or duties and under the provisions of this code shall be defended
by the legal representative of the jurisdiction until the final termination of the proceedings. The code
official or any subordinate shall not be liable for costs in an action, suit or proceedings that is instituted
in pursuance of the provisions of this code.
103.5 Fees: The fees for activities and services performed by the department in carrying out its
responsibilities under this code shall be as set forth in a fee schedule from time to time in effect as
adopted, amended, supplement and replaced by resolution of the Council of the Borough.
All such fees shall be paid to the Treasurer of the Borough and deposited into the general appropriated
funds of the Borough for the use of the Borough.
SECTION 104: DUTIES AND POWERS OF THE CODE OFFICIAL
104.1 General: The code official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this
code. The code official shall have the authority to render interpretations of this code and to adopt
policies and procedures in order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations,
policies and procedures shall be in compliance with the intent and purpose of this code. Such policies
and procedures shall not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided for in this code.
104.2 Inspections: The code official shall make all of the required inspections, or shall accept reports of
inspection by agencies or individuals appointed by the Borough Council. All reports of such inspections
shall be in writing and be certified by a responsible officer of such approved agency or by the
responsible individual. The code official is authorized to engage such expert opinion as deemed
necessary to report upon unusual technical issues that arise, subject to the approval of the appointing
authority.
104.3 Right of Entry: Whenever it is necessary to make inspection to enforce the provisions of this
code, or whenever the code official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in a structure or
upon a premises a condition in violation of this code, the code official or any agency or individual
appointed under Section 104.2 may enter, subject to constitutional standards in a similar manner as
proved under 8 Pa. C.S. §3107 (relating to entry upon premises), and inspect any structure or premises
at reasonable hours and in a reasonable manner, all as authorized under, inter alia, 8 Pa. C.S.
§32A04(b).
104.4 Identification: The code official shall carry proper identification when inspecting structures or
premises in the performance of duties under this code
2012 International Property Maintenance Code/Ordinance 279 5
104.5 Notice and Orders: The code official shall issue all necessary notices or orders to ensure
compliance with this code.
104.6 Department Records: The code official shall keep official records of all business and activities of
the department specified in the provisions of this code. Such records shall be retained in the official
records for the period required for retention of public records.
SECTION 105: APPROVAL
105.1 Modifications: Whenever there are practical difficulties involved in carrying out the provisions of
this code, the code official have the authority to grant modifications for individual cases upon
application of the owner or owner’s representative, provided the code official shall first find that
special individual reason makes the strict letter of this code impractical and the modification is in
compliance with the intent and purpose of this code and that such modification does not lessen health,
life and fire safety requirements. The details of action granting modifications shall be recorded and
entered in the department files.
105.2 Alternative Materials, Methods and Equipment: The provisions of this code are not intended to
prevent the installation of any material or to prohibit any method of construction not specifically
prescribed by this code, provided that any such alternative has been approved. An alternative material
or method of construction shall be approved where the code official finds that the proposed design is
satisfactory and complies with the intent of the provisions of this code, and that the material, method
or work offered is, for the purpose intended, at least the equivalent of that prescribed in this code in
quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety.
105.3 Required Testing: Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance with the provisions of
this code, or evidence that a material or method does not conform to the requirements of this code, or
in order to substantiate claims for alternative materials or methods, the code official shall have the
authority to require tests to be made as evidence of compliance at no expense to the jurisdiction.
105.3.1 Test Methods: Test methods shall be as specified in this code or by other recognized
test standards. In the absence of recognized and accepted test methods, the code official shall
be permitted to approve appropriate testing procedures performed by an approved agency.
105.3.2 Test Reports: Reports of tests shall be retained by the code official for the period
required for retention of public records.
105.4 Used Material and Equipment: The use of used materials which meet the requirements of this
code for new materials is permitted. Materials, equipment and devices shall not be reused unless such
elements are in good repair or have been reconditioned and tested when necessary, placed in good
and proper working condition and approved by the code official.
105.5 Approved Materials and Equipment: Materials, equipment and devices approved by the code
official shall be constructed and installed in accordance with such approval.
105.6 Research Reports: Supporting data, where necessary to assist in the approval of materials or
assemblies not specifically provided for in the code, shall consist of valid research reports from
approved sources.
2012 International Property Maintenance Code/Ordinance 279 6
SECTION 106: VIOLATIONS
106.1 Unlawful Acts: It shall be unlawful for a person, firm or corporations to be in conflict with or in
violation of any of the provisions of this code.
106.2 Notice of Violation: The code official shall serve a notice of violation or order in accordance with
Section 107.
106.3 Prosecution of Violation: Any person failing to comply with a notice of violation or order served
in accordance with Section 107 shall be deemed guilty of a summary offense. Such offense shall be a
strict liability offense, and, as specified in 18 Pa. C.S. §305, no culpability requirements shall apply with
respect to such offense. If the notice of violation is not complied with, the code official shall institute
the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require
the removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the structure in violation of the provisions of
this code or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto. Any action taken by the authority having
jurisdiction on such premises shall be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is
located and shall be a lien upon such real estate.
106.4 Violation Penalties: Any person who shall violate a provision of this code, or fail to comply
therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, and any person aiding, abetting or assisting in such
violation, shall be guilty of a summary offense punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000 per violation
or by imprisonment not exceeding thirty (30) days per violation, or both such fine and imprisonment,
together with court costs and reasonable attorney fees incurred by the Borough in the enforcement
proceedings. Such offense shall be a strict liability offense, and specified in 18 Pa. C.S. §305, no
culpability requirements shall apply with respect to such offense. Each day that a violation continues
after service of written notice of the violation, or after service of a summons, or after receipt of actual
notice of violation otherwise provided, whichever first occurs, shall be deemed a separate violation,
and violation of each applicable section of this code shall be deemed a separate violation. All fines and
other sums under this Section shall be paid to the Treasurer of the Borough and deposited into the
general unappropriated funds of the Borough for use of the Borough.
106.5 Abatement of Violation: The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not preclude the
legal officer of the jurisdiction from instituting appropriate action to restrain, correct or abate a
violation or to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises, or to stop an illegal act,
conduct, business or utilization of the building, structure or premises.
SECTION 107: NOTICES AND ORDERS
107.1 Notice to Person Responsible: Whenever the code official determines that there has been a
violation of this code or has grounds to believe that a violation has occurred, notice shall be given in
the manner prescribed in Sections 107.2 and 107.3 to the person responsible for the violation as
specified in this code. Notices for condemnation procedures shall also comply with Section 108.3.
107.2 Form: Such notice prescribed in Section 107.1 shall be in accordance with all of the following:
1 Be in writing.
2012 International Property Maintenance Code/Ordinance 279 7
2 Include a description of the real estate sufficient for identification.
3 Include a statement of the violation or violations and why the notice is being issued.
4 Include a correction order allowing a reasonable time to make the repairs and
improvements required to bring the dwelling unit or structure into compliance with the
provisions of this code.
5 Inform the property owner of the right to appeal.
6 Include a statement of the right to file a lien in accordance with Section 106.3.
107.3 Method of Service: Such notice shall be deemed to be properly served if a copy thereof is:
1 Delivered personally;
2 Sent by certified or first-class mail addressed to the last known address; or
3 If the notice is returned showing that the letter was not delivered, a copy thereof shall
be posted in a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice.
107.4 Unauthorized Tampering: Signs, tags or seals posted or affixed by the code official shall not be
mutilated, destroyed or tampered with, or removed without authorization from the code official.
107.5 Penalties: Penalties for noncompliance with orders and notices shall be set forth in Section
106.4.
107.6 Transfer of Ownership: It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dwelling unit or structure who
has received a compliance order or upon whom a notice of violation has been served to sell, transfer,
mortgage, lease or otherwise dispose of such dwelling unit or structure to another until the provisions
of the compliance order or notice of violation have been complied with, or until such owner shall first
furnish the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee a true copy of any compliance order or notice of
violation issued by the code official and shall furnish to the code official a signed and notarized
statement from the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee, acknowledging the receipt of such
compliance order or notice of violation and fully accepting the responsibility without condition for
making corrections or repairs required by such compliance order or notice of violation.
SECTION 108: UNSAFE STRUCTURES AND EQUIPMENT
108.1 General: When a structure or equipment is found by the code official to be unsafe, or when a
structure is found unfit for human occupancy, or is found unlawful, such structure shall be condemned
pursuant to the provisions of this code.
108.1.1 Unsafe Structures: An unsafe structure is one that is found to be dangerous to the life,
health, property or safety of the public or the occupants of the structure by not providing minimum
safeguards to protect or warn occupants in the event of fire, or because such structure contains unsafe
equipment or is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, structurally unsafe or of such faulty construction or
unstable foundation that partial or complete collapse is possible.
2012 International Property Maintenance Code/Ordinance 279 8
108.1.2 Unsafe Equipment: Unsafe equipment includes any boiler, heating equipment,
elevator, moving stairway, electrical wiring or device, flammable liquid containers or other equipment
on the premises or within the structure which is in such disrepair or condition that such equipment is a
hazard to life, health, property or safety of the public or occupants of the premises or structure.
108.1.3 Structure Unfit for Human Occupancy: A structure is unfit for human occupancy
whenever the code official finds that such structure is unsafe, unlawful or, because of the degree to
which the structure is in disrepair or lacks maintenance, is insanitary, vermin or rat infested, contains
filth and contamination, or lacks ventilation, illumination, sanitary or heating facilities or other
essential equipment required by this code, or because the location of the structure constitutes a
hazard to the occupants of the structure or to the public.
108.1.4 Unlawful Structure: An unlawful structure is one found in whole or in part to be
occupied by more persons than permitted under this code, or was erected, altered or occupied
contrary to law.
108.1.5 Dangerous Structure or Premises: For the purpose of this code, any structure or
premises that has any or all of the conditions or defects described below shall be considered
dangerous:
1. Any door, isle, passageway, stairway, exit or other means of egress that does not
conform to the approved building or fire code of the jurisdiction as related to the
requirements for existing buildings.
2. The walking surface of any aisle, passageway, stairway, exit or other means of egress
is so warped, worn loose, torn or otherwise unsafe as to not provide safe and adequate
means of egress.
3. Any portion of a building, structure or appurtenance that has been damaged by fire,
earthquake, wind, flood, deterioration, neglect, abandonment, vandalism or by any
other cause to such an extent that it is likely to partially or completely collapse, or to
become detached or dislodged.
4. Any portion of a building, or any member, appurtenance or ornamentation on the
exterior thereof that is not of sufficient strength or stability, or is not so anchored,
attached or fastened in place so as to be capable of resisting natural or artificial loads of
one and one-half the original designed value.
5. The building or structure, or part of the building or structure, because of dilapidation,
deterioration, decay, faulty construction, the removal or movement of some portion of
the ground necessary for the support, or for any other reason, is likely to partially or
completely collapse, or some portion of the foundation or underpinning of the building
or structure is likely to fail or give way.
6. The building or structure, or any portion thereof, is clearly unsafe for its use and
occupancy.
7. The building or structure is neglected, damaged, dilapidated, unsecured or
abandoned so as to become an attractive nuisance to children who might play in the
2012 International Property Maintenance Code/Ordinance 279 9
building or structure to their danger, becomes a harbor for vagrants, criminals or
immoral persons, or enables persons to resort to the building or structure for
committing a nuisance or an unlawful act.
8. Any building or structure has been constructed, exists or is maintained in violation of
any specific requirement or prohibition applicable to such building or structure provided
by the approved building of fire code of the jurisdiction, or of any law or ordinance to
such an extent as to present either a substantial risk of fire, building collapse or any
other threat to life and safety.
9. A building or structure used or intended to be used for dwelling purposes, because of
inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, decay, damage, faulty construction or
arrangement, inadequate light, ventilation, mechanical or plumbing system, or
otherwise, is determined by the code official to be unsanitary, unfit for human
habitation or in such a condition that is likely to cause sickness or disease.
10. Any building or structure, because of a lack of sufficient or proper fire-resistancerated
construction, fire protection systems, electrical system, fuel connections,
mechanical system, plumbing system or other cause, is determined by the code official
to be a threat to life or health.
11. Any portion of a building remains on a site after the demolition or destruction of the
building or structure or whenever any building or structure is abandoned so as to
constitute such building or portion thereof as an attractive nuisance or hazard to the
public.
108.2 Closing of Vacant Structures: If the structure is vacant and unit for human habitation and
occupancy, and is not in danger of structural collapse, the code official is authorized to post a placard
of condemnation on the premises and order the structure closed up so as not to be an attractive
nuisance. Upon failure of the owner to close up the premises within the time specified in the order, the
code official shall cause the premises to be closed and secured through any available public agency or
by contract arrangement by private persons and the cost thereof shall be charged against the real
estate upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate and may be
collected by any other legal resource.
108.2.1 Authority to Disconnect Service Utilities: The code official shall have the authority to
authorize disconnection of utility services to the building, structure or system regulated by this
code and the referenced codes and standards set forth in Section 102.7 in case of emergency
where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property or when such utility
connection has been made without approval. The code official shall notify the serving utility
and, whenever possible, the owner and occupant of the building, structure or service system of
the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnection the
owner or occupant of the building structure or service system shall be notified in writing as
soon as practical thereafter.
108.3 Notice: Whenever the code official has condemned a structure or equipment under the
provisions of this section, notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or about the structure
affected by such notice and served on the owner or the person or persons responsible for the structure
2012 International Property Maintenance Code/Ordinance 279 10
or equipment in accordance with Section 107.3. If the notice pertains to equipment, it shall also be
placed on the condemned equipment. The notice shall be in the form prescribed in section 107.2.
108.4 Placarding: Upon failure of the owner or person responsible to comply with the notice provisions
within the time given, the code official shall post on the premises or on defective equipment a placard
bearing the word “Condemned” and a statement of the penalties provided for occupying the premises,
operating the equipment or removing the placard.
108.4.1 Placard Removal: The code official shall remove the condemnation placard whenever
the defect or defects upon which the condemnation and placarding action were based have
been eliminated. Any person who defaces or removes a condemnation placard without the
approval of the code official shall be subject to the penalties provided by this code.
108.5 Prohibited Occupancy: Any occupied structure condemned and placarded by the code official
shall be vacated as ordered by the code official. Any person who shall occupy a placarded premises or
shall operate placarded equipment, and any owner or any person responsible for the premises who
shall let anyone occupy a placarded premises or operate placarded equipment shall be liable for the
penalties provided by this code.
108.6 Abatement Methods: The owner, operator or occupant of a building, premises or equipment
deemed unsafe by the code official shall abate or cause to be abated or corrected such unsafe
conditions either by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or other approved corrective action.
108.7 Record: The code official shall cause a report to be filed on an unsafe condition. The report shall
state the occupancy of the structure and the nature of the unsafe condition.
SECTION 109: EMERGENCY MEASURES
109.1 Imminent Danger: When, in the opinion of the code official, there is imminent danger of failure
or collapse of a building or structure which endangers life, or when any structure or part of a structure
has fallen and life is endangered by the occupation of the structure, or when there is actual or
potential danger to the building occupants or those in the proximity of any structure because of
explosives, explosive fumes or vapors or the presence of toxic fumes, gases or materials, or operation
of defective or dangerous equipment, the code official is hereby authorized and empowered to order
and require the occupants to vacate the premises forthwith. The code official shall cause to be posted
at each entrance to such structure a notice reading as follows: “This Structure Is Unsafe and Its
Occupancy Has Been Prohibited by the Code Official.” It shall be unlawful for any person to enter such
structure except for the purpose of securing the structure, making the required repairs, removing the
hazardous condition or of demolishing the same.
109.2 Temporary Safeguards: Notwithstanding other provisions of this code, whenever, in the opinion
of the code official, there is imminent danger due to an unsafe condition, the code official shall order
the necessary work to be done, including the boarding up of openings, to render such structure
temporarily safe whether or not the legal procedure herein described has been instituted; and shall
cause such other actions to be taken as the code official deems necessary to meet such emergency.
2012 International Property Maintenance Code/Ordinance 279 11
109.3 Closing Streets: When necessary for public safety, the code official shall temporarily close
structures and close, or order the authority having jurisdiction to close, sidewalks, streets, public ways
and places adjacent to unsafe structures, and prohibit the same from being utilized.
109.4 Emergency Repairs: For the purposes of this section, the code official shall employ the necessary
labor and materials to perform the required work as expeditiously as possible.
109.5 Costs of Emergency Repairs: Costs incurred in the performance of emergency work shall be paid
by the jurisdiction. The legal counsel of the jurisdiction shall institute appropriate action against the
owner of the premises where the unsafe structure is or was located for the recovery of such costs.
109.6 Hearing: Any person ordered to take emergency measures shall comply with such order
forthwith. Any affected person shall thereafter, upon petition directed to the appeals board, be
afforded a hearing as described in this code.
SECTION 110: DEMOLITION
110.1 General: The code official shall order he owner or any premises upon which is located any
structure, which in the code officials judgment after review is so deteriorated or dilapidated or has
become so out of repair as to be dangerous, unsafe, insanitary or otherwise unit for human habitation
or occupancy, and such that it is unreasonable to repair the structure, to demolish and remove such
structure; or if such structure is capable of being made safe by repairs, to repair and make safe and
sanitary, or to board up and hold for future repair or to demolish and remove at the owner’s option; or
where there has been a cessation of normal construction of any structure for a period of more than
two years, the code official shall order the owner to demolish and remove such structure or board up
until future repair. Boarding the building up for future repair shall not extend beyond one year, unless
approved by the building official.
110.2 Notices and Orders: All notices and orders shall comply with Section 107.
110.3 Failure to Comply: If the owner of a premises fails to comply with a demolition order within the
time prescribed, the code official shall cause the structure to be demolished and removed, either
through an available public agency or by contract or arrangement with private persons, and the cost of
such demolition and removal shall be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is
located and shall be a lien upon such real estate.
110.4 Salvage Materials: When any structure has been ordered demolished and removed, the
governing body or other designated officer under said contract or arrangement aforesaid shall have
the right to sell the salvage and valuable materials at the highest price obtainable. The net proceeds of
such sale, after deducting the expenses of such demolition and removal, shall be promptly remitted
with a report of such sale or transaction, including the items of expense and the amounts deducted, for
the person who is entitled thereto, subject to any order of a court. If such a surplus does not remain to
be turned over, the report shall so state.
2012 International Property Maintenance Code/Ordinance 279 12
SECTION 111: MEANS OF APPEAL
111.1 Application for Appeal: Any person directly affected by a decision of the code official or a notice
or order issued under this code shall have the right to appeal to the board of appeals, provided that a
written application for appeal is filed within 20 days after the day the decision, notice or order was
served. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules
legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully
apply, or the requirements of this code are adequately satisfied by other means.
111.2 Membership of Board: The board of appeals shall consist of the members of the Council of the
Borough. The code official shall be an ex officio member of the board but shall have no vote on any
matter before the board. The board may adopt rules of procedure for conducting its business and shall
render all decisions and findings in writing to the appellant with a duplicate copy to the code official.
The copy of the decision mailed to the appellant shall state thereon, or on a statement attached
thereto, the date of mailing. The code official shall take prompt action in accordance with the decision
of the board.
111.2.1 Deleted
111.2.2 Deleted
111.2.3 Deleted
111.2.4 Deleted
111.2.5 Deleted
111.3 Notice of Meeting: The board shall meet upon notice from the chairman, within 20 days of the
filing of an appeal, or at stated periodic meetings.
111.4 Open Hearing: All hearings before the board shall be open to the public. The appellant, the
appellant’s representative, the code official and any person whose interests are affected shall be given
an opportunity to be heard. A quorum shall consist of a majority of the board then in office.
111.4.1 Deleted
111.5 Postponed Hearing: When the full board is not present to hear an appeal, either the appellant or
the appellant’s representative shall have the right to request a postponement of the hearing.
111.6 Deleted
111.6.1 Deleted
111.6.2 Deleted
111.7 Court Review: Any person, whether or not a previous party to the appeal, shall have the right to
file a further appeal to the Court of Common Pleas of Venango County, Pennsylvania, to correct errors
of law made by the board of appeals in its decision. Such an appeal shall be filed within thirty (30) days
after the date written notice of the decision of the board of appeals is mailed to the appellant.
2012 International Property Maintenance Code/Ordinance 279 13
111.8 Stays of Enforcement: Appeals of notices and orders (other than Imminent Danger notices) to
the board of appeals or to the Court of Common Pleas, shall stay the enforcement of the notice and
order until the appeal is decided by the board of appeals or the Court, as the case may be.
SECTION 112: STOP WORK ORDER
112.1 Authority: Whenever the code official finds any work regulated by this code being performed in
a manner contrary to the provisions of this code or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, the code official
is authorized to issue a stop work order.
112.2 Issuance: A stop work order shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property,
to the owner’s agent, or to the person doing the work. Upon issuance of a stop work order, the cited
work shall immediately cease. The stop work order shall state the reason for the order and the
conditions under which the cited work is authorized to resume.
112.3 Emergencies: Where an emergency exists, the code official shall not be required to give a
written notice prior to stopping the work.
112.4 Failure to Comply: Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop
work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe
condition, shall be liable for the penalties prescribed in Section 106.4.
2012 International Property Maintenance Code/Ordinance 279 14
CHAPTER 2
DEFINITIONS
SECTION 201: GENERAL
201.1 Scope: Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the purposes of this
code, have the meanings shown in this chapter.
201.2 Interchangeability: Words stated in the present tense include the future; words stated in the
masculine gender include the feminine and neuter; the singular number includes the plural and the
plural, the singular.
201.3 Terms Defined in other Codes: Where terms are not defined in this code and are defined in the
International Building Code, International Existing Building Code, International Fire Code, International
Gas Code, International Mechanical Code, International Plumbing Code, International Residential Code,
International Zoning Code or NFPA 70, such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them as stated
in those codes.
201.4 Terms not Defined: Where terms are not defined through the methods authorized by this
section, such terms shall have ordinarily accepted meanings such as the context implies.
201.5 Parts: Whenever the words “dwelling unit”, “dwelling”, “premises”, “building”, “rooming
house”, “rooming unit”, “housekeeping unit”, or “story” are stated in this code, they shall be construed
as though they were followed by the words “or any part thereof.”
SECTION 202: GENERAL DEFINITIONS
ANCHORED: Secured in a manner that provides positive connection.
APPROVED: Approved by the code official.
BASEMENT: That portion of a building which is partly or completely below grade.
BATHROOM: Any room containing plumbing fixtures including a bathtub or shower.
BEDROOM: Any room or space used or intended to be used for sleeping purposes in either a dwelling
or sleeping unit.
CODE OFFICIAL: The official who is charged with the administration and enforcement of this code, or
any duly authorized representative.
CONDEMN: To adjudge unfit for occupancy.
DETACHED: When a structure element is physically disconnected from another and that connection is
necessary to provide a positive connection.
DETERIORATION: To weaken, disintegrate, corrode, rust or decay and lose effectiveness.
DWELLING UNIT: A single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more
persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
2012 International Property Maintenance Code/Ordinance 279 15
EASEMENT: That portion of land or property reserved for present or future use by a person or agency
other than the legal fee owner(s) of the property. The easement shall be permitted to be for use
under, on or above a said lot or lots.
EQUIPMENT SUPPORT: Those structural members or assemblies of members or manufactured
elements, including braces, frames, lugs, snuggers, hangers or saddles, that transmit gravity load,
lateral load and operating load between the equipment and the structure.
EXTERIOR PROPERTY: The open space on the premises and on adjoining property under the control of
owners or operators of such premises.
GARBAGE: The animal or vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and
consumption of food.
GUARD: A building component or a system of building components located at or near the open sides of
elevated walking surfaces that minimize the possibility of a fall from the walking surface to a lower
level.
HABITABLE SPACE: Space in a structure for living, sleeping, eating and cooking. Bathrooms, toilet
rooms, closets, halls, storage or utility spaces, and similar areas are not considered habitable spaces.
HOUSEKEEPING UNIT: A room or group of rooms forming a single habitable space equipped and
intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating which does not contain, within such a unit,
a toilet, lavatory and bathtub or shower.
IMMINENT DANGER: A condition which could cause serious or life-threatening injury or death at any
time.
INFESTATION: The presence, within or contiguous to, a structure or premises of insects, rats, vermin or
other pests.
INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE: A vehicle which cannot be driven upon the public streets for reason
including but not limited to being unlicensed, wrecked, abandoned, in a state of disrepair, or incapable
of being moved under its own power.
LABELED: Equipment, materials or products to which have been affixed a label, seal, symbol or other
identifying mark of a nationally recognized testing laboratory, inspection agency or other organization
concerned with product evaluation that maintained periodic inspection of the product of the abovelabeled
items and whose labeling indicates wither that the equipment, material or product meets
identified standards or has been tested and found suitable for a specified purpose.
LET FOR OCCUPANCY OR LET: To permit, provide or offer possession or occupancy of a dwelling,
dwelling unit, rooming unit, building, premise or structure by a person who is or is not the legal owner
of record thereof, pursuant to a written or unwritten lease, agreement or license, or pursuant to a
recorded or unrecorded agreement of contract for the sale of land.
NEGLECT: The lack of proper maintenance for a building or structure.
OCCUPANCY: The purpose for which a building or portion thereof is utilized or occupied.
2012 International Property Maintenance Code/Ordinance 279 16
OCCUPANT: Any individual living or sleeping in a building, or having possession of a space within the
building.
OPENABLE AREA: That part of a window, skylight or door which is available for unobstructed
ventilation and which opens directly to the outdoors.
OPERATOR: Any person who has charge, care or control of a structure or premises which is let or
offered for occupancy.
OWNER: Any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in the
property; or recorded in the official records of the state, county or municipality as holding title to the
property; or otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any such
person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take possession of
real property by a court.
PERSON: An individual, corporation, partnership, limited liability company, any other entity, any other
group acting as a unit, an executor, administrator, trustee, receiver or other representative or
fiduciary. Whenever the word “person” is used in any portion of this code prescribing a penalty or fine,
as to a partnership, limited liability company, or any other group, the word shall include each other
partners or other members thereof, and as to a corporation or similar entity shall include the officers,
agents or members thereof who are responsible for any violation.
PEST ELIMINATION: The control and elimination of insects, rodents or other pests by eliminating their
harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible materials that serve as their food or water, by
other approved elimination methods.
PREMISES: A lot, plot or parcel of land, easement or public way, including any structures thereon.
PUBLIC WAY: Any street, alley or similar parcel of land essentially unobstructed from the ground to the
sky, which is deeded, dedicated or otherwise permanently appropriated to the public for public use.
ROOMING HOUSE: A building arranged or occupied for lodging, with or without meals, for
compensation and not occupied as a one- or two-family dwelling.
ROOMING UNIT: Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit occupied or intended to
be occupied for sleeping or living, but not for cooking purposes.
RUBBISH: Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage; the term shall include
the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke and other combustible materials, paper, rags,
cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals,
mineral matter, glass, crockery and dust and other similar materials.
SLEEPING UNIT: A room a space in which people sleep, which can also include permanent provisions
for living, eating and either sanitation or kitchen facilities, but not both. Such rooms and spaces that
are also part of a dwelling unit are not sleeping units.
STRICT LIABILITY OFFENSE: An offense in which the prosecution in a legal proceeding is not required to
prove criminal intent as part of its case. It is enough to prove that the defendant either did an act
which was prohibited, or failed to do an act which the defendant was legally required to do.
STRUCTURE: That which is built or constructed or a portion thereof.
2012 International Property Maintenance Code/Ordinance 279 17
TENANT: A person, corporation, partnership or group, whether or not the legal owner of record,
occupying a building or portion thereof as a unit.
TOILET ROOM: A room containing a water closet or urinal but not a bathtub or shower.
ULTIMATE DEFORMATION: The deformation at which failure occurs and which shall be deemed to
occur if the sustainable load reduces to 80 percent or less of the maximum strength.
VENTILATION: The natural or mechanical process of supplying conditioned or unconditioned air to, or
removing such air from, any space.
WORKMANLIKE: Executed in a skilled manner, e.g., generally plumb, level, square, in line, undamaged
and without marring adjacent work.
YARD: An open space on the same lot with a structure.
2012 International Property Maintenance Code/Ordinance 279 18
CHAPTER 3
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
SECTION 301: GENERAL
301.1 Scope: The provisions of this chapter shall govern the minimum conditions and the
responsibilities of persons for maintenance of structures, equipment and exterior property.
301.2 Responsibility: The owner of the premises shall maintain the structures and exterior property in
compliance with these requirements, except as otherwise provided for in this code. A person shall not
occupy as owner-occupant or permit another person to occupy premises which are not in sanitary and
safe conditions and which do not comply with the requirements of this chapter. Occupants of a
dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit are responsible for keeping in a clean, sanitary and
safe condition that part of the dwelling unit, rooming unit, housekeeping unit or premises which they
occupy and control.
301.3 Vacant Structures and Land: All vacant structures and premises thereof or vacant land shall be
maintained in a clean, safe, secure and sanitary condition as provided herein so as not to cause a
blighting problem or adversely affect the public health or safety.
SECTION 302: EXTERIOR PROPERTY AREAS
302.1 Sanitation: All exterior property and premises shall be maintained in a clean, safe and sanitary
condition. The occupant shall keep that part of the exterior property which such occupant occupies or
controls in a clean and sanitary condition.
302.2 Grading and Drainage: All premises shall be graded and maintained to prevent the erosion of
soil and to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water thereon or within any structure located
thereon, with the exception of approved retention areas and reservoirs. All approved retention areas
and reservoirs, including, without limitation, wells, cesspools, cisterns, sedimentation ponds,
stormwater management impoundment ponds and ponds of a similar nature shall be enclosed by a
fence or other structure to prevent access thereto by the public.
302.3 Sidewalks and Driveways: All sidewalks, walkways, stairs, driveways, parking spaces and similar
areas shall be kept in a proper state of repair, and maintained free from hazardous conditions.
302.4 Weeds: All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from weeds or plant growth
in excess of eight (8) inches in height. (a) within the area of twenty-five (25) feet surrounding the
exterior walls of each building on real estate located in an residential, commercial or industrial zoning
district; (b) within the area of twenty-five (25) feet surrounding the primary residence building on real
estate located in any agriculture zoning district; and (c) within the area located between the exterior
wall of any building that is subject to Subsections (a) and (b) nearest to a public road and the cartway
of that public road to a width equal to the width of such exterior wall. The areas referred to in
Subsections (a) and (b) above shall be reduced to the extent that the area would include real estate in
which the owner of the subject property has no ownership interest. All noxious weeds shall be
prohibited. All heavy growth of weeds that impairs the health or safety of persons or property is
prohibited. Weeds shall be defined as all grasses, annual plants and vegetation, other than trees or
2012 International Property Maintenance Code/Ordinance 279 19
shrubs; provided, however, this term shall not include cultivated flowers and gardens. All trees and
shrubs shall be trimmed as necessary to prevent safety hazards to pedestrians or vehiclular traffic.
Upon failure of the owner or agent having charge of a property to cut and destroy weeds after service
of a notice of violation, the owner or agents shall be subject to prosecution in accordance with Section
106.3 and as prescribed by the authority having jurisdiction. Upon failure to comply with the notice of
violation, any duly authorized employee of the Borough shall be authorized to enter upon the property
that is in violation and cut and destroy the weeds growing thereon in the prescribed areas. The code
official shall have the authority and discretion to retain services to enter upon the property that is in
violation and cut and destroy such weeds. All costs of such cutting and destruction shall be paid by the
owner or agent responsible for the property.
302.5 Rodent Harborage: All structures and exterior property shall be kept free from rodent harborage
and infestations. Where rodents are found, they shall be promptly exterminated by approved
processes which will not be injurious to human health. After pest elimination, proper precautions shall
be taken to eliminate rodent harborage and prevent re-infestation.
302.6 Exhaust Vents: Pipes, ducts, conductors, fans or blowers shall not discharge gasses, steam,
vapor, hot air, grease, smoke, odors or other gaseous or particulate wastes directly upon abutting or
adjacent public or private property or that of another tenant.
302.7 Accessory Structures: All accessory structures including detached garages, fences and walls, shall
be maintained structurally sounds and in good repair, and any accessory structure that presents a
safety or health hazards to persons or property may be deemed a nuisance.
302.8 Motor Vehicles: Except as provided for in other regulations, no inoperative or unlicensed motor
vehicles shall be parked, kept or stored on any premises, and no vehicle shall at any time in the state of
major disassembly, disrepair or in the process of being stripped or dismantled. Painting of vehicles is
prohibited unless conducted inside an approved spray booth.
Exception: A vehicle of any type is permitted to undergo major overhaul, including body work,
provided that such work is performed inside a structure or similarly enclosed area designed and
approved for such purposes.
302.8.1 Used Vehicle Parts and Tires: No used vehicle parts or tires shall be kept or stored on
any premises outside of an enclosed structure.
Exception: Business enterprises regularly engaged in the repair of motor vehicles or the sale of
used vehicle parts if in compliance with all other applicable regulations, including, without
limitation, the Borough’s zoning code, and if such keeping or storage does not constitute a
nuisance.
302.9 Defacement of Property: No person shall willfully or wantonly damage, mutilate or deface any
exterior surface of any structure or building or any private or public property by placing thereon any
marking, carving or graffiti.
It shall be the responsibility of the owner to restore said surface to an approved state of
maintenance and repair.
2012 International Property Maintenance Code/Ordinance 279 20
302.10 Fire Hydrant Obstruction: Unobstructed access for firefighting personnel to fire hydrants shall
be maintained at all times, including, but not limited to, maintaining a three-foot open space around
each fire hydrant.
SECTION 303: SWIMMING POOLS, SPAS AND HOT TUBS
303.1 Swimming Pools: Swimming pools shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition, and in
good repair.
Enclosures: Private swimming pools, hot tubs and spas, containing water more than 24 inches
in depth shall be completely surrounded by a fence or barrier at least 48 inches in height above the
finished ground level measure on the side of the barrier away from the pool. Gates and doors in such
barriers shall be self-closing and self-latching. Where the self-latching device is a minimum of 54 inches
above the bottom of the gate, the release mechanism shall be located on the pool side of the gate.
Self-closing and self-latching gates shall be maintained such the gate will positively close and latch
when released from on open position of 6 inches from the gatepost. No existing pool enclosure shall be
removed, replaced or changed in a manner that reduces its effectiveness as a safety barrier.
Exception: Spas or hot tubs with a safety cover that complies with ASTM F 1346 shall be exempt
from the provisions of this section.
SECTION 304: EXTERIOR STRUCTURE
304.1 General: The exterior of a structure shall be maintained in good repair, structurally sound and
sanitary so as not to pose a threat to the public health, safety or welfare.
304.1.1 Unsafe Conditions: The following conditions shall be determined as unsafe and shall be
repaired or replaced to comply with the International Building Code or the International Existing
Building Code as required for existing buildings:
1. The nominal strength of any structural member is exceeded by nominal loads, the
load effects or the required strength;
2. The anchorage of the floor or roof to walls or columns, and of wall and columns to
foundations is not capable of resisting all nominal loads or load effects;
3. Structures or components thereof that have reached their limit state;
4. Siding and masonry joints including joints between the building envelope and the
perimeter of windows, doors and skylights are not maintained, weather resistant or
water tight.
5. Structural member that have evidence of deterioration or that are not capable of
safely supporting all nominal loads and loads effects;
6. Foundations systems that are not firmly supported by footings, are not plumb and
free from open cracks and breaks, are not properly anchored or are not capable of
supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects;
2012 International Property Maintenance Code/Ordinance 279 21
7. Exterior walls that are not anchored to supporting and supported elements or are not
plumb and free of holes, cracks, breaks and loose or rotting materials, are not property
anchored or are not capable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load
effects;
8. Roofing or roofing components that have defects that admit rain, roof surfaces with
inadequate drainage, or any portion of the roof framing that is not in good repair with
signs of deteriorations, fatigue or without proper anchorage and incapable or
supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects;
9. Flooring and flooring components with defects that affect serviceability or flooring
components that show signs of deterioration, fatigue, are not property anchored or are
incapable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects;
10. Veneer, cornices, belt courses, corbels, trim, wall facings and similar decorative
features not properly anchored or that are anchored with connections not capable of
supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects;
11. Overhang extensions or projections including, but not limited to, trash chutes,
canopies, marquees, signs, awnings, fire escapes, standpipes and exhaust ducts not
properly anchored or that are anchored with connections not capable of supporting all
nominal loads and resisting all load effects;
12. Exterior stair, decks, porches, balconies and all similar appurtenances attached
thereto, including guards and handrails, are not structurally sound, not property
anchored or that are anchored with connections not capable to supporting all nominal
loads and resisting all load effects; or
13. Chimneys, cooling towers, smokestacks and similar appurtenances not structurally
sound or not properly anchored, or that are anchored with connections not capable of
supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects.
Exceptions:
1. When substantiated otherwise by an approved method.
2. Demolition of unsafe conditions shall be permitted when approved by code
official.
304.2 Protective Treatment: All exterior surfaces, including by not limited to, doors, and window
frames, cornices, porches, trim, balconies, decks and fences, shall be maintained in good condition.
Exterior wood surfaces, other than decay-resistant woods, shall be protected from the elements and
decay by painting or other protective covering or treatment. Peeling, flaking and chipped paint shall be
eliminated and surfaces repainted. All siding and masonry joints, as well as those between the building
envelope and the perimeter of windows, doors and skylights, shall be maintained weather resistant
and water tight. All metal surfaces subject to rust or corrosion shall be coated to inhibit such rust and
corrosion, and all surfaces with rust or corrosion shall be stabilized and coated to inhibit future rust
and corrosion. Oxidation stains shall be removed from exterior surfaces. Surfaces designed for
stabilization by oxidation are exempt from this requirement.
2012 International Property Maintenance Code/Ordinance 279 22
304.3 Premises Identification: Buildings shall have approved address number placed in a position to be
plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting the property. These numbers shall contrast
with their background. Address numbers shall be Arabic numerals or alphabet letters. Numbers shall
be a minimum of 4 inches in height with a minimum stroke width of ½ an inch.
304.4 Structural Members: All structural members shall be maintained free from deterioration, and
shall be capable of safely supporting the imposed dead and live loads.
304.5 Foundation Walls: All foundation walls shall be maintained plumb and free from open cracks and
breaks and shall be kept in such condition as to prevent the entry of rodents and other pests.
304.6 Exterior Walls: All exterior walls shall be free from holes, breaks and loose or rotting materials,
and maintained weatherproof and properly surface coated where required to prevent deterioration.
304.7 Roof and Drainage: The roof and flashing shall be sound, tight and not have defects that admit
rain. Roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent dampness or deterioration in the walls or interior
portion of the structure. Roof drains, gutters and downspouts shall be maintained in good repair and
free from obstructions. Roof water shall not be discharged, or permitted to be discharged, in a manner
that creates or permits a safety or health hazard or a public nuisance.
304.8 Decorative Features: All cornices, belt courses, corbels, terra cotta trim, wall facings and similar
decorative features shall be maintained in good repair with proper anchorage and in a safe condition.
304.9 Overhang Extensions: All overhang extensions including, but not limited to canopies, marquees,
signs, metal awnings, fire escapes, standpipes and exhaust ducts shall be maintained in good repair
and be properly anchored so as to be kept in a sound condition. When required, all exposed surfaces of
metal or wood shall be protected from the elements and against decay or rust by periodic application
of weathercoating materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment.
304.10 Stairways, Decks, Porches and Balconies: Every exterior stairway, deck, porch and balcony, and
all appurtenances attached thereto, shall be maintained structurally sound, in good repair, with proper
anchorage and capable of supporting the imposed loads.
304.11 Chimneys and Towers: All chimneys, cooling towers, smoke stacks and similar appurtenances
shall be maintained structurally safe and sound, and in good repair. All exposed surfaces of metal or
wood shall be protected from the elements and against decay or rust be periodic application of
weathercoating materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment.
304.12 Handrails and Guards: Every handrail and guard shall be firmly fastened and capable to
supporting normally imposed loads and shall be maintained in good condition.
304.13 Window, Skylight and Door Frames: Every window, skylight, door and frame shall be kept in
sound condition, good repair and weather tight.
304.13.1 Glazing: All glazing materials shall be maintained free from cracks and holes.
304.13.2 Openable Windows: Every window, other than a fixed window, shall be easily
openable and capable to being held in position by window hardware.
304.14 Insect Screens: During the period from April 1 to December 1, every door, window and other
outside opening required for ventilation of habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food service areas
2012 International Property Maintenance Code/Ordinance 279 23
or any areas where products to be included or utilized in food for human consumption are processed,
manufactures, packaged or stored shall be supplied with approved tightly fitting screens of minimum
16 mesh per inch, and every screen door used for insect control shall have a self-closing device in good
working condition.
Exception: Screens shall not be required where other approved means, such as air curtains or
insect repellant fans, are employed.
304.15 Doors: All exterior doors, door assemblies, operator systems if provided, and hardware shall be
maintained in good condition. Locks at all entrances to dwelling units and sleeping units shall tightly
secure the door. Locks on means of egress doors shall be in accordance with Section 702.3.
304.16 Basement Hatchways: Every basement hatchway shall be maintained to prevent the entrance
of rodents, rain and surface drainage water.
304.17 Guards for Basement Windows: Every basement window that is openable shall be supplied
with rodent shields, storm windows or other approved protection against the entry of rodents.
304.18 Building Security: Door, windows or hatchways for dwelling units, room units or housekeeping
units shall be provided with devices designed to provide security for the occupants, and property
within.
304.18.1 Doors: Doors providing access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit
that is rented, leased or let shall be equipped with a deadbolt lock designated to be readily
openable from the side which egress is to be made without the need for keys, special
knowledge or effort and shall have a minimum lock throw of one inch. Such deadbolt locks shall
be installed according to the manufacturer’s specifications and maintained in good working
order. For the purpose of this section, a sliding bolt shall not be considered an acceptable
deadbolt lock.
304.18.2 Windows: Operable windows located in whole or in part within 6 feet above ground
level or a walking surface below that provide access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit or
housekeeping unit that is rented, leased or let shall be equipped with a window sash locking
device.
304.18.3 Basement Hatchways: Basement hatchways that provide access to a dwelling unit,
rooming unit or housekeeping unit that is rented, leased or let shall be equipped with devices
that secure the units from unauthorized entry.
304.19 Gates: All exterior gates, gate assemblies, operator systems if provided, and hardware shall be
maintained in good condition. Latches at all entrances shall tightly secure the gates.
SECTION 305: INTERIOR STRUCTURE
305.1 General: The interior of a structure and equipment therein shall be maintained in good repair,
structurally sound and in a sanitary condition. Occupants shall keep that part of the structure which
they occupy or control in a clean and sanitary condition. Every owner of a structure containing a
rooming house, housekeeping units, a hotel, a dormitory, two or more dwelling units or two or more
2012 International Property Maintenance Code/Ordinance 279 24
nonresidential occupancies, shall maintain, in a clean and sanitary condition, the shared or public areas
of the structure and exterior property.
305.1.1 Unsafe Conditions: The following conditions shall be determined as unsafe and shall be
repaired or replaced to comply with the International Building Code or the International
Existing Building Code as required for existing buildings:
1. The nominal strength of any structural member is exceeded by nominal loads, the
load effects or the required strength;
2. The anchorage of the floor or roof to walls or columns, and of walls and columns to
foundations is not capable of resisting all nominal loads or load effects;
3. Structures or components thereof that have reached their limit state;
4. Structural members are incapable of supporting nominal loads and load effects;
5. Stair, landings, balconies and all similar walking surfaces, including guards and
handrails, are not structurally sound, not properly anchored or are anchored with
connections not capable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects;
6. Foundation systems that are not firmly supported by footings are not plumb and free
from open cracks and breaks, are not properly anchored or are not capable of
supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effect.
Exceptions:
1. When substantiated otherwise by an approved method.
2. Demolition of unsafe conditions shall be permitted when approved by the
code official.
305.2 Structural Members: All structural members shall be maintained structurally sound, and be
capable of supporting the imposed loads.
305.3 Interior Surfaces: All interior surfaces, including windows and doors, shall be maintained in
good, clean and sanitary condition. Peeling, chipping, flaking or abraded paint shall be repaired,
removed or covered. Cracked or loose plaster, decayed wood and other defective surface conditions
shall be corrected.
305.4 Stair and Walking Surfaces: Every stair, ramp, landing, balcony, porch, deck or other walking
surface shall be maintained in sound condition and good repair.
305.5 Handrails and Guards: Every handrail and guard shall be firmly fastened and capable of
supporting normally imposed loads and shall be maintained in good condition.
305.6 Interior Doors: Every interior door shall fit reasonably well within its frame and shall be capable
of being opened and closed by being properly and securely attached to jambs, headers or tracks as
intended by the manufacturer of the attachment hardware.
2012 International Property Maintenance Code/Ordinance 279 25
SECTION 306: COMPONENT SERVICEABILITY
306.1 General: The components of a structure and equipment therein shall be maintained in good
repair, structurally sounds and in sanitary condition.
306.1.1 Unsafe Conditions: Where any of the following conditions cause the component or
system to be beyond its limit state, the component or system shall be determined as unsafe and shall
be repaired or replaced to comply with the International Building Code as required for existing
buildings:
1. Soils that have been subjected to any of the following conditions:
1.1 Collapse of footing or foundation system;
1.2 Damage to footing, foundation, concrete or other structural element due to
soil expansion;
1.3 Adverse effects to the design strength of footing, foundation, concrete or
other structural element due to a chemical reaction from the soil;
1.4 Inadequate soil as determined by a geotechnical investigation;
1.5 Where the allowable bearing capacity of the soil is in doubt; or
1.6 Adverse effects to the footing, foundation, concrete or other structural
element due to the ground water table.
2. Concrete that has been subjected to any of the following conditions:
2.1 Deterioration;
2.2 Ultimate deformation;
2.3 Fractures;
2.4 Fissures;
2.5 Spalling;
2.6 Exposed reinforcement; or
2.7 Detached, dislodged or failing connections.
3. Aluminum that has been subjected to any of the following:
3.1 Deterioration;
3.2 Corrosion;
3.3 Elastic deformation;
3.4 Ultimate deformation;
3.5 Stress or strain cracks;
3.6 Joint fatigue; or
2012 International Property Maintenance Code/Ordinance 279 26
3.7 Detached, dislodged or failing connections.
4. Masonry that has been subjected to any of the following conditions:
4.1 Deterioration;
4.2 Ultimate deformation;
4.3 Fractures in masonry or mortar joints;
4.4 Fissures in masonry or mortar joints;
4.5 Spalling;
4.6 Exposed reinforcement; or
4.7 Detached, dislodged or failing connections.
5. Steel that has been subjected to any of the following:
5.1 Deterioration;
5.2 Elastic deformation;
5.3 Ultimate deformation;
5.4 Metal fatigue; or
5.5 Detached, dislodged or failing connections.
6. Wood that has been subjected to any of the following conditions:
6.1 Ultimate deformation;
6.2 Deterioration;
6.3 Damaged from insects, rodents and other vermin;
6.4 Fire damage beyond charring;
6.5 Significant splits and checks;
6.6 Horizontal shear cracks;
6.7 Vertical shear cracks;
6.8 Inadequate support;
6.9 Detached, dislodged or failing connections; or
6.10 Excessive cutting and notching.
Exceptions:
1. When substantiated otherwise by an approved method.
2. Demolition of unsafe conditions shall be permitted when approved by the
code official.
2012 International Property Maintenance Code/Ordinance 279 27
SECTION 307: HANDRAILS AND GUARDRAILS
307.1 General: Every exterior and interior flight of stairs having more than four risers shall have a
handrail on one side of the stair and every open portion of a stair, landing, balcony, porch, deck, ramp
or other walking surface which is more than 30 inches above the floor grade or grade below shall have
guards. Handrails shall not be less than 30 inches in height or more than 42 inches in height measured
vertically above the nosing of the thread or above the finished floor of the landing or walking surfaces.
Guards shall not be less than 30 inches in height above the floor of the landing, balcony, porch, deck or
ramp or other walking surface.
Exception: Guards shall not be required where exempted by the adopted building code.
SECTION 308: RUBBISH AND GARBAGE
308.1 Accumulation of Rubbish or Garbage: All exterior property and premises, and the interior of
every structure, shall be free from any accumulation of rubbish or garbage.
308.2 Disposal of Rubbish: Every occupant of a structure shall dispose of all rubbish in a clean and
sanitary manner by placing such rubbish in approved containers.
308.2.1 Rubbish Storage Facilities: The owner of every occupied premises shall supply
approved covered containers for rubbish, and the owner of the premises shall be responsible
for the removal of rubbish.
308.2.2 Refrigerators: Refrigerators and similar equipment not in operation shall not be
discarded, abandoned or stored on premises without first removing the doors.
308.3 Disposal of Garbage: Every occupant of a structure shall dispose of garbage in a clean and
sanitary manner by placing such garbage in an approved garbage disposal facility or approved garbage
containers.
308.3.1 Garbage Facilities: The owner of every dwelling shall supply one of the following: an
approved mechanical food waste grinder in each dwelling unit; an approved incinerator unit in
the structure available to the occupants in each dwelling unit; or an approved leakproof,
covered, outside garbage container.
308.3.2 Containers: The operator of every establishment producing garbage shall provide, and
at all times cause to be utilized, approved leakproof containers provided with close-fitting
covers for the storage of such materials until removed from the premises for disposal.
SECTION 309: PEST ELIMINATION
309.1 Infestation: All structures shall be kept free from insect and rodent infestation. All structures in
which insects or rodents are found shall be promptly exterminated by approved processes that will not
be injurious to human health. After pest elimination, proper precautions shall be taken to prevent
reinfestation.
2012 International Property Maintenance Code/Ordinance 279 28
309.2 Owner: The owner of any structure shall be responsible for pest elimination within the structure
prior to renting or leasing the structure.
309.3 Single Occupant: The occupant of a one-family dwelling or of a single-tenant nonresidential
structure shall be responsible for pest elimination of the premises.
309.4 Multiple Occupancy: The owner of a structure containing two or more dwelling units, a multiple
occupancy, a rooming house or a nonresidential structure shall be responsible for pest elimination in
the public or shared areas of the structure and exterior property. If infestation is caused by failure of
an occupant to prevent such infestation in the area occupied, the occupant and owner shall be
responsible for pest elimination.
309.5 Occupant: The occupant of any structure shall be responsible for the continued rodent and pestfee
condition of the structure.
Exception: Where the infestation are caused by defects in the structure, the owner shall be
responsible for pest elimination.
2012 International Property Maintenance Code/Ordinance 279 29
CHAPTER 4
LIGHT, VENTILATION AND OCCUPANCY LIMITATIONS
SECTION 401: GENERAL
401.1 Scope: The provisions of this chapter shall govern the minimum conditions and standards for
light, ventilation and space for occupying a structure.
401.2 Responsibility: The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain light, ventilation and space
conditions in compliance with these requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant, or
permit another person to occupy, any premises that do not comply with the requirements of this
chapter.
401.3 Alternative Devices: In lieu of the means for natural light and ventilation herein prescribed,
artificial light or mechanical ventilation complying with the International Building Code shall be
permitted.
SECTION 402: LIGHT
402.1 Habitable spaces: Every habitable space shall have at least one window of approved size facing
directly to the outdoors or to a court. The minimum total glazed area for every habitable space shall be
8 percent of the floor area of such room. Wherever walls or other portions of a structure face a
window of any room and such obstructions are located less than 3 feet from the window and extend to
a level above that of the ceiling of the room, such window shall not be deemed to face directly to the
outdoors not to a court and shall not be included as contributing to the required minimum total
window area for the room.
Exception: Where natural light for rooms or spaces without exterior glazing areas is provided
through an adjoining room, the unobstructed opening to the adjoining room shall be at least 8
percent of the floor area of the interior room or space, but a minimum of 25 square feet. The
exterior glazing area shall be based on the total floor area being served.
402.2 Common Halls and Stairways: Every common hall and stairway in residential occupancies, other
than in one- and two-family dwellings, shall be lighted at all times with at least a 60 watt standard
incandescent light bulb for each 200 square feet of floor area or equivalent illumination, provided that
the spacing between lights shall not be greater than 30 feet. In other than residential occupancies,
means of egress, including exterior means of egress, stairways shall be illuminated at all times the
building space served by the means of egress is occupied with a minimum of 1 footcandle (11 lux) at
floors, landings and treads.
402.3 Other Spaces: All other spaces shall be provided with natural or artificial light sufficient to permit
the maintenance of sanitary conditions, and the safe occupancy of the space and utilization of the
appliances, equipment and fixtures.
2012 International Property Maintenance Code/Ordinance 279 30
SECTION 403: VENTILATION
403.1 Habitable Spaces: Every habitable space shall have at least one openable window. The total
openable area of the window in every room shall be equal to at least 45 percent of the minimum
glazed area required in Section 402.1
Exception: Where rooms and spaces without openings to the outdoors are ventilated through
an adjoining room, the unobstructed opening to the adjoining room shall be at least 8 percent
of the floor area of the interior room or space, but a minimum of 25 square feet. The
ventilation openings to the outdoors shall be based on a total floor area being ventilated.
403.2 Bathrooms and Toilet Rooms: Every bathroom and toilet room shall comply with the ventilation
requirements for habitable spaces as required by Section 403.1, except that a window shall not be
required in such spaces equipped with a mechanical ventilation system. Air exhausted by a mechanical
ventilation system from a bathroom or toilet room shall discharge to the outdoors and shall not be
recirculated.
403.3 Cooking Facilities: Unless approved through the certificate of occupancy, cooking shall not be
permitted in any rooming unit or dormitory unit, and a cooking facility or appliance shall not be
permitted to be present in the rooming unit or dormitory unit.
Exceptions:
1. Where specifically approved in writing by the code official.
2. Devices such as coffee pots and microwave ovens shall not be considered cooking
appliances.
403.4 Process Ventilation: Where injurious, toxic, irritating or noxious fumes, gases, dusts or mists are
generated, a local exhaust ventilation system shall be provided to remove the contaminating agent at
the source. Air shall be exhausted to the exterior and not be recirculated to any space.
403.5 Clothes Dryer Exhaust: Clothes dryer exhaust systems shall be independent of all other systems
and shall be exhausted outside the structure in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.
Exception: Listed and labeled condensing (ductless) clothes dryers.
SECTION 404: OCCUPANCY LIMITATIONS
404.1 Privacy: Dwelling units, hotel units, housekeeping units, rooming units and dormitory units shall
be arranged to provide privacy and be separate from other adjoining spaces.
404.2 Minimum Room Widths: A habitable room, other than a kitchen, shall be a minimum of 7 feet in
any plan dimension. Kitchens shall have a minimum clear passageway of 3 feet between counterfronts
and appliances or counterfronts and walls.
404.3 Minimum Ceiling Heights: Habitable spaces, hallways, corridors, laundry areas, bathrooms, toilet
rooms and habitable basement areas shall have a minimum clear ceiling height of 7 feet.
Exceptions:
2012 International Property Maintenance Code/Ordinance 279 31
1. In one- and two-family dwellings, beams or girders spaced a minimum of 4 feet on
center and projected a maximum of 6 inches below the required ceiling height.
2. Basement rooms in one- and two-family dwellings occupied exclusively for laundry,
study or recreation purposes, having a minimum ceiling height of 6 feet 8 inches with a
minimum clear height of 6 feet 4 inches under beams, girders, ducts and similar
obstructions.
3. Rooms occupied exclusively for sleeping, study or similar purposes and having a
sloped ceiling over all or part of the room, with a minimum clear ceiling height of 7 feet
over a minimum of ? of the required minimum floor area. In calculating the floor area of
such rooms, only those portions of the floor area with a minimum clear ceiling height of
5 feet shall be included.
404.4 Bedroom and Living Room Requirements: Every bedroom and living room shall comply with the
requirements of Sections 404.1 through 404.4.5.
404.4.1 Room Area: Every living room shall contain at least 120 square feet and every bedroom
shall contain a minimum of 70 square feet and every bedroom occupied by more than one
person shall contain a minimum of 50 square feet of floor area for each occupant thereof.
404.4.2 Access from Bedrooms: Bedrooms shall not constitute the only means of access to
other bedrooms or habitable spaces and shall not serve as the only means of egress from other
habitable spaces.
Exception: Units that contain fewer than two bedrooms.
404.4.3 Water Closet Accessibility: Every bedroom shall have access to at least one water
closer and one lavatory without passing through another bedroom. Every bedroom in a
dwelling unit shall have access to at least one water closet and lavatory located in the same
story as the bedroom or an adjacent story.
404.4.4 Prohibited Occupancy: Kitchens and non-habitable spaces shall not be used for
sleeping purposes.
404.4.5 Other Requirements: Bedrooms shall comply with the applicable provisions of this
code including, but not limited to, the light, ventilation, room area, ceiling height and room
width requirements of this chapter; the plumbing facilities and water-heating facilities
requirements of Chapter 5; the heating facilities and electrical receptacle requirements of
Chapter 6; and the smoke detector and emergency escape requirements of Chapter 7.
404.5 Overcrowding: Dwelling units shall not be occupied by more occupants than permitted by the
minimum area requirements of Table 404.5.
2012 International Property Maintenance Code/Ordinance 279 32
TABLE 404.5
MINIMUM AREA REQUIREMENTS
Minimum Area in Square Feet
SPACE
1-2
occupants
3-5
occupants
6 or more
occupants
Living Room a,b 120 120 150
Dining Room a,b No requirements 80 100
Bedrooms Shall comply with
section 404.4.1
Shall comply with
section 404.4.1
Shall comply with
section 404.4.1
a. See Section 404.5.2 for combined living room/dining room spaces.
b. See Section 404.5.1 for limitations on determining the minimum occupancy area for sleeping
purposes.
404.5.1 Sleeping Area: The minimum occupancy area required by Table 404.5 shall not be
included as a sleeping area in determining the minimum occupancy area for sleeping purposes.
All sleeping areas shall comply with Section 404.4.
404.5.2 Combined Spaces: Combined living room and dining room spaces shall comply with the
requirements of Table 404.5 if the total area is equal to that required for separate rooms and if
the space is located so as to function as a combination living room/dining room.
404.6 Efficiency Unit: Nothing in the section shall prohibit an efficiency living unit from meeting the
following requirements:
1. A unit occupied by not more than one occupant shall have a minimum clear floor area of 120
square feet. A unit occupied by not more than two occupants shall have a minimum clear floor
area of 220 square feet. A unit occupied by three occupants shall have a minimum clear floor
area of 320 square feet. These required areas shall be exclusive of the areas required by items 2
and 3.
2. The unit shall be provided with a kitchen sink, cooking appliance and refrigeration facilities,
each having a minimum clear working space of 30 inches in front. Light and ventilation
conforming to this code shall be provided.
3. The unit shall be provided with a separate bathroom containing a water closet, lavatory and
bathtub or shower.
4. The maximum number of occupants shall be three.
404.7 Food Preparation: All spaces to be occupied for food preparation purposes shall contain suitable
space and equipment to store, prepare and serve foods in a sanitary manner. There shall be adequate
facilities and services for the sanitary disposal of food wastes and refuse, including facilities for
temporary storage.
2012 International Property Maintenance Code/Ordinance 279 33
CHAPTER 5
PLUMBING FACILITIES AND FIXTURE REQUIREMENTS
SECTION 501: GENERAL
501.1 Scope: The provisions of this chapter shall govern the minimum plumbing systems, facilities and
plumbing fixtures to be provided.
501.2 Responsibility: The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain such plumbing facilities
and plumbing fixtures in compliance with these requirements. A person shall not occupy as owneroccupant
or permit another person to occupy any structure or premises which does not comply with
the requirements of this chapter.
SECTION 502: REQUIRED FACILITIES
502.1 Dwelling Units: Every dwelling unit shall contain its own bathtub or shower, lavatory, water
closet and kitchen sink which shall be maintained in a sanitary, safe working condition. The lavatory
shall be placed in the same room as the water closet or located in close proximity to the door leading
directly into the room in which such water closet is located. A kitchen sink shall not be used as a
substitute for the required lavatory.
502.2 Rooming Houses: At least one water closet, lavatory and bathtub or shower shall be supplied for
each four rooming units.
502.3 Hotels: Where private water closets, lavatories and baths are not provided, one water closet,
one lavatory and one bathtub or shower having access from a public hallway shall be provided for each
ten occupants.
502.4 Employees’ Facilities: A minimum of one water closet, one lavatory and one drinking facility shall
be available to employees.
502.4.1 Drinking Facilities: Drinking facilities shall be a drinking fountain, water cooler, bottled
water cooler or disposable cups next to a sink or water dispenser. Drinking facilities shall not be
located in toilet rooms or bathrooms.
502.5 Public Toilet Facilities: Public toilet facilities shall be maintained in a safe sanitary and working
condition in accordance with the International Plumbing Code. Except for periodic maintenance or
cleaning, public access and use shall be provided to the toilet facilities at all times during occupancy of
the premises.
SECTION 503: TOILET ROOMS
503.1 Privacy: Toilet rooms and bathrooms shall provide privacy and shall not constitute the only
passageway to a hall or other space, or to the exterior. A door and interior locking device shall be
provided for all common or shared bathrooms and toilet rooms in a multiple dwelling.
2012 International Property Maintenance Code/Ordinance 279 34
503.2 Location: Toilet rooms and bathrooms serving hotel units, rooming units or dormitory units or
housekeeping units, shall have access by traversing a maximum of one flight of stairs and toilet shall
have access from a common hall or passageway.
503.3 Location of Employee Facilities: Toilet facilities shall have access from within the employees’
working area. The required toilet facilities shall be located a maximum of one story above or below the
employees’ working area and the path of travel to such shall not exceed a distance of 500 feet.
Employee facilities shall either be separate facilities or combined employee and public facilities.
Exception: Facilities that are required for employees in storage structures or kiosks, which are
located in adjacent structures under the same ownership, lease or control, shall not exceed a
travel distance of 500 feet from the employees’ regular working area to the facilities.
503.4 Floor Surface: In other than dwelling units, every toilet room floor shall be maintained to be a
smooth, hard, nonabsorbent surface to permit such floor to be easily kept in a clean and sanitary
condition.
SECTION 504: PLUMBING SYSTEMS AND FIXTURES
504.1 General: All plumbing fixtures shall be properly installed and maintained in working order, and
shall be kept free from obstructions, leaks and defects and be capable of performing the function for
which such plumbing fixtures are designed. All plumbing fixtures shall be maintained in a safe, sanitary
and functional condition.
504.2 Fixture clearances: Plumbing fixtures shall have adequate clearances for usage and cleaning.
504.3 Plumbing System Hazards: Where it is found that a plumbing system in a structure constitutes a
hazard to the occupants or the structure by reason of inadequate service, inadequate venting, cross
connections, backsiphonage, improper installation, deterioration or damage or for similar reasons, the
code official shall require the defects to be corrected to eliminate the hazard.
SECTION 505: WATER SYSTEM
505.1 General: Every sink, lavatory, bathtub or shower, drinking fountain, water closet or other
plumbing fixture shall be properly connected to either a public water system or to an approved private
water system. All kitchen sinks, lavatories, laundry facilities, bathtubs and showers shall be supplied
with hot or tempered and cold running water in accordance with the International Plumbing Code.
505.2 Contamination: The water supply shall be maintained free from contamination, and all water
inlets for plumbing fixtures shall be located above the flood-level rim of the fixture. Shampoo basic
faucets, janitor sink faucets and other hose bibs or faucets to which hoses are attached and left in
place, shall be protected by an approved atmospheric-type vacuum breaker or an approved
permanently attached hose connection vacuum breaker.
505.3 Supply: The water supply system shall be installed and maintained to provide a supply of water
to plumbing fixtures, devices and appurtenances in sufficient volume and at pressures adequate to
enable to fixture to function properly, safely and free from defects and leaks.
2012 International Property Maintenance Code/Ordinance 279 35
505.4 Water Heating Facilities: Water heating facilities shall be properly installed, maintained and
capable of providing an adequate amount of water to be drawn at every required sink, lavatory,
bathtub, shower and laundry facility at a minimum temperature of 110°F (43°C). A gas-burning water
heater shall not be located in any bathroom, toilet room, bedroom or other occupied room normally
kept closed, unless adequate combustion air is provided. An approved combination temperature and
pressure-relief valve and relief valve discharge pipe shall be properly installed and maintained on water
heaters.
SECTION 506: SANITARY DRAINAGE SYSTEM
506.1 General: All plumbing fixtures shall be properly connected to either a public sewer system or to
an approved private sewage disposal system.
No person shall permit sanitary sewage or drainage to create a safety or health hazard to persons or
property by reason of inadequate or improper construction, maintenance or manner of discharge.
506.2 Maintenance: Every plumbing stack, vent, waste and sewer line shall function properly and be
kept free from obstructions, leaks and defects.
506.3 Grease Interceptors: Grease interceptors and automatic grease removal devices shall be
maintained in accordance with this code and the manufacturer’s installation instructions. Grease
interceptors and automatic grease removal devices shall be regularly services and cleaned to prevent
the discharge of oil, grease, and other substances harmful or hazardous to the building drainage
system, the public sewer, the private sewage disposal system or the sewage treatment plant or
processes. All records of maintenance, cleaning and repairs shall be available for inspection by the
code official.
SECTION 507: STORM DRAINAGE
507.1 General: Drainage of roofs and paved areas, yards and courts and other open areas on a
premises shall not be discharged in a manner that violates any other applicable regulation or that
creates a nuisance. No person shall permit storm drainage to create a safety or health hazard or
persons or property by reason of inadequate or improper construction, maintenance or manner of
discharge. No person shall permit roof gutters, drains or any other drainage system designed and
constructed to transport storm water to be discharged into any sanitary sewage system or on to the
property of another person. Basement floor drains are allowed to discharge storm water into a sanitary
sewage system provided that such drains are properly installed, connected and maintained.
2012 International Property Maintenance Code/Ordinance 279 36
CHAPTER 6
MECHANICAL AND ELECTRICAL REQUIREMENTS
SECTION 601: GENERAL
601.1 Scope: The provisions of this chapter shall govern the minimum mechanical and electrical
facilities and equipment to be provided.
601.2 Responsibility: The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain mechanical and electrical
facilities and equipment in compliance with these requirements. A person shall not occupy as owneroccupant
or permit another person to occupy any premises which does not comply with the
requirements of this chapter.
SECTION 602: HEATING FACILITIES
602.1 Facilities Required: Heating facilities shall be provided in structures as required by this section.
602.2 Residential Occupancies: Dwellings shall be provided with heating facilities capable of
maintaining a room temperature of 68°F (20°C) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms
based on the winter outdoor design temperature for the locality indicated in Appendix D of the
International Plumbing Code. Cooking appliances shall not be used, nor shall portable unvented fuelburning
space heaters be used, as means to provide required heating.
Exception: In areas where the average monthly temperature is above 30°F (-1°C), a minimum
temperature of 65°F (18°C) shall be maintained.
602.3 Heat Supply: Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases or lets one or more
dwelling units or sleeping units on terns, either expressed or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants
thereof shall supply heat during the period from October 1 to May 31 to maintain a minimum
temperature of 68°F (20°C) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms.
Exceptions:
1. When the outdoor temperature is below the winter outdoor design temperature for
the locality, maintenance of the minimal room temperature shall not be required
provided that the heating system is operating at is full design capacity. The winter
outdoor design temperature for the locality shall be as indicated in Appendix D of the
International Plumbing Code.
2. In areas where the average monthly temperature is above 30°F (-1°C), a minimum
temperature of 65°F (18°C) shall be maintained.
602.4 Occupiable Work Spaces: Indoor Occupiable work spaces shall be supplied with heat during the
period from October 1 to May 31 to maintain a minimum temperature of 65°F (18°C) during the period
the spaces are occupied.
Exceptions:
2012 International Property Maintenance Code/Ordinance 279 37
1. Processing, storage and operation areas that require cooling or special temperature
conditions.
2. Areas in which persons are primarily engaged in vigorous physical activities.
602.5 Room Temperature Measurement: The required room temperature shall be measured 3 feet
above the floor near the center of the room and 2 feet inward from the center of each exterior wall.
SECTION 603: MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT
603.1 Mechanical Appliances: All mechanical appliances, fireplaces, solid fuel-burning appliances,
cooking appliances and water heating appliances shall be properly installed and maintained in a safe
working condition, and shall be capable of performing the intended function.
603.2 Removal or Combustion Products: All fuel-burning equipment and appliances shall be connected
to an approved chimney or vent.
Exception: Fuel-burning equipment and appliances which are labeled for unvented operation.
603.3 Clearances: All required clearances to combustible materials shall be maintained.
603.4 Safety Controls: All safety controls for fuel-burning equipment shall be maintained in effective
operation.
603.5 Combustion Air: A supply of air for complete combustion of the fuel and for ventilation of the
space containing the fuel-burning equipment shall be provided for the fuel-burning equipment.
603.6 Energy Conservation Devices: Devices intended to reduce fuel consumption by attachment to a
fuel-burning appliance, to the fuel supply line thereto, or to the vent outlet or vent piping therefrom,
shall not be installed unless labeled for such purpose and the installation is specifically approved.
SECTION 604: ELECTRICAL FACILITIES
604.1 Facilities Required: Every occupied building shall be provided with an electric system in
compliance with the requirements of this section and Section 605.
604.2 Service: The size and usage of appliances and equipment shall serve as a basis for determining
the need for additional facilities in accordance with NFPA 70. Dwelling units shall be served by a threewire
120/240 volt, single-phase electrical service having a minimum rating of 60 amperes.
604.3 Electrical System Hazards: Where it is found that the electrical system in a structure constitutes
a hazard to the occupants or the structure by reason of inadequate service, improper fusing,
insufficient receptacle and lighting outlets, improper wiring or installation, deterioration or damage, or
for similar reasons, the code official shall require the defects to be corrected to eliminate the hazard.
604.3.1 Abatement of Electrical Hazards Associated with Water Exposure: The provisions of
this section shall govern the repair and replacement of electrical systems and equipment that have
been exposed to water.
2012 International Property Maintenance Code/Ordinance 279 38
604.3.1.1 Electrical Equipment: Electrical distribution equipment, motor circuits, power
equipment, transformers, wire, cable, flexible cords, wiring devices, ground fault circuit
interrupters, surge protectors, molded case circuit breakers, low-voltage fuses,
luminaires, ballasts, motors and electronic control, signaling and communication
equipment that have been exposed to water shall be replaced in accordance with the
provisions of the International Building Code.
Exceptions: The following equipment shall be allowed to be repaired where an
inspection report from the equipment manufacturer or approved manufacturer’s
representative indicates that the equipment has not sustained damage that requires
replacement:
1. Enclosed switches, rated a maximum of 600 volts or less;
2. Busway, rated a maximum of 600 volts;
3. Panelboards, rated a maximum of 600 volts;
4. Switchboards, rated a maximum of 600 volts;
5. Fire pump controllers, rate a maximum of 600 volts;
6. Manual and magnetic motor controllers;
7. Motor control centers;
8. Alternating current high-voltage circuit breakers;
9. Protective relays, meters and current transformers;
10. Low-Voltage power circuit breakers;
11. Low- and medium-voltage switchgear;
12. Liquid-filled transformers;
13. Cast-resin transformers;
14. Wire or cable that is suitable for wet locations and whose ends have not
been exposed to water;
15. Wire or cable, not containing fillers, that is suitable for wet locations and
whose ends have not been exposed to water;
16. Luminaires that are listed as submersible;
17. Motors;
18. Electronic control, signaling and communication equipment.
604.3.2 Abatement of Electrical Hazards Associated with Fire Exposure: The provisions of this
section shall govern the repair and replacement of electrical systems and equipment that have
been exposed to fire.
2012 International Property Maintenance Code/Ordinance 279 39
604.3.2.1 Electrical Equipment: Electrical switches, receptacles and fixtures, including
furnace, water heating, security system and power distribution circuits, that have been
exposed to fire, shall be replaced in accordance with the provisions of the International
Building Code.
Exception: Electrical switches, receptacles and fixtures that shall be allowed to
be repaired where an inspection report from the equipment manufacturer or approved manufacturer’s
representative indicates that the equipment has not sustained damage that requires replacement.
SECTION 605: ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT
605.1 Installation: All electrical equipment, wiring and appliances shall be properly installed and
maintained in a safe and approved manner.
605.2 Receptacles: Every habitable space in a dwelling shall contain at least two separate and remote
receptacle outlets. Every laundry area shall contain at least one grounded-type receptacle or a
receptacle with a ground fault circuit interrupter. Every bathroom shall contain at least one receptacle.
Any new bathroom receptacle outlet shall have ground fault circuit interrupter protection. All
receptacle outlets shall have the appropriate faceplate cover for the location.
605.3 Luminaires: Every public hall, interior stairway, toilet room, kitchen, bathroom, laundry room,
boiler room and furnace room shall contain at least one electric luminaire. Pool and spa luminaires
over 15 V shall have ground fault circuit interrupter protection.
605.4 Wiring: Flexible cords shall not be used for permanent wiring, or for running through doors,
windows, or cabinets, or concealed within walls, floors or ceilings.
SECTION 606: ELEVATORS, ESCALATORS AND DUMBWAITERS
606.1 General: Elevators, dumbwaiters and escalators shall be maintained in compliance with ASME
A17.1. The most current certificate of inspection shall be on display at all times within the elevator or
attached to the escalator or dumbwaiter, be available for public inspection in the office of the building
operator or be posted in a publicly conspicuous location approved by the code official. The inspection
and tests shall be performed at not less than periodic intervals listed in ASME A17.1, Appendix N,
except where otherwise specified by the authority having jurisdiction.
606.2 Elevators: In buildings equipped with passenger elevators, at least one elevator shall be
maintained in operation at all times when the building is occupied.
Exception: Buildings equipped with only one elevator shall be permitted to have the elevator
temporarily out of service for testing or servicing.
SECTION 607: DUCT SYSTEMS
607.1 General: Duct systems shall be maintained free of obstructions and shall be capable of
performing the required function.
2012 International Property Maintenance Code/Ordinance 279 40
CHAPTER 7
FIRE SAFETY REQUIREMENTS
SECTION 701: GENERAL
701.1 Scope: The provisions of this chapter shall govern the minimum conditions and standards for fire
safety relating to structures and exterior premises, including fire safety facilities and equipment to be
provided.
701.2 Responsibility: The owner of the premises shall provide and maintain such fire safety facilities
and equipment in compliance with these requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant
or permit another person to occupy any premises that do not comply with the requirements of this
chapter.
SECTION 702: MEANS OF EGRESS
702.1 General: A safe, continuous and unobstructed path of travel shall be provided from any point in
a building or structure to the public way. Means of egress shall comply with the International Fire Code.
702.2 Aisles: The required width of aisles in accordance with the International Fire Code shall be
unobstructed.
702.3 Locked Doors: All means of egress doors shall be readily openable from the side of which egress
is to be made without the need for keys, special knowledge or effort, except where the door hardware
conforms to that permitted by the International Building Code.
702.4 Emergency Escape Openings: Required emergency escape openings shall be maintained in
accordance with the code in effect at the time of construction, and the following. Required emergency
escape and rescue openings shall be operational from the inside of the room without the use of keys or
tools. Bars, grilles, grates or similar devices are permitted to be placed over emergency escape and
rescue openings provided the minimum net clear opening size complies with the code that was in
effect at the time of construction and such devices shall be releasable or removable from the inside
without the use of a key, tool or force greater than that which is required for normal operation of the
escape and rescue opening.
SECTION 703: FIRE-RESISTANCE RATINGS
703.1 Fire-resistance-rated assemblies: The required fire-resistance rating of fire-resistance-rate walls,
fire stops, shaft enclosures, partitions and floors shall be maintained.
2012 International Property Maintenance Code/Ordinance 279 41
703.2 Opening Protectives: Required opening protectives shall be maintained in an operative
condition. All fire and smokestop doors shall be maintained in operable condition. Fire doors and
smoke barrier doors shall not be blocked or obstructed or otherwise made inoperable.
SECTION 704: FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS
704.1 General: All systems, devices and equipment to detect a fire, actuate an alarm, or suppress or
control a fire or any combination thereof shall be maintained in an operable condition at all times in
accordance with the International Fire Code.
704.1.1 Automatic Sprinkler Systems: Inspection, testing and maintenance or automatic
sprinkler systems shall be in accordance with NFPA 25.
704.2 Smoke Alarms: Single- or multiple-station smoke alarms shall be installed and maintained in
Groups R-2., R-3, R-4 and in dwellings not regulated in Group R occupancies, regardless of occupant
load at all of the following locations:
1. On the ceiling or wall outside of each separate sleeping area in the immediate vicinity of
bedrooms.
2. In each room used for sleeping purposes.
3. In each story within a dwelling unit, including basements and cellars but not including crawl
spaces and uninhabitable attics. In dwellings or dwelling units with split levels and without an
intervening door between the adjacent levels, a smoke alarm installed on the upper level shall
suffice for the adjacent lower level provided that the lower level is less than one full story
below the upper level.
Single- or multiple-station smoke alarms shall be installed in other groups in accordance with
the International Fire Code.
704.3 Power Source: In Group R occupancies and in dwellings not regulated as Group R occupancies,
single-station smoke alarms shall receive their primary power from the building wiring provided that
such wiring is served from a commercial source and shall be equipped with a battery backup. Smoke
alarms shall emit a signal when the batteries are low. Wiring shall be permanent and without a
disconnecting switch other than as required for overcurrent protection.
Exception: Smoke alarms are permitted to be solely battery operated in buildings where no
construction is taking place, buildings that are not served from a commercial power source and
in existing areas of buildings undergoing alterations or repairs that do not result in the removal
of interior wall or ceiling finishes exposing the structure, unless there is an attic, crawl space or
basement available which could provide access for building wiring without the removal of
interior finishes.
704.4 Interconnection: Where more than one smoke alarm is required to be installed within an
individual dwelling unit in Group R-2, R-3, R-4 and in dwellings not regulated as Group R occupancies,
the smoke alarms shall be interconnected in such a manner that the activation of one alarm will
2012 International Property Maintenance Code/Ordinance 279 42
activate all of the alarms in the individual unit. The alarm shall be clearly audible in all bedrooms over
background noise levels with all intervening doors closed.
Exceptions:
1. Interconnection is not required in buildings which are not undergoing alterations,
repairs or construction of any kind.
2. Smoke alarms in existing areas are not required to be interconnected where
alterations or repairs do not result in the removal of interior wall or ceiling finishes
exposing the structure, unless there is an attic, crawl space or basement available which
could provide access for interconnection without the removal of interior finishes.
2012 International Property Maintenance Code/Ordinance 279 43
2012 International Property Maintenance Code/Ordinance 279 44
2012 International Property Maintenance Code/Ordinance 279 45
APPENDIX A
BOARDING STANDARD
The provisions contained in this Appendix are not mandatory unless specifically referenced in the
adopting ordinance.
A101: GENERAL
A101.1 General: All windows and doors shall be boarded in an approve manner to prevent entry by
unauthorized persons and shall be painted to correspond to the color of the existing structure.
A102: MATERIALS
A102.1 Boarding Sheet Material: Boarding sheet material shall be minimum ½ inch thick wood
structural panels complying with the International Building Code.
A102.2 Boarding Framing Material: Boarding framing material shall be minimum nominal 2-inch by 4-
inch solid sawn lumber complying with the International Building Code.
A102.3 Boarding Fasteners: Boarding fasteners shall be minimum ?-inch diameter carriage bolts of
such a length as required to penetrate the assembly and as required to adequately attach the washers
and nuts. Washers and nuts shall comply with the International Building Code.
A103: INSTALLATION
A103.1 Boarding Installation: The boarding installation shall be in accordance with Figures A103.1(1)
and A103.1(2) and Sections A103.2 through A103.5.
A103.2 Boarding Sheet Material: The boarding sheet material shall be cut to fit the door or window
opening neatly or shall be cut to provide an equal overlap at the perimeter of the door or window.
A103.3 Windows: The window shall be opened to allow the carriage bolt to pass through or the
window sash shall be removed and stored. The 2-inch by 4-inch strong back framing material shall be
cut minimum 2 inches wider than the window opening and shall be placed on the side of the window
opening 6 inches minimum above the bottom and below the top of the window opening. The framing
and boarding shall be predrilled. The assembly shall be aligned and the bolts, washers and nut shall be
installed and secured.
A103.4 Door Walls: The door opening shall be framed with minimum 2-inch by 4-inch framing material
secured at the entire perimeter and vertical members at a maximum of 24 inches on center. Blocking
shall also be secured at a maximum of 48 inches on center vertically. Boarding sheet material shall be
secured with screws and nails alternating every 6 inches on center.
A103.5 Doors: Doors shall be secured by the same method as for windows or door openings. One door
to the structure shall be available for authorized entry and shall be secured and locked in an approved
manner.
A104: REFERENCED STANDARDS
IBC-12 International Building Code A102.1, A102.2, A102.3
2012 International Property Maintenance Code/Ordinance 279 46
2012 International Property Maintenance Code/Ordinance 279 47
2012 International Property Maintenance Code/Ordinance 279 48
2012 International Property Maintenance Code/Ordinance 279 49
2012 International Property Maintenance Code/Ordinance 279 50
2012 International Property Maintenance Code/Ordinance 279 51
2012 International Property Maintenance Code/Ordinance 279 52
2012 International Property Maintenance Code/Ordinance 279 53
2012 International Property Maintenance Code/Ordinance 279 54
2012 International Property Maintenance Code/Ordinance 279 55
2012 International Property Maintenance Code/Ordinance 279 56
2012 International Property Maintenance Code/Ordinance 279 57
2012 International Property Maintenance Code/Ordinance 279 58
Sugarcreek Borough Ordinance No. 160 of 1996 (As Amended)
1
AN ORDINANCE OF THE BOROUGH OF SUGARCREEK, VENANGO COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA. PROVIDING FOR TAX
EXEMPTION FOR IMPROVEMENTS TO CERTAIN DETERIORATED PROPERTY (ALL COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL
IDENTIFIED ON THE ATTACHED MAP) AND NEW CONSTRUCTION OF COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY
LOCATED IN THE INVESTMENT OPPORTUNITY AREAS PURSUANT TO PENNSYLVANIA ACT 76 OF 1977; DEFINING
ELIGIBLE INVESTMENT OPPORTUNITY AREAS; PROVIDING FOR AN EXEMPTION PERIOD; ESTABLISHING A SCHEDULE
OF EXEMPTION FOR THAT TIME PERIOD; AND PROVIDING A PROCEDURE FOR SECURING AN EXEMPTION.
WHEREAS, on December 1, 1977, the General Assembly of Pennsylvania passed act 76 of 1977, known as the
Local Economic Revitalization Tax Assistance Act (LERTA) authorizing local taxing authorities to provide for exemption
from taxes for certain deteriorated commercial, industrial or other business property; and
WHEREAS, there are deteriorated commercial, industrial or other business property (zoned: C-1, H/C, LI/C, LI,
and I) within the Borough of Sugarcreek as designated on the attached map, hereinafter the Borough of Sugarcreek
LERTA designated areas.
WHEREAS, the Council of the Borough of Sugarcreek, in accordance with said Act, held a public hearing to
determine the boundaries of the designated areas.
NOW, THEREFORE, be it ordained by the Council of the Borough of Sugarcreek, Pennsylvania, and it is hereby
ordained by the authority of the same as follows:
SECTION 1: DEFINITIONS
As used in this ordinance, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning set forth below:
A. “Improvement” means repair, construction, or reconstruction, including alterations and additions, having
the effect of rehabilitating a deteriorated property so that is becomes habitable or attains higher standards of
safety, health, economic use or amenity, or is brought into compliance with laws, ordinances or regulations
governing such standards. Ordinary upkeep and maintenance shall not be deemed an improvement. No
residential homes, apartments or other living establishments will be included.
B. “Investment Opportunity Areas” refers to all property within the boundaries of the Borough of Sugarcreek
LERTA designated area.
C. “Local Taxing Authority” means the Borough of Sugarcreek, Sugarcreek Area School District, the County of
Venango, or any other government entity having the authority to levy real property taxes within the Borough
of Sugarcreek.
D. “Municipal Governing Body” means the Borough of Sugarcreek and/or its Council.
E. “Deteriorated Property” means any building whether it is actually in a state of disrepair or determined to
be located in the designated deteriorated area; which has been determined as any Commercial,
Highway/Commercial, Light Industrial/Commercial, Light Industrial, or Industrial zoned areas.
SECTION 2: EXEMPTIONS
A. The exemption from real property taxes shall be limited:
1. To the exemption schedule as established within this Ordinance.
2. To that portion of the additional assessment attributed to the actual cost of improvements to the
deteriorated property.
Sugarcreek Borough Ordinance No. 160 of 1996 (As Amended)
2
3. To the assessment valuation attributed to the cost of construction of a new industrial, commercial
or other business unit.
B. In all cases the exemption from taxes shall be limited to that portion of the additional assessment
attributed to the improvement or new construction, as in the case may be and for which a separate or
additional assessment has been made by the Venango County Board of Assessment Appeal, and for which an
exemption has been separately requested.
C. No tax exemption shall be granted if the property owner does not secure the necessary and proper permits
prior to improving the property.
D. In any case after the effective date of this Ordinance when deteriorated property is damaged, destroyed or
demolished, by any cause or for any reason, and assessed valuation of the property affected has been
reduced as a result of the said damage, destruction or demolition, the exemption from real property taxation
authorized by this ordinance shall be limited to that portion of new assessment attributed to the actual cost
of improvements or construction that is in excess of the original assessments that existed prior to the
damage, destruction or demolition of the property.
SECTION 3: EXEMPTION SCHEDULE
A. For the ten years immediately following the year in which the improvements become assessable, the
following real estate tax exemption schedule shall be in effect:
Length Portion Exemption
First Year 100%
Second Year 90%
Third Year 80%
Fourth Year 70%
Fifth Year 60%
Sixth Year 50%
Seventh Year 40%
Eighth Year 30%
Ninth Year 20%
Tenth Year 10%
After the tenth year, the exemption shall terminate.
B. The exemption from taxes granted under this ordinance shall be upon the property exempted and shall not
terminate upon the sale or exchange of the property.
C. If an eligible property is granted tax exemption pursuant to the ordinance, the exemption shall not, during
the exemption period, be considered as a factor in assessing other properties.
D. If the use of the property at the time the exemption is granted is modified, terminated or changed during
the ten year exemption period in any way which would have affected the exemption if the property had been
so used when the exemption was granted, then, at the election of the Borough Council, the exemption shall
terminate as of the date the use was modified or terminated if the Council determines that continuation of
the exemption would be inconsistent with the purposes of the ordinance.
Sugarcreek Borough Ordinance No. 160 of 1996 (As Amended)
3
SECTION 4: PROCEDURE FOR OBTAINING EXEMPTION
A. Any person desiring tax exemption pursuant to this ordinance shall apply to the Borough of Sugarcreek at
the time a building is secured for construction of the improvement. The application shall be in writing upon
forms specified by the Borough, setting forth the following information.
1. The date the building permit was issued for said improvements.
2. The location of the property to be improved.
3. The nature of the property to be improved and the use of the property (industrial,
commercial, etc.)
4. The type of improvement.
5. The summary of the plan of the improvement.
6. The cost of the improvement.
7. The property has been inspected and verified by the Zoning Officer and/or Borough
Manager AKA Borough Administrator.
8. Such additional information as the Borough may require.
B. A copy of the exemption requests shall be forwarded to the County Board of Assessment by the Borough
Manager and/or Zoning Officer. The Board shall determine whether the exemption shall be granted and shall
assess separately the improvements and calculate the amounts of the assessment eligible for the tax
exemption in accordance with the limits established by this ordinance and notify the tax payer and local
taxing authorities of the reassessment and the amounts of the assessment eligible for tax exemption. In the
case of new construction, the board shall assess separately the unit and the land upon which the new
construction stands and shall otherwise perform its duties as above provided for construction of
improvements to properties.
C. The cost of improvements to be exempted and the schedule of taxes exempted, existing at the time of the
initial requests for tax exemption, shall be applicable to that exemption request, and subsequent amendment
to this ordinance, if any, shall not apply to requests initiated prior to their adoption.
D. Appeals from the reassessment and the amount eligible for the exemption may be taken by the Borough
or by the taxpayer as provided by law.
SECTION 5: EFFECTIVE DATE
This ordinance shall become effective upon adoption by the Valley Grove Area School District and the
Venango County Board of Commissioners of a resolution exempting from real property taxation properties in
accordance with the terms of this ordinance.
SECTION 6: SEVERABILITY
The provisions of this ordinance are severable and if any of it sections, clauses or sentences shall be held
illegal, invalid or unconstitutional section, clause or sentence had not been included herein.
SECTION 7: AMENDMENTS
No amendment to this ordinance shall be effective unless consented to by resolution or ordinance at each
local taxing authority which has consented to bound by the terms of this ordinance.
SECTION 8: REPEALER
That any ordinance or part of ordinance, conflicting with the provisions of this ordinance be and the same is
hereby repealed so far as the same affects this ordinance.
Sugarcreek Borough Ordinance No. 160 of 1996 (As Amended)
4
ORDAINED AND ENACTED AS THE LOCAL ECONOMIC REVITALIZATION TAX ASSISTANCE LAW (LERTA) ORDINANCE ON
THIS THIRD DAY OF APRIL 1996 BY THE BOROUGH COUNCIL OF THE BOROUGH OF SUGARCREEK, VENANGO COUNTY,
PENNSYLVANIA.
Sugarcreek Borough Ordinance No. 160 of 1996 (As Amended)
5
Sugarcreek Borough Ordinance No. 160 of 1996 (As Amended)
1
AN ORDINANCE OF THE BOROUGH OF SUGARCREEK, VENANGO COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA. PROVIDING FOR TAX
EXEMPTION FOR IMPROVEMENTS TO CERTAIN DETERIORATED PROPERTY (ALL COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL
IDENTIFIED ON THE ATTACHED MAP) AND NEW CONSTRUCTION OF COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY
LOCATED IN THE INVESTMENT OPPORTUNITY AREAS PURSUANT TO PENNSYLVANIA ACT 76 OF 1977; DEFINING
ELIGIBLE INVESTMENT OPPORTUNITY AREAS; PROVIDING FOR AN EXEMPTION PERIOD; ESTABLISHING A SCHEDULE
OF EXEMPTION FOR THAT TIME PERIOD; AND PROVIDING A PROCEDURE FOR SECURING AN EXEMPTION.
WHEREAS, on December 1, 1977, the General Assembly of Pennsylvania passed act 76 of 1977, known as the
Local Economic Revitalization Tax Assistance Act (LERTA) authorizing local taxing authorities to provide for exemption
from taxes for certain deteriorated commercial, industrial or other business property; and
WHEREAS, there are deteriorated commercial, industrial or other business property (zoned: C-1, H/C, LI/C, LI,
and I) within the Borough of Sugarcreek as designated on the attached map, hereinafter the Borough of Sugarcreek
LERTA designated areas.
WHEREAS, the Council of the Borough of Sugarcreek, in accordance with said Act, held a public hearing to
determine the boundaries of the designated areas.
NOW, THEREFORE, be it ordained by the Council of the Borough of Sugarcreek, Pennsylvania, and it is hereby
ordained by the authority of the same as follows:
SECTION 1: DEFINITIONS
As used in this ordinance, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning set forth below:
A. “Improvement” means repair, construction, or reconstruction, including alterations and additions, having
the effect of rehabilitating a deteriorated property so that is becomes habitable or attains higher standards of
safety, health, economic use or amenity, or is brought into compliance with laws, ordinances or regulations
governing such standards. Ordinary upkeep and maintenance shall not be deemed an improvement. No
residential homes, apartments or other living establishments will be included.
B. “Investment Opportunity Areas” refers to all property within the boundaries of the Borough of Sugarcreek
LERTA designated area.
C. “Local Taxing Authority” means the Borough of Sugarcreek, Sugarcreek Area School District, the County of
Venango, or any other government entity having the authority to levy real property taxes within the Borough
of Sugarcreek.
D. “Municipal Governing Body” means the Borough of Sugarcreek and/or its Council.
E. “Deteriorated Property” means any building whether or not it is actually in a state of disrepair, determined
to be located in the designated deteriorated areas, which has been determined as any Commercial,
Highway/Commercial, Light Industrial/Commercial, Light Industrial, or Industrial zoned areas, as well as any
other areas designated by the Council of the Borough of Sugarcreek as Borough of Sugarcreek LERTA
designated areas.
F. “Continuing Care Retirement Community” means an integrated housing and care development for persons
over the age of 55 years (or, for a couple, if one of the partners is over the age of 55 years) offering a
coordinated variety of accommodations, services and health care alternatives. The Continuing Care
Retirement Community may include, without limitation, independent living facilities, assisted living facilities
and nursing home accommodations. Health care alternatives may include, without limitation, in-home
Sugarcreek Borough Ordinance No. 160 of 1996 (As Amended)
2
visitation services, rehabilitation services and on-site physician and specialty clinics. Social, educational,
therapeutic and recreational activities and areas, as well as centers for inter-generational programs, to
promote the well-being of the residents of the Continuing Care Retirement Community shall be included. The
Continuing Care Retirement Community shall intend to and/or shall provide “continuing care” as defined in
Section 3 of the Continuing-Care Provider Registration and Disclosure Act, Act of June 18, 1984, P.L. 391, No.
82, §3 (40 P.S. §3203).
SECTION 2: EXEMPTIONS
A. The exemption from real property taxes shall be limited:
1. To the exemption schedule as established within this Ordinance.
2. To that portion of the additional assessment attributed to the actual cost of improvements to the
deteriorated property.
3. To be assessed valuation attributable to the cost of construction of a new industrial, commercial
or other business unit, including a Continuing Care Retirement Community or component thereof.
B. In all cases the exemption from taxes shall be limited to that portion of the additional assessment
attributed to the improvement or new construction, as in the case may be and for which a separate or
additional assessment has been made by the Venango County Board of Assessment Appeal, and for which an
exemption has been separately requested.
C. No tax exemption shall be granted if the property owner does not secure the necessary and proper permits
prior to improving the property.
D. In any case after the effective date of this Ordinance when deteriorated property is damaged, destroyed or
demolished, by any cause or for any reason, and assessed valuation of the property affected has been
reduced as a result of the said damage, destruction or demolition, the exemption from real property taxation
authorized by this ordinance shall be limited to that portion of new assessment attributed to the actual cost
of improvements or construction that is in excess of the original assessments that existed prior to the
damage, destruction or demolition of the property.
SECTION 3: EXEMPTION SCHEDULE
A. For the ten years immediately following the year in which the improvements become assessable, the
following real estate tax exemption schedule shall be in effect:
Length Portion Exemption
First Year 100%
Second Year 90%
Third Year 80%
Fourth Year 70%
Fifth Year 60%
Sixth Year 50%
Seventh Year 40%
Eighth Year 30%
Ninth Year 20%
Tenth Year 10%
After the tenth year, the exemption shall terminate.
Sugarcreek Borough Ordinance No. 160 of 1996 (As Amended)
3
B. The exemption from taxes granted under this ordinance shall be upon the property exempted and shall not
terminate upon the sale or exchange of the property.
C. If an eligible property is granted tax exemption pursuant to the ordinance, the exemption shall not, during
the exemption period, be considered as a factor in assessing other properties.
D. If the use of the property at the time the exemption is granted is modified, terminated or changed during
the ten year exemption period in any way which would have affected the exemption if the property had been
so used when the exemption was granted, then, at the election of the Borough Council, the exemption shall
terminate as of the date the use was modified or terminated if the Council determines that continuation of
the exemption would be inconsistent with the purposes of the ordinance.
SECTION 4: PROCEDURE FOR OBTAINING EXEMPTION
A. Any person desiring tax exemption pursuant to this ordinance shall apply to the Borough of Sugarcreek at
the time a building is secured for construction of the improvement. The application shall be in writing upon
forms specified by the Borough, setting forth the following information.
1. The date the building permit was issued for said improvements.
2. The location of the property to be improved.
3. The nature of the property to be improved and the use of the property (industrial,
commercial, etc.)
4. The type of improvement.
5. The summary of the plan of the improvement.
6. The cost of the improvement.
7. The property has been inspected and verified by the Zoning Officer and/or Borough
Manager AKA Borough Administrator.
8. Such additional information as the Borough may require.
B. A copy of the exemption requests shall be forwarded to the County Board of Assessment by the Borough
Manager and/or Zoning Officer. The Board shall determine whether the exemption shall be granted and shall
assess separately the improvements and calculate the amounts of the assessment eligible for the tax
exemption in accordance with the limits established by this ordinance and notify the tax payer and local
taxing authorities of the reassessment and the amounts of the assessment eligible for tax exemption. In the
case of new construction, the board shall assess separately the unit and the land upon which the new
construction stands and shall otherwise perform its duties as above provided for construction of
improvements to properties.
C. The cost of improvements to be exempted and the schedule of taxes exempted, existing at the time of the
initial requests for tax exemption, shall be applicable to that exemption request, and subsequent amendment
to this ordinance, if any, shall not apply to requests initiated prior to their adoption.
D. Appeals from the reassessment and the amount eligible for the exemption may be taken by the Borough
or by the taxpayer as provided by law.
Sugarcreek Borough Ordinance No. 160 of 1996 (As Amended)
4
SECTION 5: EFFECTIVE DATE
This ordinance shall become effective upon adoption by the Valley Grove Area School District and the
Venango County Board of Commissioners of a resolution exempting from real property taxation properties in
accordance with the terms of this ordinance.
SECTION 6: SEVERABILITY
The provisions of this ordinance are severable and if any of it sections, clauses or sentences shall be held
illegal, invalid or unconstitutional section, clause or sentence had not been included herein.
SECTION 7: AMENDMENTS
No amendment to this ordinance shall be effective unless consented to by resolution or ordinance at each
local taxing authority which has consented to bound by the terms of this ordinance.
SECTION 8: REPEALER
That any ordinance or part of ordinance, conflicting with the provisions of this ordinance be and the same is
hereby repealed so far as the same affects this ordinance.
ORDAINED AND ENACTED AS THE LOCAL ECONOMIC REVITALIZATION TAX ASSISTANCE LAW (LERTA) ORDINANCE ON
THIS THIRD DAY OF APRIL 1996 BY THE BOROUGH COUNCIL OF THE BOROUGH OF SUGARCREEK, VENANGO COUNTY,
PENNSYLVANIA.
THIS ORDINANCE INCLUDES AMENDMENTS MADE BY ORDINANCE 176 OF 1997
https://www.sugarcreekborough.us/documents/ord176.pdf
THIS ORDINANCE DOES NOT INCLUDE AMENDMENT MADE BY ORDINANCE 188 OF 1999 TO INCLUDE
INSTITUTIONAL ZONE (IZ) AS A LERTA DISIGNATED AREA.
https://www.sugarcreekborough.us/documents/ord188.pdf
Sugarcreek Borough Ordinance No. 160 of 1996 (As Amended)
5
Sugarcreek Borough Ordinance No. 176 of 1997
1
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING ORDINANCE NO. 160 OF 1996 TO DESIGNATE THE BOUNDARIES OF AN
ADDITIONAL DETERIORATED AREA UNDER AND PURSUANT TO THE LOCAL ECONOMIC REVITALIZATION TAX
ASSISTANCE ACT, ACT OF DECEMBER 1, 1977, P.L. 237, NO. 76 (72 P.S. §4722, ET SEQ) AND TO PROVIDE FOR CERTAIN
EXEMPTIONS FROM REAL PROPERTY TAXES FOR CONTINUING CARE RETIREMENT COMMUNITIES.
WHEREAS, Sugarcreek Borough Ordinance No. 160 of 1996 provides for certain exemptions from real
property taxation in designated deteriorated areas, (the “Borough of Sugarcreek LERTA designated areas”) in
accordance with the Local Economic Revitalization Tax Assistance Act, Act of December 1, 1977, P.L. 237, No. 76 (72
P.S. §4722, et seq) (“LERTA”); and
WHEREAS, the Council of the Borough of Sugarcreek has determined that an additional area within the said
Borough should be designated as a deteriorated area and added to the Borough of Sugarcreek LERTA designated
areas for the purposes of and in accordance with LERTA; and
WHEREAS, the Council of the Borough of Sugarcreek has further determined that new construction of and/or
improvements to a Continuing Care Retirement Community (as hereinafter defined) should be entitled to the real
estate tax exemption benefits of the said Ordinance No. 160 of 1996 and LERTA; and
WHEREAS, the Council of the Borough of Sugarcreek, in accordance with LERTA, held a public hearing to
determine the boundaries of the said additional designated area.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED, by the Council of the Borough of Sugarcreek, and it is hereby enacted
and ordained by the authority of the same:
SECTION 1
The area outlined on the attached map be, and is hereby, added to, and designated as part of, the Borough of
Sugarcreek LERTA designated areas.
SECTION 2
Section 1: DEFINITIONS of Ordinance No. 160 of 1996 be, and is hereby, amended to add Paragraph F.
thereto which shall read as follows:
“’Continuing Care Retirement Community’ means an integrated housing and care development for persons
over the age of 55 years (or, for a couple, if one of the partners is over the age of 55 years) offering a
coordinated variety of accommodations, services and health care alternatives. The Continuing Care
Retirement Community may include, without limitation, independent living facilities, assisted living facilities
and nursing home accommodations. Health care alternatives may include, without limitation, in-home
visitation services, rehabilitation services and on-site physician and specialty clinics. Social, educational,
therapeutic and recreational activities and areas, as well as centers for inter-generational programs, to
promote the well-being of the residents of the Continuing Care Retirement Community shall be included. The
Continuing Care Retirement Community shall intend to and/or shall provide “continuing care” as defined in
Section 3 of the Continuing-Care Provider Registration and Disclosure Act, Act of June 18, 1984, P.L. 391, No.
82, §3 (40 P.S. §3203).”
SECTION 3
Paragraph E of Section 1 DEFINITIONS of Ordinance 160 of 1996 be, and is hereby, amended to read as
follows:
Sugarcreek Borough Ordinance No. 176 of 1997
2
“’Deteriorated Property’ means any building whether or not it is actually in a state of disrepair, determined to
be located in the designated deteriorated areas, which has been determined as any Commercial,
Highway/Commercial, Light Industrial/Commercial, Light Industrial, or Industrial zoned areas, as well as any
other areas designated by the Council of the Borough of Sugarcreek as Borough of Sugarcreek LERTA
designated areas.”
SECTION 4
Paragraph A.3. of Section 2 EXEMPTIONS of Ordinance No. 160 of 1996 be, and is hereby, amended to read as
follows:
“3. To be assessed valuation attributable to the cost of construction of a new industrial, commercial or other
business unit, including a Continuing Care Retirement Community or component thereof.”
SECTION 5
All other parts of Ordinance No. 160 of 1996 are hereby confirmed and re-enacted, and any and all parts of
ordinances enacted prior hereto are repealed insofar as they are inconsistent with this Ordinance.
SECTION 6
This Ordinance shall be effective upon adoption by the Board of Directors of the Valley Grove Area School
District and by the Venango County Board of Commissioners of resolutions consenting hereto.
APPROVED this 20th day of August, 1997.
Sugarcreek Borough Ordinance No. 176 of 1997
3
Sugarcreek Borough Ordinance No. 188 of 1999
1
AN ORDINANCE OF THE BOROUGH OF SUGARCREEK, VENANGO COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA,
AMENDING ORDINANCE NO. 160 OF 1996, TO INCLUDE THE INSTITUTIONAL ZONE DESIGNATED IZ IN THE
BOROUGH OF SUGARCREEK LERTA DESIGNATED AREAS.
WHEREAS, the Borough of Sugarcreek has heretofore adopted Ordinance No. 160 of 1996, with a
finding that there were deteriorated commercial, industrial or other business property within the Borough
of Sugarcreek and designating Zones C-1, H/C, LI/C, LI, and I, as Borough of Sugarcreek LERTA designated
areas;
WHEREAS, an additional area should be designated and added to the designated LERTA areas of the
Borough of Sugarcreek.
NOW, THEREFORE, be it ordained by the Council of the Borough of Sugarcreek, Pennsylvania, and it
is hereby ordained by the authority of the same as follows:
SECTION 1
The area Zone IZ on the map attached to Ordinance No. 160 of 1996, be, and is hereby, designated
as a LERTA area in the Borough of Sugarcreek.
SECTION 2
Any Ordinance or part of an Ordinance conflicting with the provisions of this Ordinance be, and the
same is hereby repealed so far as the same affects this Ordinance.
SECTION 3
This Ordinance shall become effective immediately upon adoption by the Valley Grove Area School
District and the Venango County Board of Commissioners of a Resolution exempting from real property
taxation properties in accordance with the terms of this Ordinance.
Sugarcreek Borough Ordinance No. 188 of 1999
2
ORDINANCE NO. 22 OF 1969 AND AMENDMENTS “SUGARCREEK BOROUGH ZONING ORDINANCE”
ORDINANCE NO. 22 OF 1969
Borough of Sugarcreek
Venango County, Pennsylvania
Includes the following Zoning Ordinance Amendments:
Amendment Number Ordinance Number Date of Adoption
1 22A 1970
2 42 1972
3 69 1977
4 73 1978
5 78 1979
6 86 1980
7 96 1982
8 1986
Attached are the following Zoning Ordinance Amendments:
Ordinance Number Date of Adoption
120 1987
123 1989
175 1997
184 1998
186 1999
190 1999
195 2000
214 2002
234 2004
236 2004
253 2007
1 OF 54
ORDINANCE NO. 22 OF 1969 AND AMENDMENTS “SUGARCREEK BOROUGH ZONING ORDINANCE”
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
ARTICLE 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 4
Section 101 Title 4
102 Effective Date 4
103 Purpose and Authority 4
104 Definitions 4
105 Compliance 4
106 Severability 4
107 Repeal 4
108 Community Development Objectives 4
ARTICLE 2 DEFINITIONS 5
ARTICLE 3 DISTRICT REGULATIONS 9
Section 301 Zoning Map 9
302 Zoning Districts 9
303 District Boundaries 9
304 District Regulations 9
ARTICLE 4 SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS 16
Section 401 Nonconforming Uses 16
402 Existing Lots of Record 17
403 Application of Yard Requirements 17
404 Temporary Structures 18
405 Height Limitations 18
406 Performance Standards 18
407 Off-Street Loading and Parking 19
408 Mobile Homes 21
409 Mobile Home Parks 21
410 Planned Unit Residential Development 21
411 Water Recreation and Storage Areas 22
412 Signs 22
413 Agriculture 23
414 Flood Plains 24
415 Mineral Excavations and Processing 24
416 Junkyards and Similar Storage Areas (including automobile wrecking) 24
417 Solid Waste Processing and Disposal 25
418 Drive-In Theaters 25
419 Home Occupations 25
2 OF 54
ORDINANCE NO. 22 OF 1969 AND AMENDMENTS “SUGARCREEK BOROUGH ZONING ORDINANCE”
420 Residential Occupancy of Commercial Establishments 25
421 Transient Trailer Camps 26
422 Multiple-Family Dwellings 26
ARTICLE 5 ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT AND APPEALS 26
Section 501 Zoning Officer 26
502 Duties of the Zoning Officer 26
503 Zoning Certificates 27
504 Building Permits 27
505 Violations 27
506 Appeals 27
ARTICLE 6 ZONING HEARING BOARD 27
Section 601 General 27
602 Functions 28
603 Hearings 29
604 Appeal From Board's Decision 29
ARTICLE 7 CONDITIONAL USES 29
Section 701 General 29
702 Applications 30
703 Review 30
704 Criteria for Approval 30
705 Public Notice 31
ARTICLE 8 AMENDMENTS 31
Section 801 General 31
802 Petitions 31
803 Referral 31
804 Action 31
805 Curative Amendments 31
806 Amending Ordinances 31
3 OF 54
ORDINANCE NO. 22 OF 1969 AND AMENDMENTS “SUGARCREEK BOROUGH ZONING ORDINANCE”
ORDINANCE NO. 22 OF 1969
as amended
Borough of Sugarcreek
Venango County, Pennsylvania
AN ORDINANCE DIVIDING THE BOROUGH INTO VARIOUS ZONING DISTRICTS AND REGULATING THE CONTSTRUCTION,
ALERTERATION AND USE OF BUILDING OR LAND WITHIN EACH SUCH DISTRICT.
BE IT HEREBY ORDAINED by the Borough Council of the Borough of Sugarcreek, Venango County, Pennsylvania:
ARTICLE 1 – GENERAL PROVISIONS
101 TITLE: The official title of this Ordinance is “Sugarcreek Borough Zoning Ordinance”.
102 EFFECTIVE DATE: This Ordinance shall take effect June 13, 1969.
103 PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY: This Ordinance is adopted by virtue of the authority vested in the Borough and set forth in
the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code – Act 247 of 1968 as amended for the purpose of protecting the public health,
safety, morals and general welfare.
104 DEFINITIONS: Certain words or terms that appear on this Ordinance are defined in Article 2.
105 COMPLIANCE: No Structure shall be located, erected constructed, reconstructed, moved, altered, converted, or enlarged, nor
shall any structure or land be used or be designed to be used except in full compliance with all the provision of this Ordinance
and after the lawful issuance of all permits and certificates require by this Ordinance.
106 SEVERABILITY: If any provision of this Ordinance or the application of any provision to particular circumstances is held
invalid, the remainder of this Ordinance or the application of such provision to other circumstances shall not be affected.
107 REPEAL: Any resolution or ordinance or any part of any resolution or ordinance conflicting with the provisions of this
Ordinance is hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict.
108 COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVES: This Ordinance and Zoning Map are intended to promote, protect and facilitate
the public health, safety, morals, general welfare, coordinated and practical community development, proper density or population,
civil defense, the provisions of adequate light and air, police protection, vehicle parking and loading space, transportation, water,
sewerage, schools, public grounds and other public requirements as well as preventing the overcrowding of land, blight, danger and
congestion in travel and transportation, loss of health life or property from fire, panic or other dangers. More specifically, these
broad purposes are designed to clearly achieve the objectives of the Sugarcreek Borough Comprehensive Plan adopted on May 5,
1969 which is part of the Comprehensive Plan for Venango County and the Central Venango Region dated January 13, 1967. The
specific objectives upon which the Comprehensive Plan and this Ordinance have been based include the following:
1. To support and encourage order and beauty in the development of Sugarcreek Borough for the
convenience and pleasure of present citizens and future residents through sound land development
practices and the provisions of adequate public utilities and facilities.
2. To encourage future land development to complement a logical, harmonious and efficient pattern of future
growth.
3. To encourage future residential use to occur in a harmonious arrangement within compact neighborhood
units and to discourage strip development.
4. To preserve strategic properties suitable for industrial development for the establishment of diversified
industry throughout the Borough.
4 OF 54
ORDINANCE NO. 22 OF 1969 AND AMENDMENTS “SUGARCREEK BOROUGH ZONING ORDINANCE”
5. To guide commercial development in such a way as to minimize adverse influences on adjacent roads or
land values; to maintain and protect existing commercial uses; and to encourage new commercial facilities
to locate in functionally designed centers with safe and adequate highway access.
6. To protect property values to insure a suitable, attractive, and efficient community environment.
7. To encourage integrated and cohesive urban development.
8. To encourage developers to incorporate adequate public facilities and open spaces in neighborhood
design.
9. To increase and diversity and vitality of neighborhoods and prevent isolation of income groups by
encouraging dispersal of low and moderate income housing throughout the community.
ARTICLE 2 – DEFINITIONS
Except where specifically designed herein, all words used in this Ordinance shall carry their customary meanings. Words used in the
present tense shall include the future. The singular number shall include the plural, and the plural the singular. The word “shall” is
always mandatory and not permissive. The word “used” or “occupied” as applied to any land or building shall be construed to
include the words “intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied”.
Accessory Use: A use customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use or building and located on the same lot with
such principal use or building.
Agriculture: Any agriculture use, including farming, dairying, pasturage, agriculture, horticulture, viticulture, animal and poultry
husbandry, and forestry (including the harvesting of timber).
Alley: A narrow service way providing a secondary public means of access to abutting properties.
Areal: Area of a lot or site calculated from dimensions derived by horizontal projections of the site.
Basement: A story having more than 50% of its clear height below the average finished grade.
Board: The Zoning Hearing Board of the Borough of Sugarcreek, Venango County, Pennsylvania.
Boarding, Rooming, Tourist or Lodging House: A building where lodging is provided, for compensation, for five (5) or more
persons.
Building: A roofed structure enclosed by walls for the shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, goods, materials or animals.
Building Height: The vertical distance from the average elevation at finished grade to the highest point of the roof.
Building or Setback Line: Imaginary line parallel to or concentric with the nearest road right-of-way beyond which no portion of
a building may extend.
Camp or Campground: Site and facilities for temporary lodging of sportsmen, fisherman, campers, hunters or families.
Cart way: That portion of a road which is paved, graded or improved for travel by vehicles.
Church: An establishment designed and intended for religious instruction or public worship.
Clinical: Any establishment where human patients are examined and treated by doctors and other licensed professionals, but not
5 OF 54
ORDINANCE NO. 22 OF 1969 AND AMENDMENTS “SUGARCREEK BOROUGH ZONING ORDINANCE”
hospitalized overnight.
Club: An establishment operated by an organization for social, recreational, educational and fraternal purposes, but open only to
members and their guests and not the general public.
Commission (or Planning Commission): The Sugarcreek Borough Planning Commission of Venango County, Pennsylvania.
Conditional Use: A use which is subject to conditional approval by the Borough Council under the terms, procedures, and
conditions prescribed herein, after review and recommendation by the Borough Planning Commission as specified by this Ordinance.
Council: The Sugarcreek Borough Council, Sugarcreek Borough, Venango County, Pennsylvania.
Coverage: That percentage of the lot area covered by principal and accessory use structures.
Density: The number of families housed on a lot or group of lots divided by the area in acres of the lot or group of lots
computed exclusive or any portion of the right-of-way or any road.
Dwelling, Single Family: A detached dwelling arranged or used for occupancy by one family.
Dwelling Units: One or more rooms for living purposes with separate cooking and sanitary facilities accessible from the outdoors
either directly or through an entrance hall shared with other dwelling units.
Essential Services: The erection, construction, alteration or maintenance by public utilities or municipal or other governmental
agencies of underground or overhead gas, electrical, steam or water transmission or distribution systems, collection, communication,
supply or disposal system, including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduit cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes,
traffic signals, hydrant, and other similar equipment and accessories in connection therewith; reasonably necessary for the furnishing
of adequate services by such public utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies or for the public health or safety or
general welfare, but not including structures.
Family:
(1) One or more persons related by blood, marriage or foster placement plus domestic servants, occupying a
dwelling unit, including not more than four (4) boarders, roomers or lodgers.
(2) Not more than four (4) unrelated persons occupying a dwelling unit, living together and maintaining a
common household.
Garage, Repair (See also Service Station): Premises where motor vehicles are serviced and repaired, including engine overhaul
and body work.
Golf Course: Land for playing the sport of golf, consisting of a minimum of nine holes, but excluding miniature golf, par-three
golf, pitch and putt, driving ranges and similar golf-associated activities except as accessory uses on a golf course.
Home Occupation: Any use customarily carried on entirely within a dwelling by occupants thereof, which use is clearly incidental
and subordinate to the use of the dwelling purposes and which does not change the residential character thereof.
Junk Yard: Land or structure used for the depositing, collecting, storing, processing and sale of scrap metal, scrapped,
abandoned or junked motor vehicles, machinery, equipment, waste paper, glass, rags, containers, and other proper container for the
purpose of prompt disposal. Under this Ordinance two (2) or more scrapped, abandoned, or junked motor vehicles or one or
more dismembered vehicles, or parts thereof shall constitute a junk yard. A scrapped, abandoned or junked vehicle is any vehicle,
or remains of a vehicle, that does not have a valid inspection sticker received within twelve (12) months.
Light Manufacturing: The processing of fabrication of certain materials and products which does not produce noise, vibration, air
6 OF 54
ORDINANCE NO. 22 OF 1969 AND AMENDMENTS “SUGARCREEK BOROUGH ZONING ORDINANCE”
pollution, fire hazard or other disturbance of danger to neighboring properties.
Loading Berth: A portion of a lot usable for the standing loading or unloading of motor vehicles, and having a minimum
dimension of twelve (12) feet by fifty (50) feet with a vertical clearance of fourteen (14) feet.
Lot: A parcel of land.
Lot. Corner: A lot at the junction of and fronting on two (2) or more interesting street rights-of-way.
Lot. Depth of: A mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines.
Lot. Minimum Area of: The area of a lot computed exclusive of any portion of the right-of-way of any public road or street.
Lot of Record: Any lot which individually or as a part of a subdivision has been recorded in the office of the Recorder of
Deeds of Venango County prior to the effective date of this Ordinance.
Lot. Width of: The mean width measured at right angles to its depth.
Mobile home: A transportable, single family dwelling intended for permanent occupancy, office or place of assembly contained in
one unit, or in two units designed to be joined into one integral unit capable of again being separated for repeated towing, which
arrives at a site complete and ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly permanent foundation.
Mobile home Lot: A parcel of land in a mobile home park, improved with the necessary utility connections and other appurtences
necessary for the erections thereon of a single mobile home, which is leased by the park owner to the occupants of the mobile
home erected on the lot.
Mobile home Park: A parcel of land under single ownership which has been planned and improved for the placement of mobile
homes for nontransient use, consisting of two (2) or more mobile home lots.
Nonconforming Structures: A structure of part of a structure manifestly not designed to comply with the applicable use provisions
in a zoning ordinance or prior to the enactment of such ordinance or amendment heretofore or hereafter enacted, where such
structure lawfully existed prior to the enactment of such ordinance or amendment or prior to the application of such ordinance or
amendment to its location by reason of annexation. Such nonconforming structures include, but are not limited to, nonconforming
signs.
Nonconforming Use: A use, whether of land or of structure, which does not comply with the applicable use provisions in a
zoning ordinance or amendment heretofore or hereafter enacted, where such use was lawfully in existence prior to the enactment of
such ordinance or amendment, or prior to the application of such ordinance or amendment to its location by reason of annexation.
Pennsylvania Planning Code: Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (Act 247 of July 31, 1968) as the same may be
amended from time to time.
Permitting Use: Any use of land and/or structure(s) in a district which is in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance.
Personal Services: Any enterprise conducted which primarily offers services to the general public, such as: shoe repair, valet
service, watch repairing, barber shops, beauty parlors, and related activities.
Professional Services: The use of offices and related spaces for such professional services as are provided by doctors, lawyers,
architects, engineers, and similar professions.
Professional Offices: The use of offices and related spaces for such professional services as are provided by doctors, lawyers,
7 OF 54
ORDINANCE NO. 22 OF 1969 AND AMENDMENTS “SUGARCREEK BOROUGH ZONING ORDINANCE”
architects, engineers and similar professions.
Road or Street: A street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway, freeway, parkway, lane, alley, viaduct and and other way used by
vehicles or pedestrians whether public or private including the entire right-of-way.
Screening: Screening relative to this Ordinance shall mean a fence, evergreen hedge, or wall at least eight (8) feet high, or
other approved natural or constructed means of restricting visual contact with the screened area.
Service Station: A retail place of business engaged primarily in the sale of motor fuels, but also in supplying goods and services
generally required in the operation and maintenance of automotive vehicles and the fulfilling of motorists needs.
Sign: Any structure or device to attract attention by words or graphic display.
Special Exception: A use which the Zoning Hearing Board is permitted to authorize in specific instances listed in this Ordinance
under the terms, procedures, and conditions prescribed herein.
Specialized Animal Raising and Care: The use of land and structures for the raising and care of fur-bearing animals, the
stabling and care of horses, animal kennels, bird raising, or similar operations.
Story: The portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there
be no floor above it, the space between such floor and the ceiling above it. A story shall be considered as a basement if more
than 50% of its clear height is below finished grade, and it is not used for business or dwelling purposes.
Structure: Any manmade object having an ascertainable stationary location on or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the
land.
Transient Trailer Camp: A camp or park providing sites exclusively for travel trailers or motor homes.
Travel Trailer: A mobile vehicle, with wheels, designed for overnight occupancy or camping purposes, capable of being towed by
a passenger automobile.
Truck Stop: A facility designed to provide for service and repair of trucks and associated motorized equipment and which may
incidentally provide for eating and lodging facilities.
Truck Terminal: A private facility to accommodate the service, repair, and storage of trucks and other motorized equipment, and
which may provide warehousing activities and minimal sleeping quarters for truck drivers, and associate truck drivers, of the truck
owners and/or operating company.
Variance: A departure from the strict letter of the Zoning Ordinance as it applies to specific properties as authorized by the
Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance.
Yard: Any open space located on the same lot with a building, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground up, except for
such projections as are expressly permitted by this Ordinance.
Yard, Front: An open space extending the full width of the lot between the building and the road right-of-way line.
Yard, Rear: An open space extending the full width of the lot between the building and rear lot line.
Yard, Side: An open space extending from the front yard to the rear yard between the building and the nearest side lot line.
Zoning Certificate: The written authorization issued by the Zoning Officer for the use of land, or buildings, or other structures.
8 OF 54
ORDINANCE NO. 22 OF 1969 AND AMENDMENTS “SUGARCREEK BOROUGH ZONING ORDINANCE”
Zoning Map: The map containing the zoning districts of Sugarcreek Borough, Venango County, Pennsylvania, together with all
amendments subsequently adopted.
Zoning Officer: The Zoning Officer or authorized representative, appointed by the Sugarcreek Borough Council, Venango County,
Pennsylvania.
ARTICLE 3 – DISTRICT REGULATIONS
301 ZONING MAP: A map entitled “Sugarcreek Borough Zoning Map” is hereby adopted as part of this Ordinance. The Zoning
Map shall be kept on file available for examination at the Sugarcreek Municipal Building.
302 ZONING DISTRICTS: The Borough is divided into the following districts stated in this Ordinance as shown by the district
boundaries in the Zoning Map.
A-1 Conservation
R-1 Suburban Residential
R-2 Urban Residential
I-Z Institutional Zone
C-1 Commercial
C-2 Highway Commercial
LI-C Light Industrial/Commercial
I-1 Light Industrial
I-2 Heavy Industrial
303 DISTRICT BOUNDARIES: The boundaries between districts are centerlines of streets, alleys, railroads rights-of-way, streams, or
such lines extended, or lines parallel thereto or concentric therewith, or property lines when approximate thereto or may be lines
otherwise indicated on the Zoning Map. When the Zoning Officer cannot definitely determine the location of a district boundary, he
shall deny the application and the Zoning Hearing Board, upon appeal, shall interpret the location of the district boundary.
304 DISTRICT REGULATIONS: Lot and yard-dimensions, permitted uses, conditional uses and special exceptions, maximum height
of structures and maximum lot coverage are specified for each district in Tables 304 (A) and 304 (B). Any use not expressly
listed for a district is prohibited in that district. Conditional uses require approval of the Borough Council after recommendation by
the Planning Commission, whereas permitted uses require only normal application procedures. Uses are normally accessory to the
declared permitted uses are also permitted. Special exceptions require the approval of the Zoning Hearing Board.
9 OF 54
ORDINANCE NO. 22 OF 1969 AND AMENDMENTS “SUGARCREEK BOROUGH ZONING ORDINANCE”
TABLE 304 (A)
PERMITTED USES, SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS, AND CONDITIONAL USES
A-1 CONSERVATION DISTRICT
Permitted Uses Special Exceptions
1. Agriculture 1. Home Occupations
2. Single-Family Detached Dwellings 2. Water Recreation and
3. Individual Mobile homes Storage
4. Parks and Playgrounds 3. Country Clubs and Lodges
5. Churches 4. Fire Stations
6. Hunting Preserves and Game Lands 5. Municipal Buildings
7. Golf Courses 6. Open Land Recreational Uses
8. Camps and Campgrounds 7. Radio or TV Sending or
9. Essential Services Boosting Stations
8. Nurseries and Green houses
9. Sawmills and Lumber Storage
10. Commercial Indoor and
Outdoor Amusements
11. Transient Trailer Camps
12. Hospitals and Clinics
for Humans
13. Animal Clinics
14. Nursing and Convalescent
Homes
15. Cemeteries
16. Specialized Animal Raising
17. Stable and Riding Academies
18. Ski Facilities
19. Public Utility Buildings
20. Community or Social Buildings
and Uses
Conditional Uses
1. Mobile Parks
2. Junk Yards
3. Solid Waste Processing & Disposal
4. Motels
5. Sewage Treatment Facilities
6. Mineral Excavation and Processing
7. Airports
8. Planned Unit Residential Projects
9. Public and Parochial Schools and Colleges
10. Eating and Drinking Establishments
R-1 SUBURBAN RESIDENTIAL
Permitted Uses 
1. Single-Family Detached Dwellings 
2. Individual Mobile homes 
3. Churches 
10 OF 54
ORDINANCE NO. 22 OF 1969 AND AMENDMENTS “SUGARCREEK BOROUGH ZONING ORDINANCE”
4. Libraries 
5. Essential Services 
6. Public Utilities Pedestals and Buildings (Not Storage) 
7. Nursing and Convalescent Homes 
8. Continuing Care Retirement Communities 
9. No-Impact Home-Based Businesses 
10. Forestry

Special Exceptions
1. Home Occupations
2. Water Recreation and Storage
3. Parks and Playgrounds
4. Golf Courses
5. Fire Stations
6. Public Utility Buildings
7. Multiple-Family Dwellings
8. Municipal Buildings
9. Nursing and Convalescent Homes
10. Cemeteries
11. Community or Social Buildings and Uses
Conditional Uses
1. Mineral Excavation and Processing
2. Sewage Treatment Facilities
3. Planned Unit Residential Projects
4. Public and Parochial Schools and Colleges
5. Mobile home Parks
6. Agriculture
R-2 URBAN RESIDENTIAL
Permitted Uses 
1. Single-Family Detached Dwellings 
2. Individual Mobile homes 
3. Churches 
4. Libraries 
Special Exceptions
1. Home Occupations
2. Multiple-Family Dwellings
3. Water Recreation and Storage
4. Parks and Playgrounds
5. Golf Courses
6. Nursing and Convalescent Homes
7. Nursery Schools
8. Fire Stations
9. Public Utility Buildings
10. Municipal Buildings
11. Community or Social Buildings and Uses.
Conditional Uses
1. Mineral Excavation and Processing
2. Sewage Treatment Facilities
3. Mobile home Parks
4. Public and Parochial Schools and Colleges
5. Planned Unit Residential Projects
6. Agriculture
IZ – INSTITUTIONAL ZONE
Permitted Uses Special Exceptions
1. Single-Family Dwellings 1. Home Occupations
2. Hospitals and Clinic for 2. Multiple-Family
3. Medical and Medically Related Personal and 3. Fire Stations
Professional Offices 4. Churches
4. Library Buildings 5. Residential Occupancy of Commercial Establishments
5. Commercial Medical Schools 6. Motels and Hotels
6. Eating and Drinking Establishments (except those 7. Funeral Homes
11 OF 54
ORDINANCE NO. 22 OF 1969 AND AMENDMENTS “SUGARCREEK BOROUGH ZONING ORDINANCE”
serving alcoholic beverages and drive-in types)
7. Beauty Shops and Barber Shops
8. Pharmacies which dispense drugs and medical
supplies only
9. Flower Shops
10. Domiciliary Care
11. Essential Services
12. Rooming Houses
13. Gift Shops
14. Day Care/Visiting Care Services
Conditional Uses
1. Retail Businesses (Compatible with the area)
2. Parking Ramp Structures
3. Dormitories
C-1 COMMERCIAL
Permitted Uses Special Exceptions
1. Retail Business 1. Drive-in type eating and drinking establishments
2. Eating and Drinking Establishments (but NOT 2. Motels
including drive-in types) 3. Water Recreation and Storage
3. Food Stores 4. Auto Sales, Service and Repair
4. Offices 5. Churches
5. Personal and Professional Services 6. Animal Clinics
6. Municipal Buildings 7. Hospitals and Clinics for Humans
7. Public Utility Buildings 8. Fire Stations
8. Commercial Schools 9. Libraries
9. Commercial Indoor and Outdoor Amusements 10. Residential Occupancy of Commercial Establishments
10. Clubs
11. Funeral Homes
12. Essential Services
13. Community or Social Buildings and Uses
Conditional Uses
1. Sewage Treatment Facilities
2. Mineral Excavation and Processing
3. Agriculture
C-2 HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL
Permitted Use s Special Exceptions
1. Eating and Drinking Establishments (including 1. Mobile home Parks
drive-in type with outside service) 2. Research and Testing Laboratories
2. Retail Business 3. Water Recreation and Storage
3. Food Storage 4. Animal Clinics
4. Motels 5. Residential Occupancy of Commercial Establishment
5. Auto Sales, Service and Repair
6. Offices
7. Personal and Professional Services
8. Commercial Indoor and Outdoor Amusements
9. Mobile home Sales and Displays
10. Public Utility Buildings
12 OF 54
ORDINANCE NO. 22 OF 1969 AND AMENDMENTS “SUGARCREEK BOROUGH ZONING ORDINANCE”
11. Municipal Buildings
12. Fire Stations
13. Churches
14. Hospitals and Clinics for Humans
15. Essential Services
16. Community or Social Buildings and Uses
Conditional Uses
1. Sewage Treatment Facilities
2. Mineral Excavation and Processing
3. Agriculture
LI/C LIGHT INDUSTRIAL/COMMERCIAL
Permitted Uses Special Exceptions
1. Eating and Drinking Establishments 1. Churches
2. Retail Businesses 2. Community Buildings
3. Food Supermarkets 3. Auto Body Repair Shops
4. Motels
5. Automobile and Truck Sales (Excluding Body Work)
6. Offices and/or Office Buildings
7. Public Utility Buildings
8. Municipal and/or Government Buildings
9. Essential Services
10. Research and Testing Laboratories (except explosive testing)
11. Light Manufacturing (As defined by Article 2)
12. Warehouse
13. Truck Terminals
14. Fire Stations
15. Wholesale Businesses
Conditional Uses
1. Sewage Treatment Facilities
2. Mineral Excavation and Processing
3. Heavy Manufacturing
I-1 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL
Permitted Uses Special Exceptions
1. Research and Testing Laboratories 1. Water Recreation and Storage
2. Office Buildings 2. Manufacturing meeting Performance Standards of
3. Light Manufacturing (as defined by Article 2) Section 406
including production of following goods: home 3. Truck Terminals
appliances; electrical instruments; office machines; 4. Bulk Fuel Storage
precision instruments; electronic devices; timepieces; 5. Public Utility Buildings
jewelry; optical goods; musical instruments; 6. Fire Stations
novelties; wood products; printed material; 7. Sawmills and Lumber Storage
lithographic plates; type compositions; machine tools; 8. Retail Business
dies and gauges; ceramics; apparel; lightweight 9. Auto and Truck Sales and Service
nonferrous metal castings; light sheet metal products; 10. Eating and Drinking Establishments
plastic goods; pharmaceutical goods; and food products, 11. Community or Social Buildings and Uses
but not including animal slaughtering, curing nor
rendering of fats.
4. Municipal Buildings
5. Warehousing
6. Essential Services
13 OF 54
ORDINANCE NO. 22 OF 1969 AND AMENDMENTS “SUGARCREEK BOROUGH ZONING ORDINANCE”
Conditional Uses
1. Mineral Excavation and Processing
2. Sewage Treatment Facilities
3. Airports
4. Agriculture
I-2 HEAVY INDUSTRIAL
Permitted Uses Special Exceptions
1. Research and Testing Laboratories 1. Oil Refineries
2. Office Buildings 2. Water Recreation and Storage
3. Warehousing 3. Bulk Fuel Storage
4. Light Manufacturing (as defined by Article 2) 4. Fire Stations
including production of following goods: home 5. Heavy Manufacturing (provided said use is not
appliances; electrical instruments; office machines; objectionable to immediate neighbors because of noise,
precision instruments; electronic devices; timepieces; vibration or emission of noxious gases, fumes or dust)
jewelry; optical goods; musical instruments; novelties; 6. Public Utility Buildings
wood products; printed material; lithographic plates; 7. Community or Social Buildings and Uses
type compositions; machine tools; dies and guages; 8. Eating and Drinking Establishments
ceramics; apparel; lightweight nonferrous metal castings; 9. Auto and Truck Sales, Service, and Repairs
light sheet metal products; plastic goods; pharmaceutical
goods; and food products, bot not including animal slaughtering,
curing nor rendering of fats.
5. Essential Services
6. Truck Terminals
Conditional Uses
1. Sewage Treatment Facilities
2. Mineral Excavation and Processing
3. Airports
4. Agriculture
14 OF 54
ORDINANCE NO. 22 OF 1969 AND AMENDMENTS “SUGARCREEK BOROUGH ZONING ORDINANCE”
TABLE 304(B) LOT, YARD, & HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS
ZONING DISTRICT Min. Area
(Sq. Ft. or
acres)
Min. Lot
Width
(Ft.)
Min. Front
Yard
(Ft.)
Min. Side
Yard
(Ft.)
Min. Rear
Yard
(Ft.)
Max. Bldg.
Height
(Ft.)
Max. Lot
Coverage
(%)
A-1 Conservation
Residences
All Other Uses
1 acre
3 acres
150
200
50
50
30
30
50
50
35
35
5
5
R-1 Suburban Residential
All Uses NOT Served by Public Sewerage
System
All Uses (Except Multiple-Family Dwellings
with
5 or more units) Served by Public Sewerage
System)
Multiple-Family Dwellings with 5 or more units
(must be served by Public Sewage System)
1 acre
15,000 s.f.
12,000 s.f.
plus 3,000
s.f. per family
150
100
125
50
35
35
25
15
25
50
40
50
35
35
45
10
20
40
R-2 Urban Residential
All Uses (Except Multiple-Family Dwellings
with 5
or more units) NOT served by Public
Sewerage
system
All Uses (Except Multiple-Family Dwellings
with 5
or more units) Served by Public Sewerage
System
Multiple-Family Dwellings with five (5) or
more units (must be served by Public
Sewerage System)
1 acre
12,000 s.f.
10,000 s.f.
plus 3,000
s.f. per family
150
85
125
35
35
35
15
10
25
50
40
50
35
35
45
10
35
40
I-Z Institutional Zone 5,000 s.f. 50 15 15 20 45 60
C-1 Commercial
All Uses 5,000 s.f. 50 20 10 20 30 50
C-2 Highway Commercial
All Uses 20,000 s.f. 100 35 20 40 30 40
LT/C Light Industrial/Commercial 30,000 s.f. 100 50 10 20 30 50**
I-1 Light Industrial 1 acre 150 50 20 30 0 0
15 OF 54
ORDINANCE NO. 22 OF 1969 AND AMENDMENTS “SUGARCREEK BOROUGH ZONING ORDINANCE”
Public Utilities 0 0 0 0 0 45 50
I-2 Heavy Industrial 5 acres 300 50 50 150 75 50
**Coverage over 50% shall require Zoning Hearing Board Approval
ARTICLE 4 – SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS
401 NON-CONFORMING USES: The following provisions shall apply to all non-conforming uses and structures:
401.1 Any non-conforming use may be continued but may not be extended or expanded or changed unless to
a conforming use, except as permitted by the Zoning Hearing Board accordance with the provisions of
this Ordinance.
401.2 Any non-conforming structure damaged by fire, flood, explosion, or other casualty, may be reconstructed
and used as before, if such construction is performed within twelve (12) months of such casualty and if
restored, structure covers no greater area, and contains no greater cubic content than before such
casualty, and is erected on the same foundation. This time limit may be extended by the Zoning Officer
for a period of six (6) months. If further extension is necessary, it may be granted by the Zoning
Hearing Board. If proof is shown that said structure has a greater yard setback than it had before the
casualty, it does not have to be erected on the same location. If approved by the Board, a
reconstructed structure may exceed its original lot coverage and cubic content, but minimum yard
requirements of the district in which the structure is located, and the off-street parking and loading
requirements of this Ordinance, must be met.
401.3 In the event that any non-conforming use, conducted in a structure or otherwise, ceases, for whatever
reason, for a period of one (1) year, such non-conforming use shall not be resumed, and any future
use shall be in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance.
401.4 The non-conforming use of a building may be extended throughout those parts thereof which were
manifestly arranged or designed for such use at the time of adoption of Ordinance. A non-conforming
building or structure may, with the Approval of the Board, be extended, enlarged or replaced but must
meet the minimum yard requirements of the district in which the structure is located and must meet offstreet
parking and loading requirements of this Ordinance.
401.5 If no exterior structural alterations are made, a non-conforming use of a building may be changed to
another non-conforming use of the same or more restricted classification if approved by the Board.
401.6 Nothing contained herein shall require any change in over all layout, plans, construction, size or designed
use of any development, building, structure or part there of, for which official approval and required
permits have been granted, or where no approvals are necessary, where construction has been legally
started before the enactment of this Ordinance, and completed within a one-year period.
401.7 Any structure or portion thereof, declared unsafe by any government agency, duly authorized and qualified
to make such a determination, shall be restored to a safe condition.
401.8 Once changed to a conforming use, no structure or land shall be permitted to revert to a nonconforming
use.
401.9 Whenever the boundaries of a district shall be changed so as to transfer an area from one district to
another district of a different classification, this Article shall also apply to any uses which thereby become
non-conforming.
16 OF 54
ORDINANCE NO. 22 OF 1969 AND AMENDMENTS “SUGARCREEK BOROUGH ZONING ORDINANCE”
402 EXISTING LOTS OF RECORD: Any lot of record existing at the effective date of this Ordinance and held in separate
ownership different from the ownership of adjoining lots may be used for the district in which it is located, even though its
dimensions are less than the minimum requirements of this Ordinance, except as set forth hereafter. Where two or more contiguous
lots of record with less that required area and width are held by one owner on or before the effective date of this Ordinance, the
request for a permit shall be referred to the Board which may require replatting to fewer lots complying with the minimum
requirements of this Ordinance.
402.1 No provision of Section 304, TABLE 304 (B) of this Zoning Ordinance relating to side and rear yard
requirements shall prevent the reasonable use of a lot of record. The Zoning Officer may grant a
reduction for side yards and rear yards for lots of record which lack required lot width. However, in no
event may such yards be reduced by more than one-half that required by Section 304, TABLE 304
(B) without approval of the Zoning Hearing Board. A lot of record shall mean a lot recorded in the
Venango County Courthouse, and defined in this Ordinance, as of the date of this amendment.
403 APPLICATION OF YARD REGULATIONS:
403.1 Lots which abut or more than one street shall provide the required front yards along every street.
403.2 All structures, whether attached to the principal structure or not, and whether open or enclosed, including
porches, carports, balconies, or platforms above normal grade level, shall not project into any minimum
front or side yard. However, in residential districts, accessory buildings (detached private garage, tool
houses, play houses, etc.) may project into rear yards. Such structures shall be located no less than
five (5) feet from a side or rear lot line.
403.3 A wall or fence under six feet in height, or higher if a retaining wall, and paved terraced without walls,
or roofs or other enclosure, and fences or walls required by this Ordinance for the purpose of screening,
may be erected within the limits of any yard.
403.4 Non-residential buildings hereafter constructed or uses hereafter established in any of the residential
districts shall not be located or constructed closer to any lot line than the distance specified in the
following schedule:
Minimum Side or
Use Rear Yard
Off-street parking spaces and access drives for 20 feet
non-residential uses
All other non-residential uses or structures 40 feet
403.5 In districts permitting single-family residences, not more than one single family residence may occupy any
one lot unless authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board. The Board shall not authorize more than one
dwelling if the overall density permitted in that particular district is exceeded. Dwellings which are placed
beside each other shall be spaced so that the distance between the structures is at least twice the
required side yard in that particular district and all other yard requirements must be met. All dwellings
must have direct access to a street right-of-way.
403.6 In all districts the Zoning Officer may reduce the front yard requirements for lots fronting on alleys, up to
one-half (½) of the requirements for the front yard setbacks. However, in no event may such yard be
reduced by more than the requirements set by Section 402.1. Yard requirements shall also comply with
the requirements of Section 403.2.
17 OF 54
ORDINANCE NO. 22 OF 1969 AND AMENDMENTS “SUGARCREEK BOROUGH ZONING ORDINANCE”
404 TEMPORARY STRUCTURES: Temporary structures used in conjunction with construction shall be permitted only during the
period that the construction work is in progress. Permits for such temporary structures shall be issued for a six (6) month period.
Residing in basement or foundation structures before completion of the total structure shall be permitted if approved by the Board.
The Board may establish a reasonable period of time for completion of the structure.
404.1 An underground home shall not be considered a basement or a temporary structure.
405 HEIGHT LIMITATION: When the following conditions are met, height limits may be increased by the Zoning Hearing Board
except where it could interfere with existing solar panels.
405.1 Building height in excess of the height above average ground level allowed in any district may be
permitted provided all minimum front, side and rear yard depths are increased one foot for each
additional foot of height.
405.2 The following structures are exempt from height regulations provided they do not constitute a hazard to
an established airport: television and radio towers, church spires, chimneys, elevator bulkheads, smoke
stacks, conveyors, flagpoles, silos, standpipes, elevated water tanks, derricks, and similar structures.
406 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS: No use, land or structure in any district shall involve any element or cause any condition that
may be dangerous, injurious, or noxious to any other property or persons in the Borough. Furthermore, every use of land or
structure in a district must observe the following performance requirements:
406. 1 Fire Protection : Fire protection and fighting equipment acceptable to the Board of Fire Underwriters shall be
readily available when any activity involving the handling or storage of flammable or explosive materials is carried on.
406. 2 Electrical Disturbance : No activity shall cause electrical disturbance adversely affecting radio or other
equipment in the neighboring area.
406. 3 Noise : Noise which is determined to be objectionable because of volume or frequency shall be muffled or
otherwise controlled, except fire sirens and related apparatus used solely for public purposes, which shall be exempt from
this requirement.
406. 4 Smoke : The maximum amount of smoke emission permissible shall comply with the provisions of the
Pennsylvania Air Pollution Control Act (PL 2119) of January 8, 1960, as amended.
406. 5 Odors : In any district except the Industrial District, no malodorous gas or matter shall be permitted which is
discernible on any adjoining lot or property. This shall not apply to any form of fertilizer in districts where agriculture is a
permitted use.
406. 6 Air Pollution : No pollution of air by fly-ash, dust, vapors, or other substance shall be permitted which is
harmful to health, animals, vegetation, or property.
406. 7 Glare : Lightning devices which produce objectionable direct or reflected glare on adjoining properties or public
roads shall not be permitted.
406. 8 Erosion : No erosion by wind or water shall be permitted which will carry objectionable substances onto
neighboring properties.
406. 9 Water Pollution : The method for discharging wastes into public sewers, drains or watercourses shall be in
accordance with the provisions of the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (Act 537 of 1966) and the
Pennsylvania Clean Streams Law (June 22, 1937 PL 1987) as they may be amended from time to time.
In cases involving performance standards, the Board may require a plan of the proposed construction or development, a
18 OF 54
ORDINANCE NO. 22 OF 1969 AND AMENDMENTS “SUGARCREEK BOROUGH ZONING ORDINANCE”
description of the machinery proposed, and specifications for the mechanism and techniques to be used; and the Board may obtain
qualified expert consultations to testify as to whether a proposed use will conform to the performances requirements. The cost of
such services shall be borne by the applicant.
407 OFF-STREET LOADING AND PARKING: Off-Street loading berths and parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with
the specifications in this section in all districts whenever any new use is established or an existing use is enlarged.
407. 1 Off-street Loading : Every use which requires the distribution or receipt by vehicles of merchandise or
materials shall provide off-street loading berths in accordance with the following schedule. Where the lot does
not abut on a public or private alley or other access easement providing adequate ingress, egress, and
turnaround space so that vehicles are not required to park upon or back onto a road. Directional signs shall be
posted at ingress points indicating locations of loading docks and waiting areas.
OFF-STREET LOADING BERTH REQUIREMENTS
Uses
Square Feet of
Floor Area
Required Off-Street
Loading Berths
1. Schools 15,000 or more 1
2. Hospitals
(in addition to space for
ambulance)
10,000 – 300,000
For each additional 300,000 or major fraction
thereof
1
1 additional
3. Undertaker and Funeral Parlors 5,000
For each additional 5,000 or major fraction
thereof
1
1 additional
4. Hotels and Offices 10,000 or more 1
5. Commercial 10,000 – 40,000 1
6. Wholesale Manufacturing and
Storage
40,000 – 60,000
60,000 – 80,000
80,000 – 100,000
(1 for each additional 50,000 or major fraction
thereof)
2
3
4
1 additional
407. 2 Off-Street Parking :
407.2 (a) Size and Access: Each off-street parking space shall have an area of not less than 180
square feet exclusive of access drives or aisles, and be in usable shape and condition. Except in the
case of dwellings, no parking area shall contain egress to all parking spaces. Parking areas shall be
designed to provide sufficient turn-around area so that vehicles area not required to back onto roads.
Where a lot does not abut on a public or private alley or easement of access, an access drive leading
to the parking area sufficient to adequately accommodate two-way traffic shall be provided. Access to
off-street parking areas shall be limited to safe, well-defined locations, and in no case shall there be
unrestricted access along the length of a street or alley.
407.2 (b) Number of Parking Spaces Required: The number of off-street parking spaces required is
set fourth in the following table, Where the use of the premises is not specifically mentioned,
requirements for similar uses shall apply.
OFF-STREET PARKING SPACE REQUIREMENTS
Uses Required Parking Spaces
1. Automobile Sales and Service Garage 1 for each 400 sq. ft. of floor area
2. Banks 1 for each 100 sq. ft. or floor area
3. Bowling Alleys 7.5 for each lane
19 OF 54
ORDINANCE NO. 22 OF 1969 AND AMENDMENTS “SUGARCREEK BOROUGH ZONING ORDINANCE”
4. Car Wash 5 car capacity lane for each wash bay
5. Churches and Schools 1 for each 3.5 seats in an auditorium or 1 for each 17
classroom seats, whichever is greater
6. Community Buildings and Social Halls 1 for each 50 sq. ft. of floor area used by and/or accessible
to the public
7. Driving Ranges and Miniature Golf Facilities 1 for each tee
8. Dwellings 2 for each family or dwelling unit including space in garage
9. Food Supermarkets 1 for each 100 sq. ft. of floor area used by and/or accessible
to the public
10. Funeral Homes, Mortuaries 10 for first parlor, 5 for each additional parlor
11. Furniture or Appliance Stores 1 for each 200 sq. ft. of floor area used by and/or accessible
to the public
12. Home Occupations As designated by the Zoning Hearing Board, with a minimum of
two (2)
13. Hospitals, Nursing or Convalescent Homes
High Rise for Elderly
1 for each 2 beds and 1 for each 1.5 per employee (including
staff) based upon peak shift
1/3 space for unit
14. Hotels and Motels 5 plus 1 for each living or sleeping unit*
15. Manufacturing Plants, Research, or Testing Laboratories,
Bottling Plants
1 and ½ parking spaces for each employee
16. Medical or Dental Offices 5 for each doctor, plus 1 for each staff person
17. Mobile Home or Monument Sales 1 for each 2,500 sq. ft. of lot area
18. Professional Offices (Non-Medical) 2 for each professional and one for each staff person
19. Restaurants, Taverns and Night Clubs 1 for each 2.5 seats
20. Retail Stores and Shops 1 for each 100 sq. ft. of floor area used by and/or accessible
to the public
21. Rooming House and Dormitories 1 for each occupant
22. Service Stations 4 for each service bay
23. Sports Arenas, Auditoriums 1 for each 3 seats
24. Transient Trailer Camps 1 for each trailer site (See also Section 421.4)
25. Wholesale Establishments or Warehouses 1 for each employee on maximum shift. The total parking area
shall not be less than 25% of the building floor area.
*If a hotel or motel has eating, drinking, or similar facilities, it must also provide the required off-street parking for the same, as
provided for in Item 19, Restaurants, Taverns and Night Clubs.
407.3 Location of Parking Areas: Required parking spaces shall be located on the same lot with the principal use.
The Board may permit parking spaces to be located a reasonable distance from the lot of the principal use if located in
the same zoning district as the principal use if located in the same zoning district as the principal use, and the Board
finds that it is impractical to provide parking on the same lot with principal use.
407.4 Screening and Landscaping: Off-street parking areas for more than five vehicles, and off-street loading areas,
faces any residential district, but shall not interfere with or obstruct horizontal sight distances nor shall itbe located in
20 OF 54
ORDINANCE NO. 22 OF 1969 AND AMENDMENTS “SUGARCREEK BOROUGH ZONING ORDINANCE”
such a manner as to create a safety hazard. (See definition of Screening)
407.5 Minimum Distances and Setbacks: No off-street loading or parking area for more than five vehicles shall be less
than twenty (20) feet from any adjoining property containing a dwelling, school, hospital, or similar institution.
407.6 All loading and parking area shall be designed for orderly and safe loading and parking, shall be grade
and drained to properly dispose of all surface water, and shall be paved, oiled or otherwise treated for
stabilization and prevention of dust and erosion. A detailed off-street parking plan must be submitted to
and reviewed by the Borough Planning Commission 30 days prior to the hearing date for Special
Exceptions and Conditional Uses.
407.7 Lighting: Any lighting used to illuminate off-street parking or loading areas shall be arranged so as to reflect
the light away from adjoining properties and public roads.
407.8 Loading Berths and/or Posted Waiting Areas located within 300 feet of a residence are required to have
an electrical outlet for Vehicle Engine Heaters and area to be posted: ALL TRUCKS MUST BE SHUT
OFF, EXCEPT EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
408 MOBILE HOMES: Individuals mobile homes are regarded as single family dwellings by this Ordinance provided they are set
upon a permanent foundation or supports, with supports and framework fully enclosed, and are connected to available utility
services.
409 MOBILE HOME PARKS: Mobile home parks shall meet the following requirements:
409.1 No mobile home park shall have an area of less than five (5) acres.
409.2 Each mobile home lot within the park shall have an area of at least 5,000 square feet.
409.3 No mobile home shall be less than 40 feet from an adjoining property, or 30 feet from an adjacent
mobile home or building.
409.4 Not less than ten percent (10%) of the gross area of the park must be improved for recreational activities
of the residents of the park.
409.5 The park shall be appropriately landscaped and screened from adjacent properties.
410 PLANNED UNIT RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT: The Borough Council may permit departures from the Zoning regulations for
any planned residential development in the manner herein provided for conditional uses, if the planned project meets the following
requirements:
410.1 The area of land to be developed is not less than fifteen (15) acres.
410.2 Adjacent properties will not be adversely affected.
410.3 The average density of dwelling units is not greater than the density requirements in the district in which
the plan is located. The use of the land shall not differ substantially from the used permitted in the
district, except that limited commercial facilities intended to serve only planned project area and fully
integrated into the design of the project may be allowed.
410.4 The plan is consistent with the intent and purpose of this Ordinance.
410.5 A complete plan for the area is submitted for review by the Borough Planning Commission and Council
21 OF 54
ORDINANCE NO. 22 OF 1969 AND AMENDMENTS “SUGARCREEK BOROUGH ZONING ORDINANCE”
to determine, among other things, if the proposed project is consistent with the Borough Comprehensive
Plan.
410.6 A minimum of 2 acres per one hundred (100) dwelling units shall be reserved for recreational use,
with no such recreation area to be less than one (1) acre.
411 WATER RECREATION AND STORAGE AREAS: Water recreation and storage areas such as swimming clubs, reservoirs,
sewage lagoons, and other similar facilities or uses shall comply with the following provisions:
411.1 Before a permit shall be issued to the operator or owner of the facility, a plan shall be approved by
the Board as to the size of the facility, the purposed use, the parking arrangement and use of any
other buildings on the site, surrounding properties and their usage, and any other pertinent information,
including yard requirements and fencing.
412 SIGNS: No sign shall be permitted except as herein provided:
412.1 General: In any district all signs shall comply with the following general requirements:
412.1 (a) They shall not be illuminated in any manner which will cause undue distraction, confusion,
or hazard to vehicular traffic.
412.1 (b) They shall not project over public rights-of-way.
412.1 (c) Temporary signs used for the purpose of advertising candidates for political elective office,
or advertising questions to be decided by the electorate or for similar purposes shall be
permitted provided such signs comply with all provisions of this Ordinance, and do not
exceed eight (8) square feet in size. In addition such signs shall be removed within 30
days after the election for which they are intended. To insure their removal the
organization or individual(s) distributing such signs shall post a bond with the Zoning
Officer, in an amount determined by a fee schedule established annually by Borough
Council. The bond will be forfeited to the Borough in the event said signs are not
removed in the prescribed time.
412.1 (d) One temporary real estate or construction sign not exceeding eight square feet in area will
be permitted on a property being sold, leased, or developed. Such sign shall be removed
promptly when it has fulfilled its function.
412.1 (e) One sign not exceeding four (4) square feet in area will be permitted which announces
the name, address, or professional activity of the occupant of the premises on which said
sign is located.
412.1 (f) Signs for non-conforming uses may be permitted on the premises of the non-conforming
use provided they comply with the lot requirements of the district in which they are
located and meet the minimum requirements of signs for similar uses in districts in which
the use would be conforming.
412.1 (g) Signs erected or maintained pursuant to and in the discharge of any law, ordinance or
governmental regulation will be permitted.
412.1 (h) A sign not exceeding one (1) square foot shall be permitted for the purpose of
announcing the residents name only and shall not contain any information relating to other
uses of the property.
22 OF 54
ORDINANCE NO. 22 OF 1969 AND AMENDMENTS “SUGARCREEK BOROUGH ZONING ORDINANCE”
412.1 (i) Signs shall not be located to interfere with highway sight distances, nor shall they be
located at curves.
412.2 Residential Districts: In residential districts signs shall comply with the following:
412.2 (a) One bulletin board not exceeding forty square feet in area will be permitted in connection
with any church, school or similar structure.
412. 3 Commercial and Industrial Districts : In commercial and industrial districts signs shall be permitted as follows:
412.3 (a) One sign in connection with any legal commercial or industrial use or structure will be
permitted on the premises of the business, provided such sign contains no information
beyond the name, symbol and nature of the business, providing that is said commercial
use or structure faces more than one road, one sign shall be allowed on each road
frontage.
412.3 (b) Signs shall contain no information or advertising for any product or service not sold or
processed on the premises.
412.3 (c) Signs shall have an aggregated area not greater than one and one-half square feet for
each foot of width on the principal building on the premises.
412.4 Conservation District: In the conservation district signs shall be permitted as follows:
412.4 (a) Signs shall not exceed 300 square feet in area not 25 feet in length, nor 12 feet in
height. Total height of the sign from ground level shall not exceed 18 feet.
412.4 (b) Signs shall be located not closer than 250 feet to a road intersection.
412.4 (c) Signs shall not be permitted closer than 1,000 feet to another sign on the same side of
the road, and not closer than 500 linear road feet to another sign on the opposite side
of the road.
412.4 (d) Signs shall not be permitted closer than 250 feet to any residential use, school, church,
park, playground, cemetery, or similar use.
412.5 Institutional Zone: Only signs that comply with Section 412.1 shall be permitted. The Planning Commission may
review requests for signs that relate to the safety and general welfare of the public. The Zoning Officer may, after
review of the Planning Commission's recommendations, approve or disapprove the requests.
413 AGRICULTURE: Agricultural uses shall comply with the following except in the Conservation District where only Section 413.3
shall apply:
413.1 No farm building other than a dwelling may be erected within 300 feet of a neighboring residential
building.
413.2 Intensively used facilities for animal raising and care, including but not limited to such facilities as feed
lots, runs, and pens, shall not be constructed within 500 feet of a neighboring residence.
413.3 Roadside stands for the sale of agricultural products shall be permitted providing:
23 OF 54
ORDINANCE NO. 22 OF 1969 AND AMENDMENTS “SUGARCREEK BOROUGH ZONING ORDINANCE”
413.3(a) They are erected at least 50 feet back from the nearest edge of the roadway surface on
State Traffic Routes and 30 feet on all other roads.
414 FLOOD PLAINS: Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Ordinance, land subject to periodic flooding shall be used only as
follows and in accordance with the Suugarcreek Borough Flood Plain Ordinance (Ordinance #104 of January 17, 1985) and as it
may, from time to time, be amended:
414.1 Agricultural and recreational uses not including buildings or structures shall be permitted within designated
flood areas.
414.2 Other uses, including agricultural and recreational uses, requiring buildings or other structures shall comply
with the Flood Zone Construction Standards of the Sugarcreek Borough Building Permit Ordinance as the
same may be amended or revised from time to time.
The location and boundaries of areas subject to periodic flooding shall be determined by reference to the Flood Hazard Boundary
Maps of the Federal Insurance Administration of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development issued in conjunction with
the National Flood Insurance Program.
415 MINERAL EXCAVATIONS AND PROCESSING: Excavation and processing of sand, gravel, coal, oil, gas, or other material from
the ground shall be considered a temporary use, and may be permitted in all districts as a conditional use if approved by the
Borough Council. All mineral excavations shall comply with the Pennsylvania Oil and Gas Act (Act 223 of 1984) and the following
minimum requirements and any other measures that Borough Council might specify to protect the public interest. A zoning certificate
shall be required for each property.
415.1 All operations must be conducted no closer than 100 feet to an adjacent property, unless under common
lease of ownership, and no closer than 100 feet to any road right-of-way line.
415.2 All operations must be conducted no closer than 300 feet to a neighborhood dwelling, school, hospital,
or similar use.
415.3 The operator shall file with Borough Council a plan showing location of adjacent properties, roads, and
natural features.
415.4 The operator shall submit to the Borough Council for approval a plan for the restoration of the area to
be disturbed, which shall include a time interval for restoration, anticipated future use of the restored
land, the proposed final topography indicated by contour lines of no greater interval than five (5)
feet, steps which will be taken to conserve the topsoil, and the location of future roads, drainage
courses, or other improvements contemplated.
415.5 The operator shall file with the Borough Council written evidence that he has met all regiatration and
bonding requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources. When the operator has
performed all requirements contained in the restoration plan, he will be issued a written certificate by
Borough Council that the restoration is complete and is in compliance with the plan.
416 JUNKYARDS AND SIMILAR STORGAE AREAS (Including Automobile Wrecking:)
416.1 In addition to the provisions of this Ordinance, the establishment, use, and maintenance of all junkyards
shall be in accordance with the provisions of the Sugarcreek Borough Junkyard Ordinance No. 11 of
January 17, 1972, as the same may be amended from time to time. In the event any provisions of
this Ordinance conflict with the provisions of said Junkyard Ordinance the more restrictive provision shall
prevail.
24 OF 54
ORDINANCE NO. 22 OF 1969 AND AMENDMENTS “SUGARCREEK BOROUGH ZONING ORDINANCE”
416.2 All junkyards shall be completely screened from roads or developed areas with a solid fence or wall
eight (8) feet or more in height, maintained in good condition, and painted (except for masonry
construction), or other approved natural or constructed means of restricting visual contact. All existing
junkyards shall comply with this requirement within one (1) year of the date of this Ordinance, or shall
terminate their operation.
416.3 No junkyard established after the effective date of this Ordinance shall be located closer than 1,000 feet
to an existing State or Federal road, nor closer than 300 feet to a Borough road.
416.4 Access to and egress from junkyards established after the effective date of this Ordinance shall not be
directly from State and Federal roads.
417 SOLID WASTE PROCESSING AND DISPOSAL: Plans for solid waste processing and disposal facilities and areas shall be in
harmony with existing surrounding uses and the opinion of the State Department of Environmental Resources concerning proper
drainage, cover, and the operation as a while. Plans shall be provided by the applicant to the Borough Council in accordance with
the Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act (Act 97 of 1980) as the same may be amended.
418 DRIVE-IN THEATERS: Where possible, access shall be from minor roads, rather than highways, to reduce congestions and
accidents. Theater screens shall be placed so that they are not visible from a highway, or shall be screened with adequate fencing
or planting. No part of the facility shall be closer than 200 feet to any residential district.
419 HOME OCCUPATIONS: A home occupation shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential
purposes. The following additional conditions shall be observed:
419.1 The occupation is customarily carried on in a dwelling unit or in a structure or building accessory to a
dwelling unit.
419.2 The occupation is carried on by members of the family residing in the dwelling unit, with not more than
one employee outside the family.
419.3 The occupation is carried on wholly within the principal structure or accessory structure.
419.4 There is no exterior display, no exterior sign, no exterior storage of materials, and no exterior indication
of the home occupation or variation from the residential character of the principal structure except as
provided in Section 412.1 (e).
419.5 No offensive odor, no vibration, smoke, dust, heat, or glare is produced.
419.6 The only commodities sold shall be those made as part of the hie occupation and related items.
419.7 The occupation occupies no more than 30 percent of principal structure.
419.8 Off-street parking is provided in accordance with Section 407.2 (b).
Home occupations may include, but are not limited to, art studios, dressmaking, professional offices or physicians,
dentists, lawyers, engineers, architects, or accountants; real estate offices, insurance offices, barber shops and
beauty parlors, or teaching, with musical instruction limited to one pupil at a time. A home occupation shall not be
interpreted to include commercial stables, kennels or restaurants.
420 RESIDENTIAL OCCUPANCY OF COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENTS: In accordance with provisions of Article 3- District
Regulations, a two-story building of appropriate design may, in addition to the first floor commercial use, provide residential
apartments in the second floor as an accessory use. In the Institutional Zone district, a multi-story building of appropriate design
25 OF 54
ORDINANCE NO. 22 OF 1969 AND AMENDMENTS “SUGARCREEK BOROUGH ZONING ORDINANCE”
may, in addition to first-floor commercial use, provide partial residential use of the first floor, and residential apartments on the
additional floors as an accessory use, provided they meet all the requirements governed by the State Department of Labor and
Industry Fire and Panic Regulations.
421 TRANSIENT TRAILER CAMPS: Transient trailer camps shall, in addition to the rules and regulations of the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Resources for campgrounds, the Venango County Subdivision Regulations, and other appropriate
regulations, meet the following minimum requirements:
421.1 Transient trailer camps shall have an area of five (5) or more acres.
421.2 Each transient trailer site within the camp shall have an area of at least 1,500 feet.
421.3 Transient trailer sites within the camp shall be spaced so that trailers are at least twenty (20) feet
apart and no closer than fifty (50) feet to an adjacent property line.
421.4 In addition to the minimum off street parking space requirements of Section 407, separate off street
parking areas for visitors shall be provided in the ratio of one half (½) parking space for each trailer
site within the camp.
422 MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLINGS: In addition to the other provisions of this Ordinance, multiple-family dwellings with five (5)
or more dwelling units shall meet the following requirements:
422.1 The proposed multiple-family dwelling shall be so located that the sum of the number of dwelling units
in the proposed multiple-family dwelling when added to the number of existing dwelling units within a
twenty (20) acre circumscription, having as its center the location of the proposed multiple-family
structure, shall not exceed twice the maximum number of units allowable for a hypothetical twenty-acre
area developed entirely with single-family residence meeting the density requirements of the zoning district
in which the project is proposed.
ARTICLE 5 – ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT, AND APPEALS
501 ZONING OFFICER: The Borough Council shall appoint the Zoning Officer, who shall administer the provisions of this Ordinance.
502 DUTIES OF THE ZONING OFFICER: The Zoning Officer shall enforce all the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance and shall
have such duties and powers as are conferred on him/her by the Zoning Ordinance and are reasonably implied for that purpose.
502.1 Application, Zoning Certificates, Building Permits, and Inspection: The Zoning Officer may examine or cause to
be examined all structures and/or land for which an application has been filed for a Zoning Certificate, and may
conduct such inspections from time to time during and at completion of the work for which a Zoning
Certificate has been issued.
502.2 Inspection: The Zoning Officer may examine or cause to be examined all structures and/or land for which
an application has been filed for a Zoning Certificate, and may conduct such inspections from time to time
during and at completion of the work for which a Zoning Certificate has been issued.
502.3 Non-Conforming Use: The Zoning Officer shall keep an up-to-date list of all Non-Conforming Uses.
26 OF 54
ORDINANCE NO. 22 OF 1969 AND AMENDMENTS “SUGARCREEK BOROUGH ZONING ORDINANCE”
503 ZONING CERTIFICATE:
503.1 Requirements: Until the Zoning Officer has issued a Zoning Certificate applicable thereto, no person shall:
503.1 (a) Occupy or use any vacant land; or
503.1 (b) Occupy or use any structure hereafter constructed, reconstructed, moved, altered or
enlarged; or
503.1 (c) Change the use of a structure or land to a different use;
503.1 (d) Change a non-conforming use.
503.2 Expiration of Zoning Certificate: The Zoning Certificate shall expire nine (9) months from the date of its
issuance.
503.3 Applications and Fees: Each applicant for a Zoning Certificate shall present with the application a plat of
the property showing clearly and completely the locations, dimensions and nature of any structure involved
in such other information as the Zoning Officer may require in compliance with this Ordinance, together
with a filing fee in accordance with the schedule of fees established annually by the Borough Council.
503.4 Records: The Zoning Officer shall maintain a permanent file of all Zoning Certificates and Applications as
public records.
503.5 Sewage Compliance: The Zoning Officer shall not issue a Zoning Certificate nor shall a Building Permit
be issued until such time as the applicant presents satisfactory evidence that the proposed use will be
adequately served by either a public sewerage system or a private on-site sewage disposal system in
compliance with the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act, Act 537 of 1966, as amended, and other
appropriate laws and regulations relating to sewage disposal.
504 BUILDING PERMITS:
504.1 The Applicant for a Building Permit shall also apply for a Zoning Certificate as required by this
Ordinance.
505 VIOLATIONS: Any person who violates the provisions of this Ordinance shall upon conviction thereof in a summary proceeding,
be sentenced to pay a fine or not more than five hundred ($500.00) dollars. In default of payment of the fine, sixty (60) days
in accordance with Section 616 of the Pennsylvania Planning Code. Any person continuing any such violation beyond one (1)
calendar day shall be deemed to have committed a separate offense for each calendar day such violation continues.
506 APPEALS: The procedure and time limitations for appeal from any ordinance, decision, determination, or order of the Borough
Council, Zoning Officer, Zoning Hearing Board, or other applicable agency or officer of the municipality in the enactment or
administration of this Ordinance shall be in conformance with the provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (Act
247 of 1968 as amended.)
ARTICLE 6 – ZONING HEARING BOARD
601 GENERAL: In accordance with Article IX of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, a Zoning Hearing Board shall be
appointed and organized, which Board shall adopt rules to govern its procedure. The Board shall hold meetings, keep minutes, and,
pursuant to notice, conduct hearings, compel the attendance or witnesses takes testimony under oath, and render decisions or
findings. For the filing of any appeal or proceeding with the Board, a fee shall be charged in accordance with a schedule
established annually by the Borough Council.
27 OF 54
ORDINANCE NO. 22 OF 1969 AND AMENDMENTS “SUGARCREEK BOROUGH ZONING ORDINANCE”
Except as provided in Section 910, 912, 1004, 1005, of the Pennsylvania Planning Code and as hereafter provided, the Board
shall have no power to pass upon the validity of any provision of the Zoning Ordinance and adopted by the Borough.
602 FUNCTIONS: The Zoning Hearing Board shall conduct hearings and make determinations on matters as provided in this
Ordinance in accordance with the provisions of Sections 909 through 913 of the Planning Code including the following functions:
602. 1 Appeals from the Zoning Officer : The Board shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant
that the Zoning Officer has failed to follow prescribed procedures or has misinterpreted or misapplied any provision of
this Ordinance or Map or any valid rule or regulation governing the action of the Zoning Officer. Such appeals shall be
filed within thirty (30) days as provided in Section 915 of the Planning Code.
602. 2 Special Exceptions : The Board shall hear and decide requests for special exceptions in accordance with the
standards and criteria of this Ordinance. As a minimum the following standards and criteria must be met:
(1) The use is compatible with adjacent uses and structures.
(2) The use is suited to the topography and other physical characteristics of the site.
(3) The use complies with all off-street parking and other provisions of this Ordinance.
602. 3 Variances : The Board shall hear requests for variances where it is alleged that the provisions of this
Ordinance inflict unnecessary hardship upon the applicant. The Board may grant a variance provided the following findings
are made where relevant:
(1) There are unique physical circumstances or conditions, including irregularity, narrowness, or
shallowness of lot size or shape, or exceptional topographical or other physical conditions peculiar
to the particular property, and that the unnecessary hardship is due to such conditions, and not
the circumstances or conditions generally created by the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance in the
neighborhood or district in which the property is located.
(2) Because of such physical circumstances or conditions, there is no possibility that the property can
be developed in strict conformity with the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance and that the
authorization of a variance is therefore necessary to enable to reasonable use of the property.
(3) Such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the appellant.
(4) The variance, if authorized will not alter the essential character of the neighborhood or district in
which the property is located, nor substantially or permanently impair the appropriate use of
development of adjacent property, nor be detrimental to the public welfare.
(5) That the variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum variance that will afford relief and will
represent the least modification possible of the regulation in issue.
602. 4 Challenge to the Validity of the Zoning Ordinance or Map : The Board shall hear challenges to the
validity of the Zoning Ordinance or Map in accordance with Sections 910, 1003, and 1004 of the Planning
Code. In all such challenges, the Board shall take evidence and make a record thereon as provided in Section
908 of the Planning Code. At the conclusion of the hearing, the Board shall decide all contested questions and
shall make findings on all relevant issues of fact which shall become part of the record on appeal to the court.
602. 5 Unified Appeals : Where the Board has jurisdiction over a zoning matter it shall also hear all appeals
which an applicant may elect to bring before it with respect to any municipal ordinance or requirement pertaining to the
28 OF 54
ORDINANCE NO. 22 OF 1969 AND AMENDMENTS “SUGARCREEK BOROUGH ZONING ORDINANCE”
same development plan or development. In any such case, the Board shall have no power to pass upon the nonzoning
issues, but shall take evidence and make a record thereon as provided in Section 908 of the Planning Code. At
the conclusion of the hearing, the Board shall make findings on all relevant issues of fact which shall become part of
the record on appeal to the Court.
602.6 Non Conforming Uses and Structures: The Board shall make determinations on Non-conforming Uses and
Structures as provided in Section 401 of this Ordinance.
602. 7 Home Occupations : The Board shall make determinations on Home Occupations as provided in Section
419 of this Ordinance.
602.8 Reasonable Conditions and Safeguards: In authorizing any special exception, variance, change of a nonconforming
use or structure, or home occupation the Board may require, in addition to those specifically provided
in this Ordinance, reasonable conditions and safeguards as it determines is necessary to meet the intent of this
Ordinance, to protect adjacent property, and to promote the public interest. This may include securing the services of
expert consultants to advise the Board and requiring submission of a plan of the proposed land or structure in sufficient
detail for the Board to make an informed decision. In interpreting and applying the provisions of this Ordinance, they shall
be held to be the minimum requirements for the health, safety and general welfare of the Borough.
602. 9 Request and Application Procedure : All requests, applications, or appeals made to the Board shall be in
writing on forms prescribed by the Rules of Procedure of the Board. Every appeal or application shall refer to
the specific provision of the Ordinance involved, and shall set forth exactly the interpretation that is claimed, the
use which is sought, or the details of the variance that is applied for and the grounds on which it is claimed a
request should be granted. At least 10 days before the date of the hearing, on a request, application, or appeal in order
that the Planning Commissions may have an opportunity to submit a report or opinion to the Board.
603 HEARINGS: The Board shall conduct hearings and make decisions in accordance with the following provisions:
603. 1 Notice of Hearing : Notice shall be given to the public, the applicant, the Zoning Officer, Borough Council, the
Sugarcreek Borough and Venango County Planning Commissions, and such other persons who have been designated by
Council or have made timely requests for the same. Notice shall also be conspicuously posted on the affected tract of
land.
603. 2 Conduct of Hearing : The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the Rules of Procedure of the Board and
a stenographic record of the proceedings shall be kept. The Chairman, acting chairman, or hearing officer presiding
shall assure that all interested parties have an opportunity to be heard or represented, and may administer oaths, issue
subpoenas, require testimony and relevant documents, and exclude irrelevant, immaterial, or unduly repetitious evidence.
603. 3 Notification of Decision : The Board shall render a written decision or make written findings within forty-five (45)
days after the last hearing date. A copy of the final decision or findings shall be delivered to the applicant in person or
mailed within one day of the date of the decision or findings. Notification of the decision shall also be provided to those
persons or organizations receiving notice of the hearing and any other persons requesting notification who have filed their
name and address with the Board not later than the last day of the hearing.
604 APPEAL FROM BOARD'S DECISION: Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Board, or any taxpayer or member of
Borough Council, may within thirty (30) days after such decision of the Board, appeal there from in accordance with Article X,
Section 1007 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
ARTICLE 7 – CONDITIONAL USES
701 GENERAL: Conditional uses may be permitted or denied by the Borough Council after recommendations by the Planning
Commission in accordance with the following criteria and provisions:
29 OF 54
ORDINANCE NO. 22 OF 1969 AND AMENDMENTS “SUGARCREEK BOROUGH ZONING ORDINANCE”
702 APPLICATION: Applications for conditional uses will be filed with the Zoning Officer and shall be accompanied by:
702.1 Fee: An application fee in an amount equal to that established annually by the Borough Council.
702.2 Plans: Five (5) copies of a site plan and supporting data which shows the size, location, and topography of
the site, the use of adjacent land, the proposed size, bulk, use and location of buildings; the location and
proposed function of all yards, open spaces, parking areas, driveways, storage areas and accessory
structures; the location of all utilities, the provisions for parking, moving or loading of vehicles and the
timing of construction proposed.
703 REVIEW: The Zoning Officer shall forward copies of the Application to the Borough Council and to the Planning Commission
for review and approval.
703.1 Time: The Planning Commission shall forward its recommendation within forty (40) days unless the petitioner agrees
in writing to a time extension and failure to act within the allotted time shall be deemed to be a favorable
recommendation.
703.2 Conditions: The Borough Council may, in addition to those specifically provided in this Ordinance, attach such
reasonable conditions and safeguards as it determines is necessary to meet the intent of this Ordinance, to protect
adjacent property, and to further the public interest. All development, construction and use shall be in accordance with the
approved plan and all attached conditions, unless a revised plan is submitted and approved. Any development contrary to
the approved plan shall constitute a violation of this Ordinance.
704 CRITERIA FOR APPROVAL: A conditional use shall be approved only if it meets the following criteria:
704. 1 Use : The proposed use conforms to the district and conditional use provisions and all general regulations of this
Ordinance.
704. 2 Special Standards : The proposed use meets all special standards which may apply to its class of conditional uses
as set forth in this Article.
704. 3 Performance Standards : The proposed use shall not involve any element or cause any condition that may be
dangerous, injurious, or noxious to any other property or persons, and shall comply with the performance standards of
Section 406.
704. 4 Relationship : The proposed use shall be sited, oriented and landscaped to produce a harmonious relationship of
buildings and grounds to adjacent buildings and properties.
704. 5 Environmen t: The proposed use shall produce a total visual impression and environment which is consistent with
the environment of the neighborhood.
704. 6 Screening : A non-residential use proposed in a residential district shall be adequately screened from
residential areas as deemed appropriate by the Borough Council.
704. 7 Parking : Adequate off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with this Ordinance. No off-street parking area
for a non-residential use shall be closer than 20 feet to any adjacent lot in a residential district.
704. 8 Access : The proposed use shall organize vehicular access and parking to minimize traffic congestion in the
neighborhood. Access to off-street parking area shall be limited to several well defined locations, and in no case shall
there be unrestricted access along the length of a street or alley.
30 OF 54
ORDINANCE NO. 22 OF 1969 AND AMENDMENTS “SUGARCREEK BOROUGH ZONING ORDINANCE”
704. 9 Objectives : The proposed use shall preserve the objectives of this Ordinance.
705 PUBLIC NOTICE: Public notice shall be given of the time and place of the meeting at which the Borough Council will
consider a request for a conditional use. The notice shall clearly describe the nature of the requested conditional use.
ARTICLE 8 - AMENDMENTS
801 GENERAL: The Borough Council may introduce and consider amendments to this Ordinance and to the Zoning Map, as
proposed by a member of the Borough Council, by the Planning Commission, or by a petition of a person residing or owning
property within the Borough.
802 PETITIONS: Petitions for amendments shall be filed with the Borough Council, and the petitioner, upon such filing, shall pay
an advertising deposit and a filing fee, in accordance with a schedule established annually by the Borough Council.
803 REFERRAL: Any proposed amendment presented to the Borough Council shall be referred to the Sugarcreek Borough Planning
Commission and Venango County Planning Commission for review prior to public hearing by the Borough Council. A forty-five (45)
day review period by these Planning Commission shall be allowed before the Borough Council may take final action on the
amendment.
804 ACTION: Before acting upon a proposed amendment, the Borough Council shall hold at least one public hearing thereon,
Notice of such public hearing, containing a brief summary of the proposed amendment and reference to the place where copies of
the same may be examined, shall be published once each week for two successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation
within the Borough. The first publication shall be at least fourteen (14) days but not more than thirty (30) days prior to the
date of the hearing.
805 CURATIVE AMENDMENTS: A landowner who desires to challenge on substantive grounds the validity of this Zoning Ordinance
or Map or any provision thereof, which prohibits or restricts the use or development of land in which he has an interest may
submit a curative amendment to the Borough Council with a written request that his challenge and proposed amendment be heard
and decided as provided in Sections 609.1 and 1004 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (Act 247) as amended, As
with other proposed amendments, the curative amendment shall be referred to the Sugarcreek Borough Planning Commission and the
Venango County Planning Commission at least forty-five (45) days before the hearing is conducted by the Borough Council.
806 AMENDING ORDINANCES: This Zoning Ordinance includes the provisions of the Ordinance No. 22 of 1969 as amended by
the following ordinances adopted by the Borough Council:
Amendment No. 1, Ordinance No. 22A of July 6, 1970
Amendment No. 2, Ordinance No. 42 of December 19, 1972
Amendment No. 3, Ordinance No. 69 of September 7, 1977
Amendment No. 4, Ordinance No. 73 of October 18, 1978
Amendment No. 5, Ordinance No. 78 of October 8, 1979
Amendment No. 6, Ordinance No. 86 of December 3, 1980
Amendment No. 7, Ordinance No. 96 of August 4, 1982
Amendment No. 8, Ordinance No. 111 of November 5, 1986
31 OF 54
ORDINANCE NO. 22 OF 1969 AND AMENDMENTS “SUGARCREEK BOROUGH ZONING ORDINANCE”
ORDINANCE NO. 120 OF 1987
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING ORDINANCE #22 OF 1969, BEING THE ZONING ORDINANCE OF THE BOROUGH OF
SUGARCREEK, VENANGO COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA, AND THE ZONING MAP OF THE BOROUGH OF SUGARCREEK
INCORPORATED IN SAID ORDINANCE AND EXISTING AMENDMENTS AND SUPPLEMENTS THERETO BY AMENDING
ORDINANCE #22 FROM THE CODE OF THE BOROUGH OF SUGARCREEK REGARDING “SOLID WASTE PROCESSING AND
DISPOSAL”. ARTICLE 4. SECTION 417.
WHEREAS, the Council of the Borough of Sugarcreek, Venango County, Pennsylvania, deem it to be in the best interest of the
Borough, to adopt regulations dealing with the location of sanitary landfills; and
WHEREAS, such regulations are intended to promote protect and facilitate the public health, safety and general welfare of the
Borough of Sugarcreek; and
WHEREAS, in accordance with Article 4, Section 417, from Ordinance #22 of the Borough of Sugarcreek and Section 609 of the
aforesaid Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, a public hearing was held by the Council of the Borough of Sugarcreek after
proper public notice.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED AND ENACTED by the authority of the Council of Sugarcreek Borough, that the aforesaid
Borough of Sugarcreek Zoning Ordinance #22, be amended as follows:
Add the following definitions:
HAZARDOUS WASTE: A solid waste, or combination of solid wastes, which because of it quantity, concentration, or physical,
chemical, or infectious characteristics may (A) cause, or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious
irreversible, or incapacitating reversible illness; or (B) pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the
environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, or disposed of, or otherwise managed.
RADIOACTIVE WASTE: Any material solid, liquid, or gas of which one or more constituents exhibit radioactivity or is capable of
emitting ionizing radiation.
SEWAGE SLUDGE: The coarse screenings, grit and dewatered or air dried sludges septic and holding tank pumpings and any other
residues from sewage collection and treatment systems which require disposal.
SOLID WASTE: Garbage, refuse and other discarded materials including, but not limited to, solid and liquid waste materials resulting
from municipal, industrial, commercial, agricultural and residential activities.
SOLID WASTE PROCESSING AND DISPOSAL: Any technology used for the purpose of reducing the volume of municipal or
residual waste for off-site reuse and/or the incineration, deposition, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking, or placing of solid waste
into or on the land or water in a manner that the solid waste or a constituent of the solid waste enters the environment, is
emitted into the air or is discharged to the waters of the Commonwealth. Solid waste as defined by this amendment shall not
include hazardous or radioactive waste.
Amend Article 7 to read: Section 701, Solid Waste Processing and Disposal Operations may be permitted only in the A-1
Conservation District as a Conditional Use if approved by the Council of Sugarcreek Borough in accordance with Article 7 of the
Zoning Ordinance of the Borough of Sugarcreek, Venango County.
Plans for solid waste processing and disposal facilities and areas shall be in harmony with existing surroundings uses and shall
conform with all requirements of the Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act, Act 241 of 1969, as the same may be amended.
In addition, all solid waste processing and disposal operations shall comply with the following minimum requirements:
A. No operation shall be conducted closer than 7,000 feet to an existing dwelling, school, hospital or
32 OF 54
ORDINANCE NO. 22 OF 1969 AND AMENDMENTS “SUGARCREEK BOROUGH ZONING ORDINANCE”
ORDINANCE NO. 120 OF 1987 CONTINUED
similar residential use or water source for those uses.
B. There shall be one access road serving road serving the solid waste processing and disposal operation.
Said access road shall be located no closer than 3,000 feet to an existing dwelling, school, hospital or similar
residential use.
C. No solid waste processing and disposal operation shall be located closer than one thousand (1,000)
feet to an existing state, federal or township road.
D. No operation proposing to dispose of hazardous, radioactive or sewage sludge from metropolitan or
industrial sources shall be located closer than 10,000 feet to an existing dwelling, school, hospital, or similar
residential use or water supply for those uses.
E. A fee on a cost per ton basis, set by the Council, shall be assessed to any solid waste transported
into the solid waste processing and disposal that has been generated from outside the Borough of
Sugarcreek.
BE IT FURTHER ORDAINED AND ENACTED that the above described zone changes shall become effective October 7, 1987.
APPROVED THIS 7th DAY OF OCTOBER, 1987.
33 OF 54
ORDINANCE NO. 22 OF 1969 AND AMENDMENTS “SUGARCREEK BOROUGH ZONING ORDINANCE”
ORDINANCE NO. 123 OF MARCH 15, 1989
MOTION TO ADOPT A ZONING ORDINANCE AMENDMENT, AMENDMENT #9 TO ORDINANCE #22 OF 1969 FOR
SUGARCREEK BOROUGH, VENANGO COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA
WHEREAS; The Sugarcreek Borough Council appointed a 1967, and
WHEREAS; Said Planning Commission entered upon its duties and after proper study and due reference to the
comprehensive plan, prepared a Zoning Ordinance and a Zoning Map, and held at least one public meeting, as required by law,
on said proposed Zoning Ordinance Amendment on December 19, 1988, at 10:00 A.M. at Sugarcreek Borough Municipal Building,
and
WHEREAS; The said Planning Commission submitted its proposed Zoning Ordinance Amendment and Zoning Map which was
annexed thereto the governing body or Municipal Officers of Sugarcreek Borough on January 4, 1989 and
WHEREAS; The governing body or Municipal Officers of Sugarcreek Borough being the Sugarcreek Council, held a public
meeting on Wednesday, March 1, 1989, in the Sugarcreek Borough Municipal building, after public notice of its intention to consider
the proposed Zoning Ordinance Amendment, and
WHEREAS; After said public hearing announcement was made by the governing body or Municipal Officers of Sugarcreek
Borough, being the Sugarcreek Borough Council, that it would consider the adoption of the Zoning Ordinance Amendment proposed
by the Sugarcreek Planning Commission together with the changes that they, the said Council, might make pursuant to the
recommendations received at their public hearing, at the next meeting of the said Council to to be held March 15, 1989, at 7:00
P.M., at the Municipal Building of Sugarcreek Borough, on 212 Fox Street, Rocky Grove, and
WHEREAS; I hereby attach to this Motion the Ordinance which I propose to have adopted and which proposed Ordinance
Amendment has attached to it the Sugarcreek Borough Zoning Map as part of this Ordinance Amendment, and
WHEREAS; It is now my intention to have the said Council consider the adoption of said Sugarcreek Borough Zoning
Ordinance Amendment.
I, therefore, move for the adoption of the proposed Sugarcreek Borough Zoning Ordinance Amendment as prepared by the
Sugarcreek Planning Commission, and amended after its public hearing, and as amended after the public hearing of the Sugarcreek
Borough Council, and
I, further move that said Ordinance shall be incorporated into the official ordinance books of the Borough of Sugarcreek, by
reference and with the same force and effect as if the adopted Zoning Ordinance Amendment and Map were duly recorded therein.
34 OF 54
ORDINANCE NO. 22 OF 1969 AND AMENDMENTS “SUGARCREEK BOROUGH ZONING ORDINANCE”
ORDINANCE NO. 123 OF MARCH 15, 1989
AMENDMENT #9 TO ORDINANCE #22 OF 1969
NON-COMPLIANCE WITH SETBACK REQUIREMENTS FOR UTILITIES
304(A) Permitted use in all Zoning Districts
304(B) *Public Utilities Pedestals and Buildings (Not Storage)
Lot Width Min Front Min Rear Max Bldg Max Lot Coverage
Yard Yard Height
0 0 0 12 ft. Not to exceed 100 sq. ft
(10 ft. by 10 ft. at base)
* Note Put * after each Zoning District
403.2A Public Utility Buildings (equipment not storage) and Pedestals must comply with Section 304B (Public Utilities
Buildings and Pedestals) but shall not be located so as to interfere with sight distances for highways or exits from private
drives.
406.10 Notation of Hazardous Materials (Public Utilities) All hazardous materials or electrocution hazards or any other
hazards must be noted on a post, not attached to the building or pedestal and this post must be in the most direct
approach to the site.
407.7 Any lighting used to illuminate off street parking or loading areas or utility buildings or pedestals, shall be arranged
so as to reflect the light away from adjoining properties and public roads.
35 OF 54
ORDINANCE NO. 22 OF 1969 AND AMENDMENTS “SUGARCREEK BOROUGH ZONING ORDINANCE”
ORDINANCE NO. 175 OF 1997
Introduced and Passed:
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE SUGARCREEK BOROUGH ZONING ORDINANCE TO PROVIDE A DEFINITION
FOR “CONTINUING CARE RETIREMENT COMMUNITY”, TO ESTABLISH NURSING AND CONVALESCENT HOMES AND
CONTINUING CARE RETIREMENT COMMUNITIES AS PERMITTED USES IN THE R-1 SUBURBAN RESIDENTIAL ZONING
DISTRICT AND TO SPECIFY THE NUMBER OF OFF-STREET PARKING SPACES REQUIRED FOR A CONTINUING
CARE RETIREMENT COMMUNITY.
WHEREAS, the Sugarcreek Borough Zoning Ordinance does not provide for a Continuing Care Retirement
Community as a permitted use, special exception or condition use in any zoning district; and
WHEREAS, the Council of the Borough of Sugarcreek deems it desirable for the welfare of the present and future
residents of the Borough of Sugarcreek and in order to further the development objectives as set forth in the Sugarcreek
Borough Zoning Ordinance to provide for Continuing Care Retirement Communities and nursing and convalescent homes as
permitted uses in R-1 Suburban Residential districts and to specify the number and size of off-street parking spaces
required for a Continuing Care Retirement Community.
NOW THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Council of the Borough of Sugarcreek, and it is hereby enacted
and ordained by authority of the same:
Section One: ARTICLE 2- DEFINITIONS of the Sugarcreek Borough Zoning Ordinance be, and is hereby,
amended to add the definition of “Continuing Care Retirement Community” thereto, which shall read as follows:
“Continuing Care Retirement Community: An integrated housing and care development for persons over the age of
55 years (or, for a couple, if one of the partners over the age of 55 years) offering a coordinated variety of
accommodations, services and health care alternatives. The Continuing Care Retirement Community may include,
without limitation, independent living facilities, assisted living facilities and nursing home accommodations. Health
care alternatives may include, without limitation, in-home visitation services, rehabilitation services and on-site
physician and specialty clinics. Social, educational, therapeutic and recreational activities and areas, as well as
centers for inter-generational programs, to promote the well-being of the residents of the Continuing Care
Retirement Community may be included. The Continuing Care Retirement Community shall intend to and/or shall
provide “continuing care” as defined in Section 3 of the Continuing Care Provider Registration and Disclosures
Act, Act of June 18, 1984, P.L. 391, No. 82, §3 (40 P.S. §3203).”
Section Two: The portion of TABLE 304(A) of ARTICLE 3-DISTRICT REGULATIONS of the Sugarcreek
Borough Zoning Ordinance pertaining to the R-1 Suburban Residential District be, and is hereby, amended to read as
follows:
“Permitted Uses Special Exceptions
1. Single-Family Detached Dwellings 1. Home Occupations
2. Individual Mobile Homes 2. Water and Recreation and Storage
3. Churches 3. Parks and Playgrounds
4. Libraries 4. Golf Courses
5. Essential Services 5. Fire Stations
6. Nursing and Convalescent Homes 6. Public Utility Buildings
7. Continuing Care Retirement Communities 7. Multiple-Family Dwellings
8. Municipal Buildings
9. Cemeteries
36 OF 54
ORDINANCE NO. 22 OF 1969 AND AMENDMENTS “SUGARCREEK BOROUGH ZONING ORDINANCE”
10. Community or Social Buildings and Uses
ORDINANCE NO. 175 OF 1997 CONTINUED Conditional Uses
1. Mineral Excavation and Processing
2. Sewage Treatment Facilities
3. Planned Unit Residential Projects
4. Public and Parochial Schools and Colleges
5. Mobile Home Parks
6. Agriculture”
Section Three: Section 407.2(b) of the Sugarcreek Borough Zoning Ordinance be, and is hereby, amended to
add a number 26 to the OFF-STREET PARKING SPACE REQUIREMENTS table, which shall read as follows:
“26. Continuing Care Retirement Community 1 for each living unit and 1 for each 1.5 employees
based upon peak shift”
Section Four: All other parts of the Sugarcreek Borough Zoning Ordinance are hereby confirmed and re-enacted,
and any and all parts of ordinances enacted prior hereto are repealed insofar as they are inconsistent with this Ordinance.
Section Five: This Ordinance shall be effective on the earliest date permitted by law.
APPROVED this 20th day of August, 1997.
37 OF 54
ORDINANCE NO. 22 OF 1969 AND AMENDMENTS “SUGARCREEK BOROUGH ZONING ORDINANCE”
Ordinance No. 184 or 1998
An Ordinance of the Borough of Sugarcreek amending Ordinance No. 22 of 1969 providing a zoning hearing fee of $125
for each zoning hearing.
BE IT ORDAINED AND ENACTED by the Council of the Borough of Sugarcreek, Venango County, Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania:
That the zoning hearing fee of $75 be increased to $125 to help defer the cost affiliated with a zoning hearing.
The $125 fee will be charged for each advertised zoning hearing.
All Ordinances, or parts of Ordinances, inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed.
Adopted the thirtieth day of December 1998 and becomes effective January 1, 1999.
38 OF 54
ORDINANCE NO. 22 OF 1969 AND AMENDMENTS “SUGARCREEK BOROUGH ZONING ORDINANCE”
ORDINANCE NO. 186 OF 1999
BOROUGH OF SUGARCREEK
VENANGO COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE ZONING ORDINANCE OF THE BOROUGH OF SUGARCREEK TO ADD
PENNSYLVANIA RESTAURANT LIQUOR LICENSE AS A PERMITTED USE FOR AN EATING AND DRINKING
ESTABLISHMENT IN THE COMMERCIAL (C-1), HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL (C-2), AND LIGHT
INDUSTRIAL/COMMERCIAL (LI-C) ZONING DISTRICTS.
WHEREAS, the Council of the Borough of Sugarcreek has determined that if a Pennsylvania restaurant
liquor license is granted in the Borough of Sugarcreek, that said license should be a permitted use only in the
C-1, C-2, or LI-C Zoning Districts of the Borough of Sugarcreek.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Council of the Borough of Sugarcreek, and it is hereby
enacted and ordained by the Authority of the same:
Section One:
The Sugarcreek Zoning Ordinance be, and is hereby, amended to provide that a Pennsylvania
restaurant liquor license shall be a permitted use only in eating and drinking establishments in a C-1, C-2, or
LI-C Zoning District of the Borough.
Section Two:
All of the parts of the Zoning Ordinance of the Borough of Sugarcreek and the Amendments and
Supplements thereto as expressly changed by this Ordinance are hereby confirmed and re-enacted, and any part
of said Ordinance inconsistent herewith is hereby repealed only to the extent of the inconsistency with this
Ordinance.
Section Three:
This Ordinance shall be effective at the earliest date allowed by law.
APPROVED THIS 5th DAY OF MAY, 1999
39 OF 54
ORDINANCE NO. 22 OF 1969 AND AMENDMENTS “SUGARCREEK BOROUGH ZONING ORDINANCE”
ORDINANCE NO. 190 OF 1999
BOROUGH OF SUGARCREEK
VENANGO COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA
An Ordinance of the Borough of Sugarcreek amending Ordinance No. 184 of 1998 providing a zoning hearing fee
of $200 for each zoning hearing.
BE IT ORDAINED AND ENACTED, by the Council of the Borough of Sugarcreek, Venango County,
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania:
That the zoning hearing fee of $125 be increased to $200 to help defer the cost affiliated with a zoning
hearing. The $200 fee will be charged for each advertised zoning hearing.
All Ordinances, or parts of Ordinances, inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed.
Adopted the twenty-second day of December 1999 and becomes effective January 1, 2000
40 OF 54
ORDINANCE NO. 22 OF 1969 AND AMENDMENTS “SUGARCREEK BOROUGH ZONING ORDINANCE”
ORDINANCE NO. 195 OF 2000
BOROUGH OF SUGARCREEK
VENANGO COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE ZONING ORDINANCE OF THE BOROUGH OF SUGARCREEK BY AMENDING
THE ZONING MAP TO CHANGE THE AREA MARKED ON THE MAP ANNEXED HERETO TO THE I-Z
INSTITUTIONAL ZONE DISTRICT CLASSIFICATION AND TO ESTABLISH NURSING AND CONVALESCENT HOMES
AND CONTINUING CARE RETIREMENT COMMUNITES AS PERMITTED USES IN AN I-Z ISTITUTIONAL ZONE
DISTRICT
BE IT ORDAINED AND ENACTED, by the Council of the Borough of Sugarcreek, Venango County,
Pennsylvania and it is hereby ordained and enacted by authority of the same:
WHEREAS, the Council has found the expansion of I-Z Institutional Zone Districts within the Borough and
the addition of certain permitted uses to I-Z Institutional Zone Districts will promote the economy and the health,
safety and general welfare of the inhabitants of the Borough.
Section One: The zoning map of the Borough of Sugarcreek be, and is hereby, amended by changing the
area outlined in red on the annexed map to an I-Z Institutional Zone District Classification.
Section Two: The part of TABLE 304(A) Of Article 3 - DISTRICT REGULATIONS of the Sugarcreek
Borough Zoning Ordinance pertaining to the I-Z Institutional Zone District be, and is hereby, amended to add
nursing and convalescent homes and continuing care retirement communities as permitted uses.
Section Three: All provisions of the zoning ordinance of the Borough of Sugarcreek inconsistent with the
provisions of this ordinance are intended to be, and are hereby amended to the extent necessary to effect
consistency with this ordinance; and all provisions of said zoning ordinance in direct conflict with the provisions of
this ordinance are intended to be, and are, hereby repealed.
Section Four: This ordinance shall become effective on the earliest date permitted by law following final
enactment.
APPROVED this 20th day of December 2000.
41 OF 54
ORDINANCE NO. 22 OF 1969 AND AMENDMENTS “SUGARCREEK BOROUGH ZONING ORDINANCE”
42 OF 54
ORDINANCE NO. 22 OF 1969 AND AMENDMENTS “SUGARCREEK BOROUGH ZONING ORDINANCE”
ORDINANCE NO. 214 OF 2002
BOROUGH OF SUGARCREEK
VENANGO COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA
AN ORDINANCE OF THE BOROUGH OF SUGARCREEK, VENANGO COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA, SETTING THE
ZONING HEARING FEE AT $200 FOR EACH ZONING HEARING PLUS THE COST OF ADVERTISING FOR
EACH HEARING AND REPEALING ALL INCONSISTENT ORDINANCES.
BE IT ENACTED AND ORDAINED, and it hereby is enacted and ordained by the Council of the Borough
of Sugarcreek, Venango County, Pennsylvania, as follows:
Section 1:
The zoning hearing fee is hereby set as follows:
Fee for Zoning Hearing Board and staff services $200
Advertising costs for Zoning Hearing $amount charged by newspaper for advertisement
Total Zoning Hearing Fee $200+
Section 2:
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent hereto are repealed.
ORDAINDED AND ENACTED into law by the Council of the Borough of Sugarcreek Venango County,
Pennsylvania, assembled this 18th day of December, A.D., 2002 and becomes effective the 1st day of January,
A.D., 2003.
43 OF 54
ORDINANCE NO. 22 OF 1969 AND AMENDMENTS “SUGARCREEK BOROUGH ZONING ORDINANCE”
ORDINANCE NO. 234 OF 2004
BOROUGH OF SUGARCREEK
VENANGO COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA
AN ORDINANCE OF THE BOROUGH OF SUGARCREEK, VENANGO COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA, AMENDING THE
ZONING HEARING ORDINANCE CHANGING THE AREA NEAR THE VILLAGE OF RENO MARKED ON THE MAP
FROM AN I-Z INSTITUTIONAL ZONE DISTRICT CLASSIFICATION TO A LI/C LIGHT INDUSTRIAL/COMMERCIAL
DISTRICT CLASSIFICATION.
BE IT ORDAINED AND ENACTED, by the Council of the Borough of Sugarcreek, Venango County,
Pennsylvania and it is hereby ordained and enacted by authority of the same:
WHEREAS, the Council has found that the reassignment of the LI/C Light Industrial/Commercial Zone near
the Village of Reno will better promote the economy and general welfare of the inhabitants of the Borough.
Section One: The zoning map of the Borough of Sugarcreek be, and is hereby amended by changing the
area outlined in red on the annexed map (See Ordinance No. 195 of 2000) to a LI/C Light
Industrial/Commercial Zone District Classification.
Section Two: All provisions of the zoning ordinance of the Borough of Sugarcreek inconsistent with the
provisions of this Ordinance are intended to be, and are hereby amended to the extent necessary to effect
consistency with this ordinance; and all provisions of said zoning ordinance in direct conflict with the provisions of
this ordinance are intended to be, and are hereby repealed.
Section Three: This ordinance shall become effective on the earliest date permitted by law following final
enactment.
ORDAINED AND ENACTED this 7th day of April, A.D., 2004.
44 OF 54
ORDINANCE NO. 22 OF 1969 AND AMENDMENTS “SUGARCREEK BOROUGH ZONING ORDINANCE”
45 OF 54
ORDINANCE NO. 22 OF 1969 AND AMENDMENTS “SUGARCREEK BOROUGH ZONING ORDINANCE”
ORDINANCE NO. 236 OF 2004
SUGARCREEK BOROUGH
VENANGO COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE SUGARCREEK BOROUGH ZONING ORDINANCE TO SPECIFY ZONES WHERE
INTENSIVE FEEDING OF ANIMAL FEED OPERATIONS, COMMUNICATION TOWERS AND SEXUALLY ORIENTED
BUSINESSES MAY BE LOCATED AS SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS OR CONDITIONAL USES; TO PROVIDE SPECIFIC
CRITERIA FOR SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS AND CONDITIONAL USES; ADDING NO-IMPACT HOME-BASED
BUSINESSES AS PERMITTED USES IN ALL RESIDENTIAL ZONES AND FORESTRY AS A PERMITTED USE IN
ALL ZONES; AMENDING SECTION 403.1 TO REQUIRE ONLY ONE FRONT YARD FOR LOTS ABUTTING MORE
THAN ONE STREET; AND AMENDING SECTION 505 TO PROVIDE FOR CIVIL ENFORCEMENT AND
PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS.
WHEREAS, the Planning and Zoning Commission of the Borough of Sugarcreek and the Council of the
Borough of Sugarcreek deem it desirable for the welfare of the present and future residents of the Borough of
Sugarcreek in order to further the development objectives set forth in the Sugarcreek Borough Zoning Ordinance to
provide for certain new uses not originally contemplated, and to provide specific criteria for special exemptions and
conditional uses and to provide for no impact home based businesses and to provide civil enforcement of the
Zoning Ordinance.
NOW THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Council of the Borough of Sugarcreek, and it is hereby
enacted and ordained by authority of the same:
Section One: TABLE 304(A), A-1 Conservation District of the Sugarcreek Borough Zoning Ordinance be,
and is hereby, amended to add intensive animal feed operations, and communication towers as conditional uses in
the district.
Section Two: TABLE 304(A) be, and is hereby amended, to provide that sexually oriented business shall
be added as a conditional use in C-1 Commercial District, LI/C light industrial/commercial district and, I-1 light
industrial district and in I-2 heavy industrial district.
Section Three: TITLE OF ARTICLE 7 shall be changed by adding "AND SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS."
Section Four: Section 704 CRITERIA FOR APPROVAL be, and is hereby amended to read:
"A conditional use or a special exception shall be approved only if it meets the following criteria.
704.1 Use: The proposed use conforms to the district and conditional use or special exceptions
provisions and all general regulations of this Ordinance.
704.2 The effect on traffic, as to creating danger and hazards which would be adverse to the public
safety but not the mere fact that the use would increase traffic.
704.3 Whether the use will create a nuisance or hazard to the neighboring property owners.
46 OF 54
ORDINANCE NO. 22 OF 1969 AND AMENDMENTS “SUGARCREEK BOROUGH ZONING ORDINANCE”
ORDINANCE NO. 236 OF 2004 CONTINUED
704.4 Will the use result in a high probability of a substantial effect on the community of pollution,
drainage and/or flooding problems.
704.5 Special Standards: The proposed use meets all special standards which may apply to its class of
conditional uses or special exceptions as set forth in this Article:
A. Churches, hospitals and nursing homes:
1. Shall provide all parking and loading/unloading requirements as required by this ordinance.
2. Shall be so located as to be readily accessible from streets that are adequate to handle
anticipated traffic.
3. The design and landscaping shall be compatible with, and preserve the character of
adjoining residential uses.
4. All parking and recreation/play areas which abut residential uses shall be screened.
5. Any outdoor lighting shall be designed to prevent glare to adjoining properties.
B. Public Utilities:
1. Shall be landscaped to preserve the residential character of the neighborhood.
2. Shall be enclosed by a security fence; notwithstanding any other section of this chapter,
the height of this fence shall be adequate to provide proper security for the installation.
3. No outdoor storage shall be permitted.
C. Medical Clinics:
1. Such facilities shall exclude the treatment of the insane, nor shall they include penal or
correctional institutions.
2. Access shall be from a street with a pavement width of at least twenty-four (24) feet.
3. All required parking, loading and unloading shall be contained entirely on lot, including
sufficient maneuvering room so that vehicles will not back onto a public street.
4. All lighting shall be so arranged to prevent glare to adjoining properties.
5. Any parking area next to a residential use shall be as follows."
47 OF 54
ORDINANCE NO. 22 OF 1969 AND AMENDMENTS “SUGARCREEK BOROUGH ZONING ORDINANCE”
ORDINANCE NO. 236 OF 2004 CONTINUED
Section Five: ARTICLE 2 - DEFINITIONS be, and is hereby, amended to add the definition of "no-impact home
based business" thereto, which shall read as follows:
"No-Impact Home-Based Business": As business or commercial activity administered or conducted as an
accessory use which is clearly secondary to the use of a residential dwelling and which involve no
customer, client or patient traffic, whether vehicular or pedestrian, pick up, delivery or removal functions to
or from the premises, in excess of those normally associated with residential use. The business or
commercial activity must satisfy the following requirements:
1. The business activities shall be compatible with the residential use of the property and surrounding
residential uses.
2. The business shall employ no employees other than family members residing in the dwelling.
3. There shall be no display or sale of retail goods and no stockpiling or inventory of a substantial
nature.
4. There shall be no outside appearance of a business use, including, but not limited to, parking,
signs, or lights.
5. The business activity may not use any equipment or process which creates noise, vibration, air,
fumes, odors or electric coal or electronic interference, including interference with radio or television
reception, which is detectable in the neighborhood.
6. The business activity may not generate any solid waste or sewage discharge in volume or type
which is not normally associated with residential use in the neighborhood.
7. The business activities shall be conducted only within the dwelling and may not occupy more than
25% of the habitable floor area.
8. The business may not involve any illegal activity.
Section Six: "No-Impact Home-Based Businesses shall be added as permitted uses in Table 304(A) of
Article 3 - District Regulations. A-1 Conservation District, R-1 Suburban Residential District and R-2 Urban
Residential District.
Section Seven: Forestry shall be added as permitted use in all Districts.
Section Eight: Section 403.1 be, and is hereby amended to nine. "403.1 Lots which abut more than one
street are required to have one front yard which shall be on the side the front door of the house is nearer or
nearest.
Section Nine: Section 505 of Article 5 is hereby deleted and in place thereof the Ordinance is hereby
amended to read as follows:
48 OF 54
ORDINANCE NO. 22 OF 1969 AND AMENDMENTS “SUGARCREEK BOROUGH ZONING ORDINANCE”
ORDINANCE NO. 236 OF 2004 CONTINUED
"505 VIOLATIONS - ENFORCEMENT OF ORDINANCE.
505.1 Enforcement Notice
(a) If it appears to the municipality that a violation of any zoning ordinance enacted under this act
or prior enabling laws has occurred, the municipality shall initiate enforcement proceedings by sending an
enforcement notice as provided in this section.
(b) The enforcement notice shall be sent to the owner of the parcel on which the violation has
occurred, to any person who has filed a written request to receive enforcement notices regarding that parcel, and
to any other person requested in writing by the owner of the record.
(c) An enforcement notice shall state at least the following:
(1) The name of the owner of record any any other persons against whom the
municipality intends to take action.
(2) The location of the property in violation.
(3) The specific violation with a description of the requirements which have not been met,
citing in each instance the applicable provisions of the ordinance.
(4) The date before which the steps for compliance must be commenced and the date
before which the steps must be completed which shall be no less than thirty (30) days
after the enforcement notice date except when the violation involves imminent danger to
person(s) or property.
(5) That the recipient of the notice has the right to appeal to the zoning hearing board
within a prescribed period of time in accordance with procedures set forth in the ordinance.
(6) That failure to comply with the notice within the time specified, unless extended by
appeal to the zoning hearing board, constitutes a violation, with possible sanctions clearly
described.
(d) In any appeal of an enforcement notice to the zoning hearing board, the municipality shall
have the responsibility of presenting its evidence first.
(e) Any filing fee paid by a party to appeal an enforcement notice to the zoning hearing board
shall be returned to the appealing party by the municipality if the zoning hearing board or any
court in a subsequent appeal rules in the appealing party's favor.
505.2 Causes of Action
49 OF 54
ORDINANCE NO. 22 OF 1969 AND AMENDMENTS “SUGARCREEK BOROUGH ZONING ORDINANCE”
ORDINANCE NO. 236 OF 2004 CONTINUED
In case any building, structure, landscaping or land is, or proposed to be, erected, constructed,
reconstructed, altered, converted, maintained or used in violation of any ordinance enacted under this act
or prior enabling laws, the governing body or, with the approval of the governing body, an officer of the
municipality, or any aggrieved owner or tenant of real property who shows that his property or person will
be substantially affected by the alleged violation, in addition to other remedies, may institute any
appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, restrain, correct or abate such building, structure, landscaping
or land, or to prevent, in or about such premises, any act, conduct, business or use constituting a
violation. When any such action is instituted by a landowner or tenant, notice of that action shall be
served upon the municipality at least thirty (30) days prior to the time the action is begun by serving a
copy of the complaint on the governing body of the municipality. No such action may be maintained until
such notice has been given.
505.3 Enforcement Remedies
(a) Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated or permitted the violation of
the provisions of any zoning ordinance enacted under this act or prior enabling laws shall, upon being
found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by a municipality, pay a judgment of
not more than $500 plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees incurred by the municipality
as a result thereof. No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or payable until the date of the
determination of a violation by the district justice. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the j
udgment, the municipality may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure.
Each date that violation continues shall constitute a separate violation, unless the district justice
determining that there has been a violation further determines that there as a good faith basis for the
person, partnership or corporation violating the ordinance to have believed that there was no such
violation, in which event there shall be deemed to have been only one such violation until the fifth
(5th) day following the date of determination of a violation by the district justice and thereafter each day
that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation. All judgments, costs and reasonable attorney
fees collected for the violation of zoning ordinance shall be paid over to the municipality who ordinance
has been violated.
(b) The court of common pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of stay, upon cause shown,
tolling the per diem fine pending a final adjudication of the violation and judgment.
(c) Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted to grant to any person or
entity other than the municipality the right to commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this
section."
Section 10: All other parts of the Sugarcreek Borough's Zoning Ordinance are hereby confirmed and reenacted,
and any and all parts of ordinances enacted prior hereto are repealed insofar as they are inconsistent
with this Ordinance.
Section 11: This Ordinance shall be effective on the earliest date permitted by law.
Approved this 2nd day of June, 2004
50 OF 54
ORDINANCE NO. 22 OF 1969 AND AMENDMENTS “SUGARCREEK BOROUGH ZONING ORDINANCE”
ORDINANCE NO. 253 OF 2007
BOROUGH OF SUGARCREEK
VENANGO COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA
AN ORDINANCE OF THE BOROUGH OF SUGARCREEK AMENDING ORDINANCE NO. 111 OF 1986. THE
ZONING ORDINANCE OF THE BOROUGH OF SUGARCREEK, AS AMENDED BY ORDINANCE NO. 123 OF
1989, IN ORDER TO AMEND THE ZONING MAP OF THE BOROUGH OF SUGARCREEK IN THE AREA OF
FORMER UPMC NORTHWEST MEDICAL CENTER FROM AN IZ - INSTITUTIONAL ZONE TO A COMBINED C-1
COMMERCIAL ZONE AND R-2 URBAN RESIDENTIAL ZONE.
WHEREAS, the Sugarcreek Borough Planning Commission entered upon its duties at the request of the
Council of the Borough of Sugarcreek, and, after proper study and due reference to the Sugarcreek Borough
Comprehensive Plan, at its public meeting held October 11, 2006, recommended an amendment to the Zoning
Ordinance of the Borough of Sugarcreek and the zoning map; and
WHEREAS, the Sugarcreek Borough Planning Commission recommended that the area of the former UPMC
Northwest Medical Center, which is currently designated as a IZ - Institutional Zone, be rezoned such that it is a
combined C-1 Commercial Zone and R-2 Urban Residential Zone; and
WHEREAS, the Council of the Borough of Sugarcreek held a public hearing on the proposed amendment
to the zoning map on February 7, 2007, after notice of said hearing was published once each week for two
(2) consecutive weeks in the Franklin News-Herald with the first publication occurring at least fourteen (14)
days, but not more than thirty (30) days, prior to the public hearing in accordance with Section 804 of the
Zoning Ordinance of the Borough of Sugarcreek; and
WHEREAS, in accordance with Section 10609 of the Municipalities Planning Code, the Council of the
Borough of Sugarcreek caused to be conspicuously posted notice of said public hearing at points deemed sufficient
by the Council of the Borough of Sugarcreek along the tract to notify potentially interested citizens, and further
caused to be mailed notice of said public hearing at least thirty (30) days before the public hearing by first
class mail to the addresses to which real estate tax bills are sent for all real property located within the area
being rezoned, as evidence by the tax records within the possession of the Borough of Sugarcreek, said notice in
both instances setting forth the location, date, and time of the public hearing; and
WHEREAS, in further accordance with Section 10609 of the Municipalities Planning Code, the Council of
the Borough of Sugarcreek submitted for recommendations this proposed ordinance and zoning map amendment to
the Venango County Planning Commission at least thirty (30) days before the public hearing; and
WHEREAS, after the public hearing, notice was published by the Council of the Borough of Sugarcreek in
accordance with the Borough Code if its intention to enact this ordinance and proposed amendment to the zoning
map at it regularly scheduled meeting on February 21, 2007; and
WHEREAS, the proposed amendment to the zoning map is more fully described below and further evidence
on the zoning map annexed hereto as Exhibit "A"
BE IT ORDAINED AND ENACTED, by the Council of the Borough of Sugarcreek, Venango County,
Pennsylvania, and it is hereby ordained and enacted by the authority of the same:
51 OF 54
ORDINANCE NO. 22 OF 1969 AND AMENDMENTS “SUGARCREEK BOROUGH ZONING ORDINANCE”
ORDINANCE NO. 253 OF 2007 CONTINUED
Section One: Ordinance No. 111 of 1986, The Zoning Ordinance of the Borough of Sugarcreek, as
amended by Ordinance No. 123 of 1989, is hereby amended such that that IZ - Institutional Zone in the area of
the former UPMC Northwest Medical Center is rezoned into a combined C-1 Commercial District and R-2 Urban
Residential District as follows:
(a) The following geographical area bounded and described as follows is hereby rezoned as C-1
Commercial: Beginning at ta point at the intersection of the centerline of Meadville Pike and State
Route 417, thence along the cetnerline of Meadville Pike in a northern and eastern direction to the
intersection of the centerline of Meadville Pike and the centerline of an alleyway located between
Lots No. 28-10-44 and 28-10-23 as identified on the Venango County Assessment Map, thence
along the centerline of said alleyway in a southern and eastern direction to the intersection of the
centerline of said alleyway and the centerline of Prospect Avenue, thence along the centerline of
Prospect Avenue in a northern and eastern direction to the intersection of the centerline of
Prospect Avenue and the arc of the centerline of Murdock Street, thence along the arc of the
centerline of Murdock Street in an eastern and southern direction to the centerline of the boundary
line between Lots No. 28-10-114 and 28-10-113 as identified on the Venango County
Assessment Map, thence along the boundary line between the aforesaid lots in a southern direction
to the intersection of said boundary line and the arc of the boundary line of Lot No. 28-10-164
as identified on the Venango County Assessment Map, also known as Miller Sibley Park, at the
southeast corner of Lot No. 28-10-114, thence traveling the arc of the boundary line of Miller
Sibley Park in an eastern and southern direction to the intersection of said boundary line and the
centerline of Walnut Street, thence along the centerline of Walnut Street in an eastern direction to
the intersection of the centerline of Walnut Street and the centerline of Palmer Avenue, thence
along with centerline of Palmer Avenue in an eastern and southern direction to the intersection of
the centerline of Palmer Avenue and the arc of the centerline of the Park Avenue, thence along
the centerline of Park Avenue, which travels in an arc through various points, in a southern and
western direction to the intersection of the centerline of Park Avenue and the centerline of Oak
Street, then along the centerline of Oak Street in a western and northern direction to the
intersection of the centerline of Oak Street and the arc of the centerline of Circle Alley, thence
along the arc of the centerline of Circle Alley in a southern, western and northern direction to the
point along the centerline of Circle Alley between Lots No. 28-10-133 and 28-10-131 as
identified on the Venango County Assessment Map, thence from that point continuing along the
centerline of Circle Alley in a southern and western direction to the intersection of the centerline of
Circle Alley and the centerline of Prospect Avenue, thence along the centerline of Prospect Avenue
in a southern direction through lands of the City of Franklin to a point is the place of beginning.
(b) The following geographical area bounded and described as follows is hereby rezoned as R-2
Urban Residential: Beginning at a point at the intersection of the centerline of Meadville Pike and
State Route 417, thence along the centerline of Route 417 in an eastern and northern direction to
a point that would be the intersection of the centerline of Route 417 and the western boundary l
ine of the Franklin Cemetery, thence along the western boundary line of the Franklin Cemetery,
thence along the boundary line of said Lot No. 28-10-228 as identified on the Venango County
Assessment Map on the boundary line of The Franklin Cemetery, thence along the boundary line
52 OF 54
ORDINANCE NO. 22 OF 1969 AND AMENDMENTS “SUGARCREEK BOROUGH ZONING ORDINANCE”
ORDINANCE NO. 253 OF 2007 CONTINUED
of said Lot No. 10-28-228 in a western and southern direction to the centerline of Palmer
Avenue, thence along the centerline of Palmer Avenue in a northern direction to the intersection of
the centerline Palmer Avenue and the centerline of Kistler Street in a western and southern
direction to the intersection of the centerline of Kistler Street and the centerline of Meadville Pike,
thence along the line of Meadville Pike, which travels through an arc at various points, in a
southern and western direction to the intersection of the centerline of Meadville Pike and the
centerline of an alleyway located between Lots No. 28-10-44 and 28-10-23 as identified on the
Venango County Assessment Map, thence along the centerline of said alleyway in a southern and
eastern direction to the intersection of the centerline of said alleyway and the centerline of
Prospect Avenue, thence along the centerline of Prospect Avenue in a northern and eastern
direction to the intersection of the centerline of Prospect Avenue and the arc of the centerline of
Murdock Street, thence along the arc of the centerline of Murdock Street in an eastern and
southern direction to the centerline of the boundary line between Lots no. 28-10-114 and 28-10-
113 as identified on the Venango County Assessment Map, thence along the boundary line
between the aforesaid lots in a southern direction to the intersection of said boundary line and the
arc of the boundary line of Lot No. 28-10-164 as identified on the Venango County Assessment
Map, also known as Miller Sibley Park, at the southeast corner of Lot No. 28-10-114, thence
traveling the arc of the boundary line of Miller Sibley Park in an eastern and southern direction to
the intersection of said boundary line and the centerline of Walnut Street, thence along the
centerline of Walnut Street in an eastern direction to the intersection of the centerline of Walnut
Street and the centerline of Palmer Avenue, thence along the centerline of Palmer Avenue in an
eastern and southern direction to the intersection of the centerline of Palmer Avenue and the arc
of the centerline of the Park Avenue, thence along the centerline of Park Avenue, thence along
the centerline of Park Avenue, which travels in an arc through various points, in a southern and
western direction to the intersection of the centerline of Oak Street in a western and northern
direction to the intersection of the centerline of Park Avenue and the centerline of Oak Street, then
along the centerline of Oak Street in a western and northern direction to the intersection of the
centerline of Oak Street and the arc of the centerline of Circle Alley in a southern, western and
northern direction to the point along the centerline of Circle Alley between Lots No. 28-10-133
and 28-10-131 as identified on the Venango County Assessment Map, thence from that point
continuing along the centerline of Circle Alley in a southern and western direction to the i
ntersection of the centerline of Circle Alley and the centerline of Prospect Avenue, thence along
the centerline of Prospect Avenue in a southern direction through lands of the City of Franklin to
a point that is the place of beginning.
Section Two: All ordinances or parts of ordinances conflicting with any of the provisions of this Ordinance
are hereby repealed insofar as the same affect this Ordinance.
Section Three: In the event any provision, section, sentence, clause, or part of this Ordinance shall be
held to be invalid, illegal, or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity, illegality or
unconstitutionality shall not affect or impair the remaining provisions, sections, sentences, clauses, or parts of this
Ordinance, it being the intent of the Council of the Borough of Sugarcreek that the remainder of this Ordinance
shall be and shall remain in full force and effect.
53 OF 54
ORDINANCE NO. 22 OF 1969 AND AMENDMENTS “SUGARCREEK BOROUGH ZONING ORDINANCE”
ORDINANCE NO. 253 OF 2007 CONTINUED
Section Four: This Ordinance shall become effective immediately.
APPROVED this 21st day of February, 2007
54 OF 54
Ordinance No. 66 of 1977
Borough of Sugarcreek
Venango County, Pennsylvania
An Ordinance prohibiting the keeping or maintaining of a common, ill-governed, or
disorderly house or place to the encouragement of idleness, gaming, drinking,
violation of liquor laws or misbehavior, to the common nuisance and disturbance or
the neighborhood or orderly citizens; prohibiting the visiting of frequenting of such
house or place; providing penalties for the violation thereof.
Be it enacted and ordained by the Council of Sugarcreek Borough assembled, and it
is hereby enacted and ordained by the authority of the same:
SECTION 1. That it shall be unlawful for any person or persons within the limits of
the Borough of Sugarcreek to keep and maintain a common, ill-governed, or
disorderly house or place, to the encouragement of idleness, gaming, drinking,
violation of liquor laws or misbehavior, to the common nuisance and disturbance of
the neighborhood or orderly citizens and on conviction thereof before the Magistrate
of said city, such person or persons shall be liable to a fine of not more than one
hundred ($100.00) dollars or to undergo an imprisonment no to exceed thirty
(30) days in the county jail, or both, or either, at the discretion of the Magistrate.
SECTION 2. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to frequent, visit, or
loiter about, except upon lawful business, any common, ill-governed, or disorderly
house or place kept to the encouragement of idleness, gaming, drinking, violation or
liquor laws or misbehavior, and on conviction thereof before the Magistrate of the
city, such person or persons shall be liable to a fine not more than ten ($10.00)
dollars, and, on failure to pay said fine, may be imprisoned until discharged
according to law.
SECTION 3. That all ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistant with the
provisions of the Ordinance be the same are hereby repealed.
ORDAINED AND ENACTED into law by the Borough Council of the Borough of
Sugarcreek in lawful session this 18th day of May, 2006
ORDINANCE NO. 77 OF 1979
Borough of Sugarcreek
Venango County, Pennsylvania
AN ORDINANCE REGULATING THE STREETS AND HIGHWAYS WITHIN THE BOROUGH
OF SUGARCREEK, AUTHORIZING THE ESTABLISHMENT OF PERMANENT, TEMPORARY
OR EMERGENCY RULES AND REGULATIONS PROHIBITING OR RESTRICTING THE USE
THEREOF BY CERTAIN TYPES OR CLASSES OF VEHICLES, PROVIDING FOR
ENFORCEMENT THEREOF AND PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION THEREOF OR FAILURE TO
COMPLY THEREWITH.
The Borough of Sugarcreek, under its general police powers and the authority of the
Borough Code, as amended, particularly 53 P.S. §46202 and §6109, hereby ordains and
enacts as follows:
SECTION 1. No vehicle may be operated or moved along, over or across any
street, highway or alley within the Borough of Sugarcreek which exceeds the size, weight
and load limits specified in the Vehicle Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, 75
P.S. §101 et seq., without a valid permit therefor issued by the Borough of Sugarcreek
under rules and regulations as hereinafter provided.
SECTION 2. In addition to the prohibitions and restrictions provided for in Section 1
hereof, the Borough of Sugarcreek may from time to time establish and enforce such
emergeny, temporary or permanent rules and regulations restricting or prohibiting the use of
streets, highways and alleys within the Borough at particular times or at particular places or
by particular types or classes of vehicles or to cover special conditions and circumstances
whenever said use would or may constitute a safety hazard or would may cause damage to
said streets, highways and alleys. Any such rules and regulations may prohibit any such
absolutely or may restrict or condition the same in any manner, including the issuance of
permits and/or the procurement of surety bonds or other security.
SECTION 3. Violation of or failure to comply with this Ordinance or any rule or
regulation established hereunder shall constitute a summary offense punishable by a fine not
less than $25.oo nor to exceed $300.00 for each violation or failure to comply continues;
which shall be enforced in the manner provided in Article XXXIII of the Borough Code, as
amened, 53 P.S. § 48301, et seq.
SECTION 4. The Secretary of the Borough of Sugarcreek is hereby authorized and
empowered to establish, administer and enforce such rules and regulations as may be
necessary or appropriate under this Ordinance, including a permit system thereunder and
fees therefor.
ENACTED AND ORDAINED into Law by the Council of the Borough of Sugarcreek, in
lawful session assembled this 5th day of September, 1979
ORDINANCE NO. 77 OF 1979
Borough of Sugarcreek
Venango County, Pennsylvania
RULES AND REGULATIONS
NO. 2
Pursuant to the authority granted in and be the Borough of Sugarcreek
Ordinance No. 77 of 1979, I, Karen L Noel, Secretary, hereby establish the
following rules regulating streets, highways and bridges:
1. No. vehicle
a. having a weight in excess of six (6) tons (12,000 lbs); or
b. regardless of weight is a type which would be or might constitute a
safety hazard, or otherwise damage a bridge in the borough which
has been duly posted by the inspector of bridges within the Borough
of Sugarcreek and determined to limit the wright therein including but
not limited to the following:
Bridge #39 – Sugarcreek #2 Located 1 1/2 miles south of Two Mile
Run reservoir on T-529 over Two Mile Run
Bridge #38 – Sugarcreek #1 Located one mile south of Wyattville.
2. Application for such permit shall be made to the Secretary of the
Borough, in writing, in accordance with Rules and Regulations No. 1.
3. Said permit shall be granted or denied by the Secretary of the Borough,
in writing; and, if granted, said permit shall condition or restrict the
requested movement or operation in any manner authorized by said
Ordinance No. 77 of 1979, including the posting of surety performance
bond or other security guaranteeing the faithful compliance with the terms
of the permit.
4. These rules and regulations shall take effect immediately.
August 11, 1986
ORDINANCE NO. 85 OF 1980 “CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE PARAPHERNALIA PROHIBITION”
ORDINANCE NO. 85 OF 1980
Borough of Sugarcreek
Venango County, Pennsylvania
AN ORDINANCE PROHIBITING THE SALE AND ADVERTISING FOR SALE BY ANY
PERSON, NOT A LICENSED PHARMACY, OR PARAPHERNALIA ASSEMBLED FOR
SALE IN ORDER TO BE USED, IN ANY WAY, WITH THE INTRODUCTION INTO
THE HUMAN BODY OF A CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE AS THAT TERM IS
DEFINED BY THE “CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE, DRUG DEVICE AND COSMETIC
ACT” OF THE PENNSYLVANIA LEGISLATURE.
BE IT ENACTED AND ORDAINED and it hereby is enacted and ordained,
under the authority of the Borough Code, Act of February 1, 1965, P.L. No. 1656,
Act No. 581, as amended, by the Council of the Borough of Sugarcreek, County of
Venango, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as follows:
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE
This ordinance shall be known as the Borough of Sugarcreek Controlled
Substance Paraphernalia Prohibition Ordinance.
SECTION 2. PREFACE
The people and citizens of the Borough of Sugarcreek, and their duly elected
government body, are aware that business establishments exist in our nation that
market, advertise for sale and sell paraphernalia that are utilized by persons for the
introduction into their bodies of prohibited, controlled substances and that these
business establishments are not controlled, regulated or probibited effectively. The
Council of the Borough of Sugarcreek believes that this industry panders to our
citizens, particularly out youth, and through the sale of this paraphernalia physically
encourages persons to engage in the illegal use of controlled substances. The
Council believes that such use of controlled substances is harmful to the user thereof
and poses a clear, present and significant danger to the health and welfare of those
users and to the welfare of the general community. Therefore, in response to these
dangers, this Ordinance is passed to promote the health, safety and public welfare
of the citizens and inhabitants of the Borough of Sugarcreek.
1 of 5
ORDINANCE NO. 85 OF 1980 “CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE PARAPHERNALIA PROHIBITION”
SECTION 3. AUTHORITY
This Ordinance, and the objectives leading to its enactment, are authorized by
the following provisions of the Borough Code, to wit:
(a) Article X, Section 1006 (3)
(b) Article XXXIII
SECTION 4. DEFINITIONS
A. The term “Drug Paraphernalia” means all equipment, products and
materials, of any kind, which are used, intented for use, or designed for use, in
planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding,
converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, storing,
containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the
human body a controlled substance in violation of the Controlled Substance, Drug
Device and Cosmetic Act. It includes but is not limited to:
(1) Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting,
propagating, growing, cultivating, or harvesting or any species of plant
which is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance
can be derived;
(2) Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in manufacturing,
compounding, converting, producing, processing, or preparing controlled
substances;
(3) Isomerization devices used, intended for use, or designed for use
in increasing the potency of any species of plant or any compound
which is a controlled substance;
(4) Testing equipment used, intended for use, or designed for use in
identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity or
controlled substances;
(5) Scales and balances used, intended for use, or designed for use
in weighing or measuring controlled substances;
(6) Diluents and/or adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride,
mannitol, mannite, dextrose and lactose, used, intended for use, or
designed for use in cutting controlled substances;
(7) Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use, or designed for
2 of 5
ORDINANCE NO. 85 OF 1980 “CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE PARAPHERNALIA PROHIBITION”
use in removing extraneous materials, such as twigs and seeds, or in
otherwise cleaning and refining marijuana;
(8) Blendors, bowls, containers, spoons, and mixing devices used,
intended for use, or designed for use in compounding controlled
substances;
(9) Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used, intended
for use, or designed for use in compounding controlled substances;
(10) Containers and other objects used, intended for use, or designed
for use in storing or concealing controlled substances;
(11) Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used, intended for
use, or designed for use in parenterally injecting controlled substances
into the human body;
(12) Objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in ingesting,
inhaling or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish or hashish
oil into the human body such as:
(a) Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or
ceramic pipes, with or without screens, permanent
screens, hashish heads or punctured metal bowls;
(b) Water pipes;
(c) Carburetion tubes and devices;
(d) Smoking and carburetion masks;
(e) Roach clips (meaning objects used to hold burning
material, such as a marijuana cigarette that has become to small or short to be
held in the hand;
(f) Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;
(g) Chamber pipes;
(h) Carburetion pipes;
(i) Electric pipes;
(j) Chillums;
(k) Bongs;
(l) Ice pipes or chillers.
3 of 5
ORDINANCE NO. 85 OF 1980 “CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE PARAPHERNALIA PROHIBITION”
SECTION 5. CONDUCT PROHIBITED
A. It is a violation of this Ordinance for any person to deliver, by sale or
gift, or manufacture with the intent to deliver, by sale or gift, drug paraphernalia,
knowing, or under circumstances where on reasonably should know that it will be
used to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert,
produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal,
inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled
substance in violation of this Pennsylvania Legislature.
B. It is unlawful for any person to place in any newspaper, magazine,
handbill, or other publication any advertisement, knowing, or under circumstances
where one reasonably should know, that the purpose of the advertisement, in whole
or in part, is to promote the sale of objects designed or intended for use as drug
paraphernalia.
SECTION 6. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
Any person who shall violate this Ordinance shall be liable, upon summary
conviction for a first offense and upon summary conviction for each subsequent
offense, to a fine of not less than $100. nor more than $300., together with costs
of prosecution, in each case. Each day that a violation shall continue shall be
deemed to be a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. Fines and costs
imposed under the provisions of this Ordinance shall be enforceable and recoverable
in the manner and at the time provided by applicable law. Upon refusal of any
person convicted of a violation or this Ordinance to pay such fine and costs, such
person shall be imprisoned in the jail of Venango County for a period not excedding
ninety (90) days.
SECTION 7. SEVERABILITY
If any provision of this Ordinance or the application thereof to any person or
circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect other provisions or
applications of the Ordinance which can be given effect without the invalid provisions
or application, and to this end, the provisions of this Ordinance are severable.
4 of 5
ORDINANCE NO. 85 OF 1980 “CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE PARAPHERNALIA PROHIBITION”
SECTION 8. All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent hereby are
repealed.
ADOPTED this fifth day of November, 1980.
5 of 5
ORDINANCE NO. 89 OF 1981 “DOG CONTROL”
ORDINANCE NO. 89 OF 1981
Borough of Sugarcreek
Venango County, Pennsylvania
AN ORDINANCE REGULATING THE CONTROL OF DOGS WITHIN THE BOROUGH OF
SUGARCREEK
BE IT ENACTED AND ORDAINED, and it hereby is enacted and ordained under the
authority of the Borough Code, Act of February 1, 1965, P.L.No.1656, Act No,581, as
amended, by the Council of the Borough of Sugarcreek, County of Venango, Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania, as follows:
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE
This Ordinance shall be known as the Borough of Sugarcreek Dog Control Ordinance.
SECTION 2. PREFACE
The people and citizens of the Borough of Sugarcreek, and their duly elected
governmental body are aware that numerous owners of dogs are permitting their animals to
run at large upon the public property and the private property of others, that these owners
are permitting their dogs to constitute a public nuisance and, through lack of adequate
control, are allowing them to cause personal injury to other persons and property damages
to the holdings of others. Secondly, in response to this situation and in the interest of the
safety and convenience of the general public, said Council has caused this Ordinance to be
enacted.
SECTION 3. AUTHORITY
This Ordinance, and the objectives leading to its enactment, are authorized under the
following provisions of the Borough Code, to wit: Article XII, Section 1202, Paragraph
(13).
SECTION 4. DOGS – RUNNING AT LARGE
It shall be unlawful for the owner, custodian or keeper of any dog, or dogs, to
permit such dog, or dogs, to run at large, at any time, upon the public streets, highways
or alleys within the corporate limits of the Borough of Sugarcreek or upon the property of
any person, or persons, other than that of the owner, custodian or keeper, unless
1
ORDINANCE NO. 89 OF 1981 “DOG CONTROL”
accompanied by, and under the control of, by means of leash or other device, such owner,
custodian or keeper.
SECTION 5. DOGS – PUBLIC NUISANCE
SEE BOROUGH ORDINANCE 131 OF 1991 “DOG CONTROL” SECTION 105 –
PUBLIC NUISANCE
SECTION 6. DOGS - SHELTERED
SEE BOROUGH ORDINANCE 131 OF 1991 “DOG CONTROL” SECTION 106 –
SHELTERS, KENNELS, RUNS, ETC.
SEE BOROUGH ORDINANCE 131 OF 1991 “DOG CONTROL” SECTION 107 –
APPREHENSION AND DETENTION AND PENALTIES
SECTION 7. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
SEE BOROUGH ORDINANCE 131 OF 1991 “DOG CONTROL” SECTION 108 –
VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
SECTION 8. SEVERABILITY
SEE BOROUGH ORDINANCE 131 OF 1991 “DOG CONTROL” SECTION 109 -
SEVERABILITY
ADOPTED THIS TWENTY FIRST DAY OF JANUARY, 1981
2
ORDINANCE NO. 94 OF 1982 “BUILDING PERMIT ORDINANCE”
ORDINANCE NO. 94 OF 1982
Borough of Sugarcreek
Franklin, Pennsylvania
AN ORDINANCE OF THE BOROUGH OF SUGARCREEK, COUNTY OF VENANGO, COMMONWEALTH OF
PENNSYLVANIA, REQUIRING THE OBTAINMENT OF A BUILDING PERMIT BY ANY PERSON PRIOR TO THE
CONSTRUCTION, ALTERATION, ENLARGEMENT, REPAIR, MOVEMENT AND/OR DEMOLITION OF ANY
STRUCTURE, TRAILER, MOBILE HOME AND/OR MODULAR HOME LOCATED, OR TO BE LOCATED, WITHIN SAID
BOROUGH; STIPULATING THOSE EFFORTS FOR WHICH A BUILDING PERMIT NEED NOT BE OBTAINED;
STIPULATING THE PROCEDURE BY WHICH A BUILDING PERMIT CAN BE OBTAINED; NAMING OF THE ISSUING
AGENT FOR BUILDING PERMITS; AND ESTABLISHING THE PENALTIES AND FINES FOR THE FAILURE TO
OBTAIN REQUIRED BUILDING PERMITS AND/OR FOR THE VIOLATION OF ANY SECTION, OR SECTIONS OF
THIS ORDINANCE.
BE IT ENACTED AND ORDAINED and it hereby is enacted and ordained, under the authority of the Borough Code,
Act of February 1, 1966 (1965 P.L. 1656, no. 581), as amended, by the Council of the Borough of Sugarcreek,
County of Venango, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as follows:
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE
This Ordinance shall be known and cited as the Borough of Sugarcreek Building Permit Ordinance.
SECTION 2. OBJECTIVES
The people and the citizens of the Borough of Sugarcreek and their duly elected government body are aware that
there exists a need for the municipal authorities to maintain an awareness of the construction, alteration, repair,
enlargement, moving and/or demolition of structures located within the Borough in order to insure that zoning laws are
followed, to insure that reasonably safe building methods are practiced and to insure the equitable assessment of real
property and/or improvements made thereto. Accordingly, this Ordinance is passed to assure that all construction
and/or related activities which occur within the Borough are prosecuted in such a manner as to meet these stated
objectives.
SECTION 3. AUTHORITY
This Ordinance, and the objectives leading to its enactment, are authorized by the following provision of the Borough
Code, to wit:
Article XII, Corporation Powers, Section 1202 (24).
SECTION 4. DEFINITIONS
Unless otherwise stated, the following words and phrases shall be construed throughout this Ordinance to have the
meanings herein indicated.
(A) Building Permit (Permit): Shall mean the written permission, in the form of an official Borough
document, granted to a person who is constructing, altering, enlarging, repairing, moving and/or
demolishing any structure, trailer, mobile home and/or modular home in the Borough of Sugarcreek.
(B) Building Permit Application (Application): Shall mean the written official Borough document
which is submitted to the Issuing Agent by the owner of a structure, or by said owner's authorized
representative, prior to the issuance of a Building Permit.
ORDINANCE NO. 94 OF 1982 “BUILDING PERMIT ORDINANCE”
(C) Issuing Agent: Shall mean that person, or persons, appointed and named by the Borough
Council to prosecute the terms of this Ordinance.
(D) Mobile Home (Trailer): Shall mean any mobile vehicle used, or designed to be used
exclusively for dwelling and/or occupancy purposes, with the non-removable carriage and frame,
whether the wheels be attached or not, and used upon roads and highways only on an incidental
basis.
(E) Modular Home: Shall mean any structure used, or designed to be used exclusively for dwelling
and/or other occupancy purposes and which is manufactured, either in whole or in part, at a location
other than the site upon which the structure is assembled and/or occupied, and transported by some
means involving the use of a removable carriage and frame, to said site.
(F) Person: Shall mean any individual, partnership, association, firm and/or corporation.
(G) Reasonable Value: Shall mean that value of any good and/or service or combination thereof,
as may be freely agreed to between a willing and able seller of the good and/or service and a
willing and able buyer thereof.
(H) Structural Change: Shall mean the replacement, removal, movement and/or the change in size
of columns, beams, trusses, rafters, joists, bearing walls, foundations, and/or any part thereof, and/or
any part of a structure which supports other parts of the structure or any other load; and shall mean
any and all changes in the dimensions, including height, width and/or depth, of any structure.
(I) Structure: Shall mean anything constructed or erected within the geographical limits of the
Borough, the use of which requires a fixed location to the ground, whether used for residential,
commercial, industrial, agricultural and/or storage purposes, to include trailers, mobile homes and/or
modular homes as defined in this Ordinance.
SECTION 5. PERMITS REQUIRED
No person shall, nor shall any person cause, through a representative and/or acting as a representative, unless
excepted by other provisions of this Ordinance, permit the construction, alteration, enlargement, repair, movement
and/or demolition of any structure, trailer, mobile home and/or modular home without first having obtained a Building
Permit from the Issuing Agent and for which Permit a fee shall be paid to the Issuing Agent. Said fees shall be in
accordance with the schedule of fees lawfully adopted by the Council of the Borough of Sugarcreek and in effect at
the time the Application for the Permit is made and submitted to the Issuing Agent. Fees so collected will be
deposited to the General Fund of the Borough for the lawful use thereof and thereby.
SECTION 6. MOVEMENT OF STRUCTURES, TRAILERS, MOBILE HOMES AND/OR MODULAR HOMES
Any person contemplating the movement of any structure, trailer, mobile home and/or modular home, whether same is
to be used for residential or commercial purposes, either into or out of the Borough or from one location to another
within the Borough, shall within five (5) days of the date on which the unit is to be moved, apply for and secure
a Permit to do so from the appropriate Issuing Agent and, for which Permit, a fee shall be paid to said Issuing
Agent in accordance with the schedule hereinafter set forth.
ORDINANCE NO. 94 OF 1982 “BUILDING PERMIT ORDINANCE”
SECTION 7. EXCEPTIONS TO REQUIRED PERMITS
(A) No person and/or representative need apply for, nor secure, a Building Permit as required under the
terms of this Ordinance in the event that the total estimated cost of the contemplated work to any structure is
Two Thousand dollars ($2,000), or less. Said total estimated cost of work shall include the reasonable value
of any and all labor and materials and whether the said labor and/or materials shall be hired, contracted,
sub-contracted, donated and/or furnished by the owner of the property to which the contemplated work will be
undertaken. The movement of structures, trailers, mobile homes and/or modular homes is excluded from this
Section and a Permit must be secured regardless of the total estimated cost of the work.
(B) No person and/or representative need apply for, nor secure, a Building Permit as required under the
terms of this Ordinance for the following work and/or similar type of work unless Structural Changes are
involved and the total estimated cost of the work exceeds Ten Thousand dollars ($10,000):
(1) Painting and/or the application of siding;
(2) Roofing, shingling and/or re-sheeting of roof;
(3) General interior remodeling and/or repair;
(4) Installation of flooring, floor coverings and/or re-decking;
(5) Installation of and/or repair to sidewalks, patios, fences and decorative walls;
(6) Installation of furnaces, heating plants and/or air conditioning systems;
(7) Installation and/or replacement of storm windows/doors;
(8) Tree removal;
(9) Demolition of private garages, sheds, out buildings and like items.
SECTION 8. DESIGNATION OF ISSUING AGENT
Council of the Borough of Sugarcreek shall nominate and appoint a person, or persons, as the Issuing Agent whose
duty shall be to issue and receive Building Permit Applications to issue Building Permits, to receive the fees
established therefor and to undertake any and all acts commensurate with these duties and the enforcement of this
Ordinance; to include, but not limited to the assurance that the work is undertaken in accordance with the provisions
of this Ordinance and/or any other enacted Borough ordinance and/or State regulation and the filing of complaints
against those in violation thereof.
SECTION 9. BUILDING PERMIT APPLICATION AND ISSUANCE-----PROCEDURES
The Building Permit provided for in this Ordinance shall be issued by the appropriate Issuing Agent following the
receipt thereby of a written Building Permit Application from the owner of the property to which the Permit will apply
or from the said owner's authorized representative. Said application shall be submitted only upon such form as
supplied by the Issuing Agent and all information therein called for must be provided completely to the satisfaction of
said Issuing Agent. Upon the review of said Application and the satisfaction of the Issuing Agent that the application
is true and complete, that the proposed work is to be undertaken in full compliance with any and all pertinent
Borough and/or State laws, upon receipt of the total required fees and that there is no reason to deny issuance of
a Permit, the Issuing Agent will issue, or cause to be issued, the Building Permit. Upon receipt, the Building Permit
so issued must be posted conspicuously at, or upon, the front of the premises for which said Permit was issued and
it must remain so posted until the completion of the work which it encompasses. The Issuing Agent shall not issue,
or cause to be issued, any Permit where the work contemplated shall be, or appears to be, in violation of this
Ordinance and/or any other Borough ordinance and/or state law nor shall a Permit be issued until the apparent
discrepancies are clarified and/or corrected to the satisfaction of the Issuing Agent; nor, until the required fees are
collected in full.
ORDINANCE NO. 94 OF 1982 “BUILDING PERMIT ORDINANCE”
SECTION 10. REVOCATION OF BUILDING PERMIT
A Building Permit, once issued, may be revoked by Borough Council, upon information received, provided said
information demonstrates to the satisfaction of Borough Council that the Application filed was falsified and/or
incomplete; the work undertaken exceeds that approved under the Permit; the work undertaken is not in compliance
with any and/or all Borough and/or State laws and/or the health and/or safety of the general populace is in
jeopardy, due to the manner in which the work is being carried out.
SECTION 11. TERM OF PERMIT
All Building Permits issued pursuant to this Ordinance shall be valid for a period of twelve (12) months from the
date of issuance. In those instances in which it is estimated by the owner and/or owner's authorized representative
that the contemplated work to be covered by a Permit cannot be completed within the said twelve (12) months, a
Permit may be issued for a period of time in which the owner and/or owners authorized representative estimates the
work can be done. In addition, a Permit may be extended once, for an additional twelve (12) months, provided the
scope of the work is not changed in any manner and the Issuing Agent is so requested to extend the Permit.
SECTION 12. COMPLETION OF WORK
Upon completion of the work for which a Building Permit was issued, the owner of the premises and/or the owner's
authorized representative shall, within five (5) days of said completion report such fact to the Issuing Agent.
SECTION 13. SCHEDULE OF FEES
Pursuant to the schedule of fees as annually established by Borough Council.
SECTION 14. VIOLATIONS – FINES AND PENALTIES
Any person or persons, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this Ordinance shall, upon conviction
thereof, by punishable by a fine of not more than Three Hundred dollars ($300) and costs of the prosecution or
imprisonment in the County Jail for a period of not more than thirty (30) days.
SECTION 15. SEVER ABILITY
If any provisions of the Ordinance, or the application thereof, to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the
invalidity does not effect the other provisions or applications of this Ordinance which can be given effect without the
invalid provisions or application and, to this end, the provisions of the Ordinance are sever able.
SECTION 16. ABROGATION
All Ordinances and codes of the Borough of Sugarcreek and/or parts thereof, inconsistent hereto, hereby are
repealed.
ENACTED AND ORDAINED into Law by the Council of the Borough of Sugarcreek, Venango County, Pennsylvania, in
lawful session this seventeenth day of February, 1982
Ordinance No. 104 of 1985 “FLOODPLAIN”
ORDINANCE NO. 104 OF 1985
Borough of Sugarcreek Venango
County, Pennsylvania
FLOODPLAIN ORDINANCE
SPECIAL PURPOSE ORDINANCE OF SUGARCREEK BOROUGH ADOPTED BY
RESOLUTION OF THE BOROUGH COUNCIL OF SUGARCREEK BOROUGH.
AN ORDINANCE REQUIRING ALL PERSONS, PARTNERSHIPS, BUSINESSES AND
CORPORATIONS TO OBTAIN A BUILDING PERMIT FOR ANY CONSTRUCTION OR
DEVELOPMENT; PROVIDING FOR THE ISSUANCE OF SUCH BUILDING PERMITS;
SETTING FORTH CERTAIN MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS FOR NEW CONSTRUCTION
AND DEVELOPMENT WITHIN THE AREAS OF SUGARCREEK BOROUGH WHICH
ARE SUBJECT TO FLOODING; AND ESTABLISHING PENALTIES FOR ANY
PERSONS WHO FAIL, OR REFUSE TO COMPLY WITH, THE REQUIREMENTS OR
PROVISIONS OF THIS ORDINANCE.
BE IT ENACTED AND ORDAINED by the Council of the Borough of Sugarcreek,
Venango County, Pennsylvania (hereinafter for brevity referred to as “Council”) and
it is hereby enacted and ordained by the authority of the same as follows:
1 of 35
Ordinance No. 104 of 1985 “FLOODPLAIN”
ARTICLE I – DEFINITIONS
Section 1.00 – General 4
Section 1.01 – Specific Definitions 4
ARTICLE II – GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 2.00 - Intent 7
Section 2.01 – Applicability 7
Section 2.02 – Abrogation and Greater Restrictions 7
Section 2.03 – Severability 8
Section 2.04 – Warning and Disclaimer or Liability 8
ARTICLE III – ADMINISTRATION
Section 3.00 – Building Permits Required 8
Section 3.01 – Issuance of Building Permit 8
Section 3.02 – Application Procedures and Requirements 9
Section 3.03 – Review by County Conservation District 15
Section 3.04 – Review of Application by Others 16
Section 3.05 – Changes 16
Section 3.06 – Placards 16
Section 3.07 – Start of Construction 16
Section 3.08 – Inspection and Revocation 17
Section 3.09 – Fees 18
Section 3.10 – Enforcement 18
Section 3.11 – Appeals 19
ARTICLE IV – IDENTIFICATION OF FLOODPLAIN AREA
Section 4.00 – Identification 20
Section 4.01 – Determination of the One Hundred (100) Year Flood
Elevation
20
Section 4.02 – Changes in Identification of Area 21
2 of 35
Ordinance No. 104 of 1985 “FLOODPLAIN”
Section 4.03 – Boundary Disputes 21
ARTICLE V - GENERAL TECHNICAL REQUIREMENTS
Section 5.00 – General 22
Section 5.01 – Design and Construction Standards 22
Section 5.02 – Development Which May Endanger Human Life 26
Section 5.03 – Special Requirements for Mobile Homes 30
ARTICLE VI – ACTIVITIES REQUIRING SPECIAL PERMITS
Section 6.00 – General 31
Section 6.01 – Application Review Procedures 31
Section 6.02 – Special Technical Requirements 32
ARTICLE VII – EXISTING STRUCTURES IN IDENTIFIED FLOODPLAIN AREA
Section 7.00 – General 33
ARTICLE VIII – VARIANCES
Section 8.00 – Variance Procedures and Conditions 34
ARTICLE IX – REPEALER
Section 9.00 - 35
3 of 35
Ordinance No. 104 of 1985 “FLOODPLAIN”
ARTICLE I – DEFINITIONS
SECTION 1.00 - General
Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this Ordinance
shall be interpreted so as to give this Ordinance its most reasonable
application.
SECTION 1.01 – Specific Definitions
A. Accessory use or structure – a use or structure on the same lot with, and of
a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal use or
structure.
B. Base Flood – The highest possible level of flooding which is likely to occur,
on the average, once every hundred years – commonly referred to as the 100
year flood.
C. Building – a combination of materials to form a permanent structure having
walls and a roof. Included shall be all mobile homes and trailers to be used
for human habitation.
D. Construction – the construction, reconstruction, renovation, repair, extension,
expansion, alteration or relocation of a building or structure including the
placement of mobile homes.
E. Development – any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to buildings or other structures, the placement of
mobile homes, streets and other paving, utilities, filling, grading, excavation,
mining, dredging or drilling operations and the subdivision of land.
F. FEMA – The Federal Emergency Management Agency, the parent organization
of the Federal Insurance Administration (FIA).
G. Flood – a temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
4 of 35
Ordinance No. 104 of 1985 “FLOODPLAIN”
H. Floodplain area – a relatively flat or low land area which is subject to partial
or complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream, river or
watercourse; and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation of
surface waters from any source.
I. Flood-proofing – means any combination of structural and non-structural
additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood
damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
J. Floodway – The channel and adjacent overbank areas through which the base
flood is discharged. This portion of the floodplain is where the highest flood
velocities and greatest flood depths usually occur.
K. Freedboard – A 1½ foot margin of safety above the 100 year flood elevation.
L. Minor repair – the replacement of existing work with equivalent materials for
the purpose of its routine maintenance and upkeep, but not including the
cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the removal or cutting of
any structural beam or bearing support, or the removal or change of any
required means of egress or rearrangement of parts of a structure affecting the
exitway requirements; nor shall minor repairs include addition to, alteration of,
replacement or relocation of any standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage,
drain leader, gas, soil, waste, vent or similar piping, electric wiring or
mechanical or other work affecting public health or general safety.
M. Mobile home – means a transportable, single-family dwelling intended for
permanent occupancy, office or place of permanent chassis, which arrives at a
site complete and ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental
unpacking and assembly operations, and constructed so that it may be used
with or without a permanent foundation. The term does not include recreational
vehicles or travel trailers.
5 of 35
Ordinance No. 104 of 1985 “FLOODPLAIN”
N. Mobile home park – a parcel
planned and improved for the
non-transient use.
of land under single
placement of two or
ownership which has been
more mobile homes for
O. Obstruction – any wall, dam, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile abutment,
projection, excavation, channel, rectification, culvert, building, fence, stockpile,
refuse, fill, structure or matter in, along, across or projecting into any channel,
watercourse or flood-prone area, which may impede, retard or change the
direction of the flow of water, either in itself or by catching or collecting debris
carried by such water or is placed where the flow of the water might carry
the same downstream to the damage of life and property.
P. One hundred year flood – a flood that, on average is likely to occur once
every one hundred (100) years (i.e., that has one (1) percent chance of
occuring each year, although the flood may occur in any year.
Q. Regulatory flood elevation – the one hundred (100)
a freeboard safety factor of one and one-half (1½)
year flood elevation plus
feet.
R. Special permit – a special approval which is required for hospitals, nursing
homes, jails, and new mobile home parks and substantial improvements to
such existing parks, when portion of, a floodplain.
S. Structure – anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached to the
ground including, but not limited to, buildings, sheds, mobile homes and other
similar items.
T. Subdivision – the division or redivision or a lot, tract, or parcel of land by
any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land,
including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether immediate or
future, of lease, transfer of ownership or building or lot development. The
division of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more than ten (10)
acres, not involving any new street or easement of access, shall be exempted.
6 of 35
Ordinance No. 104 of 1985 “FLOODPLAIN”
U. Substantial improvements – any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a
structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of
the structure either before the improvement or repair is started, or, if the
structure has been damaged or is being restored, before the damage occurred.
ARTICLE II – GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION 2.00 – Intent
The intent of the Ordinance is to:
A. Promote the General health, welfare and safety of the community.
B. Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in order to
prevent or minimize flood damage in the future.
C. Minimize danger to public health by protecting water supply and natural
drainage.
D. Reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its governmental
units and its residents, by preventing excessive development in areas
subject to flooding.
SECTION 2.01 – Applicability
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, business or corporation to
undertake, or cause to be undertaken, any construction or development
anywhere within the Borough of Sugarcreek, Venango County, Pennsylvania,
(hereinafter for brevity referred to as “the Borough”), unless a Building
Permit has been obtained from the Building Permit Officer.
B. A Building Permit shall not be required for minor repairs to existing buildings
or structures.
SECTION 2.02 – Abrogation and Greater Restrictions
This ordinance supersedes any other conflicting provisions which may be in
effect in identified floodplain areas. However, any other ordinance provisions
shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that those provisions are
more restrictive.
7 of 35
Ordinance No. 104 of 1985 “FLOODPLAIN”
SECTION 2.03 – Severability
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this
Ordinance shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such decision
shall not affect the remaining portions of this Ordinance, which shall remain in
full force and effect, and for this purpose the provisions of this Ordinance are
hereby declared to be severable.
SECTION 2.04 – Warning and Disclaimer of Liability
The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this Ordinance is
considered reasonable for regulatory study. Larger floods may occur. Flood
heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such as ice jams,
and bridge openings restricted by debris. This Ordinance does not imply that
areas outside any identified floodplain area, or that land uses permitted within
such areas, will be free from flooding or flood damages.
This Ordinance shall not create liability on the part of the Borough or any
officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on
this Ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
ARTICLE III – ADMINISTRATION
SECTION 3.00 – Building Permits Required
Building Permits shall be required before any construction or development is
undertaken within any area of the Borough.
SECTION 3.01 – Issuance of Building Permit
A. The building Permit Officer shall issue a Building Permit only after it has
been determined that the proposed work to be undertaken will be in
conformance with the requirements of this and all other applicable codes
and ordinances.
B. Prior to the issuance of any Building Permit, the Building Permit Officer
8 of 35
Ordinance No. 104 of 1985 “FLOODPLAIN”
shall review the application for permit to determine if all other necessary
government permits required by State and Federal laws have been
obtained, such as those required by the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities
Act (Act 1966-537, as amended); The Pennsylvania Dam Safety and
Encroachments Act (Act 1978-325, as amended); The Pennsylvania
Clean Streams Act (Act 1937-394, as amended); The U.S. Clean
Water Act, Section 404, 33 U.S.C. §1334. No permit shall be issued
until this determination has been made.
C. No encroachment, alteration or improvement of any kind shall be made
to any watercourse until all contiguous municipalities which, upon the
basis of reasonable consideration, may be affected by such action have
been notified by the Borough and until all required permits or approvals
have been first obtained from the Department of Environmental
Resources, Bureau of Dams and Waterway Management. In addition, the
Federal Insurance Administration and Pennsylvania Department of
Community Affairs, Bureau of Community Planning, shall be notified by
the Borough prior to any alteration or relocation of any watercourse.
SECTION 3.02 – Application Procedures and Requirements
A. Application for such a Building Permit shall be made, in writing, to the
Building Permit Officer on forms supplied by the Borough.
B. If any proposed construction or development is located entirely or partially
within any identified floodplain area, applicants for Building Permits shall provide
all necessary information in sufficient detail and clarity to enable the Building
Permit Officer to determine that:
(a) All utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems are
located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and
(b) Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
9 of 35
Ordinance No. 104 of 1985 “FLOODPLAIN”
Applicants shall file the following minimum information plus any other pertinent
information; e.g., any or all of the technical information contained on the forms
supplied by the Borough, as may be required by the Building Permit Officer to make
the above determination:
1. A completed Building Permit Application Form.
2. A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at scale of one (1) inche
being equal to one hundred (100) feet or less, showing the following:
a. north arrow, scale and date;
b. topographic contour lines, if available;
c. all property and lot lines including dimensions, and the size of the site
expressed in acres or square feet;
d. the location of all existing and proposed buildings, structures and other
improvements, including the location of any existing or proposed
subdivision and land development;
e. the location of all existing streets, drives, and other accessways; and
f. the location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses, identified
floodplain areas, and if available, information pertaining to the floodway,
and the flow of water including direction and velocities.
3. Plans for all proposed buildings, structures and other improvements, drawn at
suitable scales showing the following:
a. the proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed building based upon
National Geodetric Vertical Datum of 1929;
10 of 35
Ordinance No. 104 of 1985 “FLOODPLAIN”
b. the elevation of the one hundred (100) year flood;
c. if available, information concerning
impact and uplift forces and other
(100) year flood; and
flood depths, pressures, velocities,
factors associated with a one hundred
d. detailed information concerning any proposed flood-proofing measures.
4. The following data and documentation:
a. a document, certified by a registered professional engineer or architect,
which states that the proposed construction or development has been
adequately designed to withstand the one hundred (100) year flood
elevations, pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces associated with
the one hundred (100) year flood.
Such statement shall include a description of the type
flood-proofing measures which have been incorporated
the structure and/or the development.
and extent of
into the design of
b. detailed information needed to determine compliance with Section 5.01
F., Storage, and Section 5.02, Development Which May Endanger
Human Life, including:
I) the amount, location and purpose of any materials or substances
referred to in Sections 5.01 F. and 5.02, which are intended to
be used, produced, stored or otherwise maintained on site.
ii) a description of the safeguards incorporated into the design of the
proposed structure to prevent leaks or spills of the dangerous
materials or substances listed in Section 5.02 during a one
hundred (100) year flood.
11 of 35
Ordinance No. 104 of 1985 “FLOODPLAIN”
c. the appropriate component of the Department of Environmental Resources'
“Planning Module for Land Development”.
d. where any excavation or grading is proposed, a
requirements of the Department of Environmental
and maintain erosion and sedimentation control.
plan meeting the
Resources, to implement
C. Applicants for Special Permits shall provide five copies of the following items.
1. A written request including a completed Building Permit Application Form.
2. A small scale map showing the vicinity in which the proposed site is
located.
3. A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one
(1) inch being equal to one hundred (100) feet or less, showing the
following:
a. north arrow, scale and date;
b. topography based upon the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of
1929, showing existing and proposed contours at intervals of two
(2) feet;
c. all property and lot lines including dimensions, and the size of the
site expressed in acres or square feet;
d. the location of all existing streets, drives,
parking areas, with information concerning
and construction, and elevations.
other accessways and
widths, pavement types
e. the location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
12 of 35
Ordinance No. 104 of 1985 “FLOODPLAIN”
buildings, structures and other public or private facilities, including
railroad tracks and facilities, and any other natural and man-made
features affecting, or affected by the proposed activity or
development;
f. the location of the floodplain boundary line, information and spot
elevations concerning the one hundred (100) year flood
elevations, and information concerning the flow of water including
direction and velocities;
g. the location of all proposed buildings, structures, utilities and any
other improvements; and
h. any other information which the municipality considers necessary for
adequate review of the application.
4. Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other improvements, clearly and
legibly drawn at suitable scale showing the following:
a. sufficiently detailed architectural or engineering drawings including floor
plans, sections and exterior building elevations, as appropriate;
b. for any proposed building, the elevation of the lowest floor (including
basement) and, as required the elevation of any other floor;
c. complete information concerning flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact
and uplift forces, and other factors associated with the one hundred
(100) year flood;
d. detailed information concerning any proposed flood-proofing measures;
e. cross-section drawings for all proposed streets, drives, other accessways
13 of 35
Ordinance No. 104 of 1985 “FLOODPLAIN”
and parking areas, showing all right-of-way and pavement widths;
f. profile drawings for all proposed streets, drives and vehicular accessways
including existing and proposed grades; and
g. plans and profiles of all profiles of all proposed sanitary and storm
sewer systems, water supply systems and any other utilities and facilities.
5. The following data and documentation:
a. certification from the applicant that the site upon which the activity or
development is proposed is an existing separate and single parcel,
owned by the applicant or the client he represents;
b. a statement, certified by a registered professional engineer, architect,
landscape architect, or other qualified person which contains a complete
and accurate description of the nature and extent of pollution that might
possibly occur from the development during the source of a one hundred
(100) year flood, including a statement concerning the effects such
pollution may have no human life;
d. a statement certified by a registered professional engineer, architect or
landscape architect, which contains a complete and accurate description
of the effects the proposed development will have on one hundred
(100) year flood elevations and flows;
e. a statement, certified by a registered professional engineer, architect or
landscape architect, which kinds and amounts of any loose buoyant
materials or debris that may possibly exist or be located on the site
below the one hundred (100) year flood elevation and the effects such
materials and debris may have on one hundred (100) year flood
elevations and flows;
14 of 35
Ordinance No. 104 of 1985 “FLOODPLAIN”
f. the appropriate component of the Department of Environmental Resources'
“Planning Module for Land Development”;
g. where any excavation or grading is proposed, a
requirements of the Department of Environmental
and maintain erosion and sedimentation control;
plan meeting the
Resources to implement
h. any other applicable permits such as, but not limited to, a permit for
any activity regulated by the Department of Environmental Resources
under Section 302 of the Act 1978-166; and
i. an evacuation plan which fully explains the manner in which the site will
be safely evacuated before or during the course of a one hundred
(100) year flood.
SECTION 3.03 – Review by County Conservation District
A copy of all applications and plans for any proposed construction or
development in any identified floodplain area to be considered for approval
shall be submitted by the Building Permit Officer to the County Conservation
District for review and comment prior to the issuance of a Building Permit.
The recommendations of the Conservation District shall be considered by the
Building Permit Officer for possible incorporation into the proposed plan.
SECTION 3.04 – Review of Application by Others
A copy of all plans and applications for any proposed construction or
development in any identified floodplain area to be considered for approval may
be submitted by the Building Permit Officer to any other appropriate agencies
and/or individuals (e.g., Planning Commission, Municipal Engineer, etc.) for
15 of 35
Ordinance No. 104 of 1985 “FLOODPLAIN”
review and comment.
SECTION 3.05 – Changes
After the issuance of a Building Permit by the Building Permit Officer, no
changes of any kind shall be made to the application, permit or any of the
plans, specifications or other documents submitted with the application without
the written consent or approval of the Building Permit Officer. Requests for any
such change shall be in writing and shall be submitted by the applicant to the
Building Permit Officer for consideration.
SECTION 3.06 – Placards
In addition to the Building Permit, the Building Permit Officer shall issue a
placard which shall be displayed on the premises during the time construction
is in progress. The placard shall show the number of the Building Permit, the
date of its issuance and be signed by the Building Permit Officer.
SECTION 3.07 – Start of Construction
All permits issued pursuant to this Ordinance shall be valid for a period of
twelve (12) months from the date of issuance. In those instances in which it
is estimated by the owner and/or the owners authorized representative that the
contemplated work to be covered by a permit cannot be completed within said
twelve (12) months, a permit may be issued at the discretion of the Building
Permit Officer, for a period of time in which the owner and/or owner's
authorized representative estimates the work can be completed. In addition, a
permit may be extended, once, for an additional twelve (12) months, provided
the scope of the work is not changed in any manner and the Building Permit
Officer is so requested, in writing, to extend the permit. Said written extension
request shall be submitted by the owner and/or the owner's representative and
shall set forth sufficient and reasonable cause for the Building Permit Officer to
16 of 35
Ordinance No. 104 of 1985 “FLOODPLAIN”
approve such a request.
Time extensions shall be granted only if a written request is submitted by the
applicant, which sets forth sufficient and reasonable cause for the Building
Permit Officer to approve such a request.
SECTION 3.08 – Inspection and Revocation
A. During the construction period, the Building Permit Officer or other authorized
official shall inspect the premises to determine that the work is progressing in
compliance with the information provided on the permit application and with all
applicable Borough laws and ordinances. He shall make as many inspections
during and upon completion of the work as are necessary.
B. In the discharge of his duties, the Building Permit Officer shall have the
authority to enter any building, structure, premises or development in the
identified floodplain area, upon presentation of proper credentials, at any
reasonable hour to enforce the provisions of this Ordinance.
C. In the event the Building Permit Officer discovers that the work does not
comply with the permit application or any applicable laws and ordinances, or
that there has been a false statement or misrepresentation by any applicant,
the Building Permit Officer shall revoke the Building Permit and report such
fact to Council and the Zoning Hearing Board for whatever action it considers
necessary.
D. A record of all such inspections and violations of this Ordinance shall be
maintained by the Building Permit Officer.
SECTION 3.09 – Fees
Applications for a Building Permit in a
a fee, payable to Sugarcreek Borough
floodplain area shall be accompanied by
as set forth in Section VII of the
17 of 35
Ordinance No. 104 of 1985 “FLOODPLAIN”
building permit application.
SECTION 3.10 – Enforcement
A. Notices:
Whenever the Building Permit Officer or other authorized municipal
representative determines that there are reasonable grounds to believe that
there has been a violation of any provisions of this Ordinance, or of any
regulation adopted pursuant thereto, the Building Permit Officer shall give notice
of such alleged violation as hereinafter provided. Such notice shall:
(1) be in writing;
(2) include a statement of the reasons for its issuance;
(3) allow a reasonable
the performance of
time not to exceed a period of thirty (30) days for
any act it requires;
(4) be served upon the property owner or his agent as the case may
require; provided, however, that such notice or order shall be deemed to
have been properly served upon such owner or agent when a copy
thereof has been servied with such notice by any other method
authorized or required by the laws of this State;
(5) contain an
compliance
outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect
with the provisions of this Ordinance.
B. Penalties:
Any person who fails to comply with any or all of the requirements or
provisions of this Ordinance or who fails or refuses to comply with any notice,
order or direction of the Building Permit Officer or any other authorized
18 of 35
Ordinance No. 104 of 1985 “FLOODPLAIN”
employee of the municipality shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction,
shall pay a fine not exceeding three hundred ($300.00) dollars, together with
the costs of prosecustion, or imprisonment for a term not to exceed thirty
(30) days. Each day during which any violation of this Ordinance continues
shall constitute a separate offense.
In addition to the above penalties, all other actions are hereby reserved
including an action in equity for the proper enforcement of this Ordinance. The
imposition of a fine or penalty for any violation of, or non-compliance with,
this Ordinance shall not excuse the violation or non-compliance or permit it to
continue and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such
violations and non-compliance within a reasonable time as determined by the
Building Permit Officer.
Any development initiated or any structure or building constructed, reconstructed,
enlarged, altered or relocated in non-compliance with this Ordinance may be
declared by Council to be a public nuisance and abatable as such.
SECTION 3.11 – Appeals
A. Any person aggrieved by an action or decision of the Building Permit Officer
concerning the administration of the provisions of this Ordinance may appeal to
the Zoning Hearing Board. Such appeal must be filed in writing, within (30)
days after the decision or action of the Building Permit Officer.
B. Upon receipt of such appeal, the Zoning Hearing Board shall set a time and
place, within not less than ten (10) not more than sixty (60) days, for the
purpose of considering the appeal. Notice of the time and place at which the
appeal will be considered shall be given to all parties. The Zoning Hearing
Board shall render a decision within sixty (60) days of the date of the
completion of the hearing.
Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Zoning Hearing Board may seek
19 of 35
Ordinance No. 104 of 1985 “FLOODPLAIN”
relief therefrom by appeal to Court, as provided by the laws of this
Commonwealth, including The Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act, in
addition to Ordinance No. 22 of 1969 as amended.
ARTICLE IV – IDENTIFICATION OF FLOODPLAIN AREA
SECTION 4.00 – Identification
The identified floodplain area shall be any area of the Borough, subject to the
one hundred (100) year flood, which is identified as a Special Flood Hazard
(Zone A) on the Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM) as issued by the
Federal Insurance Administration dated May 5, 1978, or such revised map
issued by the Federal Insurance Administration.
SECTION 4.01 – Determination of the One Hundred (100) Year Flood Elevation
For the purpose of this Ordinance, the one hundred (100) year flood
elevation shall be used as the basis for regulation. To determine the one
hundred (100) year flood elevation, the elevation at a given point on the
boundary of the identified floodplain area which is nearest the construction site
in question will be used. In helping to make this necessary elevation
determination other sources of data, where available, shall be used such as:
A. Corps of Engineers – Flood Plain Information Reports
B. U.S. Geological Survey – Flood Prone Quadrangles
C. U.S.D.A., Soil Conservation Service – County Soil Surveys (Alluvial
Soils) or P.L. 566 Flood Information
D. Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources – Flood Control
Investigations
20 of 35
Ordinance No. 104 of 1985 “FLOODPLAIN”
E. Known Highwater Marks from Past Floods
F. Other sources.
In lieu of the above, the municipality may require the applicant to determine
the elevation with hydrologic and hydraulic engineering techniques. Hydrologic
and hydraulic analysis shall be undertaken only by professional engineers or
others of demonstrated qualifications, who shall certify that the technical
methods used correctly reflect currently accepted technical concepts. Studies,
analysis, computations, etc., shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a
technical review by Council.
SECTION 4.02 – Changes in Identification of Area
The identified floodplain area may be revised or modified by Council where
studies or information provided by a qualified agency or person documents the
need for such revision. However, prior to any such change, approval must be
obtained from the Federal Insurance Administration (FIA).
SECTION 4.03 – Boundary Disputes
Should a dispute concerning any identified floodplain boundary arise, such
dispute shall be resolved by the Hearing Board. Any party aggrieved by such
decision can seek relief therefrom by appeal to Court, as provided by the laws
of this Commonwealth, including the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act.
ARTICLE V – GENERAL TECHNICAL REQUIREMENTS
SECTION 5.00 – General
A. In the identified floodplain area, the development and use of any land shall be
21 of 35
Ordinance No. 104 of 1985 “FLOODPLAIN”
permitted provided that the development and/or use complies with the
restrictions requirements of this and all other applicable codes and ordinances
in force in the municipality.
B. Within any identified floodplain area, no new construction or development shall
be located within the area measuring fifty (50) feet landward from the topof-
bank of any watercourse.
C. Within any identified floodplain area, the elevation of lower floor (including
basement) of any new or substructure improved residential structure shall be
one and one-half (1½) feet or more above the one hundred (100) year
flood elevation.
D. Within any identified floodplain area, the elevation on the lowest floor
(including basement) of any new or substantially improved non-residential
structure shall be one half one and one-half (1½) feet or more above the
one hundred year flood elevation or be flood-proofed up to that height.
Any structure, or part thereof, which will not be com or adequately elevated,
shall be flood-proofed in accordance with the provisions of this article.
Additional information may be obtained from the publication entitled “Flood
Proofing Regulations” (U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, 1972).
SECTION 5.01 – Design and Construction Standards
The following minimum standards
development proposed within any
shall apply for all construction and
identified floodplain area:
A. Fill
If fill is used, it shall:
1. Extend laterally at least fifteen (15) feet beyond the building line from
22 of 35
Ordinance No. 104 of 1985 “FLOODPLAIN”
all points;
2. Consist of soil or small rock materials only - sanitary landfills shall not
be permitted;
3. Be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and resistance to
erosion, scouring or settling;
4. Be no steeper than one (1) vertical to two (2) horizontal, unless
substantiated data, justifying steeper slopes are submitted to, and
approved by the Building Permit Officer; and
5. Be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect adjacent
properties.
B. Drainage Facilities
Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to convey the flow of storm water
runoff in a safe and efficient manner. The system shall insure proper drainage
along streets and provide positive drainage away from buildings. The system
shall also be designed to prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent
properties.
C. Water and Sanitary Sewer Facilities and Systems
1. All new or replacement water and sanitary sewer facilities and systems
shall be located, designed and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damages and the infiltration or flood waters.
2. Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to prevent the
discharge or untreated sewage into flood waters.
3. No part of any on-site sewage system shall be located within any
23 of 35
Ordinance No. 104 of 1985 “FLOODPLAIN”
identified floodplain area except in strict compliance with all state and
local requirements for such systems. If any such system is permitted, it
shall be located so as to avoid impairment to it, contamination from it,
during a flood.
D. Other Utilities
All other utilities such as gas lines, electrical and telephone systems shall be
located, elevated (where possible) and constructed to minimize the chance of
impairment during a flood.
E. Streets
The finished elevation of all new streets shall be no more than one (1) foot
below the Regulatory Flood Elevation.
F. Storage
All materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive or times of flooding could
be injurious to human, animal or plant life, and not listed in Section 5.02,
Development Which May Endanger Human Life, shall be stored at or above
the Regulatory Flood Elevation and/or floodproofed to the maximum extent
possible.
G. Placement of Buildings and Structures
All buildings and structures shall be designed, located and constructed so as
to offer the minimum obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to
have a minimum effect upon the flow and height of flood water.
H. Anchoring
1. All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance with
24 of 35
Ordinance No. 104 of 1985 “FLOODPLAIN”
accepted engineering practices to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement.
2. All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks and other similar objects or
components located below the Regulatory Flood Elevation shall be
securely anchored or affixed to prevent flotation.
I. Floors, Walls and Ceilings
1. Wood flooring used at or below the Regulatory Flood Elevation shall be
installed to accommodate a lateral expansion of the flooring, perpendicular
to the flooring grain without causing structural damage to the building.
2. Plywood used at or below the Regulatory Flood Elevation shall be of a
“marine” or “water-resistant” variety.
3. Walls and ceilings at or below the Regulatory Flood Elevation shall be
designed and constructed of materials that are water-resistant and will
withstand inundation.
4. Windows, doors and other components at or below the Regulatory Flood
Elevation shall be made of metal or other water-resistant material.
J. Paints and Adhesives
1. Paints or other finishes used at or below the Regulatory Flood Elevation
shall be of “marine” or water-resistant quality.
2. Adhesives used at or below the Regulatory Flood Elevation shall be of a
“marine” or water-resistant variety.
3. All components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) shall
“marine” or water-resistant paint or other finishing
be finished with a
material.
25 of 35
Ordinance No. 104 of 1985 “FLOODPLAIN”
K. Electrical Components
1. Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three (3) feet above the
one hundred (100) year flood elevation.
2. Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be dropped
from above.
L. Equipment
Water heaters, furnaces, air conditioning and ventilating units, and other
mechanical or utility equipment or apparatus shall not be located below the
Regulatory Flood Elevation.
M. Fuel Supply Systems
All gas and oil supply systems shall be designed to prevent the infiltration of
flood waters into the system and discharges from the system into flood waters.
Additional provisions shall be made for the drainage of these systems in the
event that flood water infiltration occurs.
SECTION 5.02 – Development Which May Endanger Human Life
A. In accordance with the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act, and the
regulations adopted by the Department of Community Affairs as required by the
Act, any new construction or substantial improvement of any structure located
within a floodplain area, which be be used for the production or storage of
any material or substance listed in subsection B of this section, or which will
be used for any activity requiring the maintenance of a supply (more than
550 gallons or other comparable volume) of any such materials or substances
on the premises, or which will involve the production, storage or use of any
amount of radioactive substances, shall require at a minimum the follow:
26 of 35
Ordinance No. 104 of 1985 “FLOODPLAIN”
1. That within any floodplain area, such construction or substantial
improvement shall be prohibited unless it is elevated, or flood-proofed to
remain dry, up to at least 1½ feet above the one hundred (100) year
flood elevation.
2. That within any delineated floodway area, such construction or substantial
improvement shall be prohibited.
B. The following list of materials and
human life, and shall include, but
substances shall be considered dangerous to
not be limited to:
1. Acetone.
2. Ammonia.
3. Benzene.
4. Calcium carbide.
5. Carbon disulfide.
6. Celluloid.
7. Chlorine.
8. Hydrochloric acid.
9. Hydrocyanic acid.
10. Magnesium.
11. Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen.
12. Petroleum products – gasoline, fuel oil, crude oil, etc.
13. Phosphorus.
14. Potassium.
15. Sodium.
16. Sulphur and sulphur products.
17. Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides and rodenticides).
18. Radioactive substances insofar as such substances are not otherwise
subject to regulation.
C. Oil and gas exploration and/or production is expressly prohibited within an
identified floodway.
27 of 35
Ordinance No. 104 of 1985 “FLOODPLAIN”
D. The Zoning Hearing Board may, upon request from an applicant consider the
possibility of modifying the freeboard requirement for the kind of development
regulated by this section, provided that the applicant can demonstrate, and the
Zoning Hearing Board can determine:
1. That there are unique physical circumstances, including such things as
exceptional topographical, or other existing natural or man-made
conditions peculiar to the property.
2. That because of such physical circumstances and conditions, the
proposed development cannot be reasonably designed and constructed in
compliance with the applicable requirements, and that a modification is
therefore necessary.
3. That failure
hardship to
to grant the requested modification will result in exceptional
the applicant.
4. That approval
heights within
of the request will not result in any increased flood
any designated floodway.
5. That approval of the request will not
public health and safety, or result in
create any nuisance.
result in any additional threat to
any extraordinary public expense, or
6. That approval of the request will not result in any conflict with any other
applicable laws or regulations.
E. In approving a request for a reduction in the required free-board, the Zoning
Hearing Board shall:
1. Authorize the least reduction necessary to provide relief.
28 of 35
Ordinance No. 104 of 1985 “FLOODPLAIN”
2. Notify the applicant in writing that approval of the request will, (i)
result in increased premium rates for flood insurance; and (ii) increase
risk to the structure, its contents or occupants. Such notification shall be
included with Council records, and the Zoning Hearing Board, as required
below.
3. Maintain a complete record of all requests which have been approved,
authorizing reductions in freeboard.
4. Report all such requests which have been approved in its annual report
to the Department.
5. That approval of the request will not
public health and safety, or result in
create any nuisance.
result in any additional threat to
any extraordinary public expenses,
F. Where permitted within any identified floodplain area, any new or substantially
improved structure of the kind described in subsection A above shall be
designed to prevent pollution from the structure or activity during the course of
a one hundred (100) year flood.
Any new structure, or part thereof, that will be built below the Regulatory
Flood Elevation shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the
standards for completely dry flood-proofing contained in the publication “Flood
Proofing Regulations” (U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, June 1972), or with
some other equivalent watertight standard.
SECTION 5.03 – Special Requirements for Mobile Homes
A. Where permitted
additions thereto
within any identified floodplain area, all mobile homes and
shall be:
29 of 35
Ordinance No. 104 of 1985 “FLOODPLAIN”
1. Anchored as per “Anchoring Mobile Homes in Flood Prone Areas”,
Bulletin No. 2, prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency,
April 1983, and subsequent amendments thereto.
2. Elevated in accordance with the following requirements:
a. the stands or lots shall be elevated on compacted fill, or on
pilings so that the lowest floor of the mobile home will be one
and one-half (1½) feet or more above the elevation of the one
hundred (100) year flood.
b. adequate surface drainage is provided.
c. adequate access for a hauler is provided.
d. where pilings are used for elevation, the lots shall be large
enough to permit steps; piling foundations shall be placed in stable
soil no more then ten (10) feet apart; reinforcement shall be
provided for pilings that will extend for six (6) feet or more
above the ground level.
B. An evacuation plan indicating alternate vehicular access and escape routes shall
be filed with Council, the Zoning Hearing Board and the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
ARTICLE VI – ACTIVITIES REQUIRING SPECIAL PERMITS
SECTION 6.00 – General
In accordance with the administrative regulations promulgated by the Department
of Community Affairs to implement the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management
30 of 35
Ordinance No. 104 of 1985 “FLOODPLAIN”
Act, (Act 1978-66), the
located entirely or partially
Permit is issued:
following obstructions and activities are prohibited if
within an identified floodplain area unless a Special
A. Hospitals (public or private).
B. Nursing homes (public or private).
C. Jails or prisons.
D. New mobile home parks
improvements to existing
and mobile home subdivisions, and substantial
mobile home parks.
SECTION 6.01 – Application Review Procedures
Upon receipt of an application for a Special Permit by the Zoning
Board, the following procedures shall apply in addition to those of
Hearing
Article III:
A. Within three (3) working days following receipt of the application, a
complete copy of the application and all accompanying documentation
shall be forwarded to the County Planning Commission by registered or
certified mail for its review and recommendations. Copies of the
application shall also be forwarded to the Borough Planning Commission
and the Borough Engineer for review and comment.
B. If an application is received that is incomplete, the Borough shall notify
the applicant in writing, stating in what respects the application is
deficient.
C. If the Zoning Hearing Board decides to disapprove an application, it shall
31 of 35
Ordinance No. 104 of 1985 “FLOODPLAIN”
notify the applicant, in writing, of the reasons for the disapproval.
D. If the Zoning Hearing Board approves an application, it shall file written
notification, together with the application and all pertinent information, with
the Department of Community Affairs, by registered or certified mail,
within five (5) working days after the date of approval.
E. Before issuing the Special Permit, the Zoning Hearing Board shall allow
the Department of Community Affairs thirty (30) days, after receipt of
the notification by the Department, to review the application and decision
made by the Zoning Hearing Board.
F. If the Zoning Hearing Board does not receive any communication from
the Department of Community Affairs during the thirty (30) day review
period, it may issue a Special Permit to the applicant.
G. If the Department of Community Affairs should decide to disapprove an
application, it shall notify Council and the applicant, in writing, of the
reasons for disapproval, and the Zoning Hearing Board shall not issue
the Special Permit.
SECTION 6.02 – Special Technical Requirements
A. In addition to the requirements of Article V of this Ordinance, the following
minimum requirements shall also apply to any proposed development requiring a
Special Permit if there is any conflict between any of the following
requirements and those in Article V of this Ordinance or in any other code,
ordinance or regulation, the more restrictive provisions shall apply.
B. No application for a Special Permit shall be approved unless it can be
determined that the structure or activity will be located, constructed and
maintained in a manner in which will:
1. Fully protect the health and safety of the general public and any
32 of 35
Ordinance No. 104 of 1985 “FLOODPLAIN”
occupants or the structure. At a minimum, all new structures shall be
designed, located and constructed so that:
a. the structure will survive inundation by water of the one hundred
(100) year flood without any lateral movement or damage to
either the structure itself, or to any of its equipment or contents
below the one hundred (100) year flood elevation.
b. the lowest floor elevation will be at least
feet above the one hundred (100) year
one and one-half (1½)
flood elevation.
c. the occupants of the structure can remain inside for
period of time and be safely evacuated at any time
one hundred (100) year flood.
an indefinate
during the
2.
flows, or
Prevent any significant possibility of pollution, increased flood levels or
debris endangering life and property.
ARTICLE VII – EXISTING STRUCTURES IN IDENTIFIED FLOODPLAIN AREAS
SECTION 7.00 – General
Structures existing in any identified floodplain area prior to the enactment of
this Ordinance may continue to remain provided that:
A. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction or improvement or any kind to
an existing structure, to an extent or amount of fifty (50%) percent or
more of its market value, shall constitute a substantial improvement and
shall be undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this
Ordinance.
B. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction or improvement of any kind to
an existing structure, to an extent or amount of less than fifty (50%)
33 of 35
Ordinance No. 104 of 1985 “FLOODPLAIN”
percent of its market value, shall be elevated and/or floodproofed to the
greatest extent possible.
ARTICLE VIII – VARIANCES
SECTION 8.00 – Variance Procedures and Conditions
Requests for variances shall be considered by the Zoning Hearing
accordance with the procedures contained in Section 3.11 and the
Board in
following:
A. Except for a possible modification of the freeboard requirements involved,
no variance shall be granted for any of the other requirements pertaining
specifically to development regulated by Special Permit (Art. VI) or to
Development Which May Endanger Human Life (Sec 5.02)
B. If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification necessary
to provide relief.
C. In granting any variance, the Zoning Board Board shall attach whatever
reasonable conditions and safe guards it considers necessary in order to
protect the public health, safety and welfare, and to achieve the
objectives of this Ordinance.
D. Whenever a variance is granted, the Zoning Hearing Board shall notify
the applicant in writing that:
1. the granting of the variance may result in increased premium rates
for flood insurance.
2. such variances may increase the risks to life and property.
E. In reviewing any request
consider, at a minimum,
for variance, the Zoning Hearing Board shall
the following:
34 of 35
Ordinance No. 104 of 1985 “FLOODPLAIN”
1. that there is good and sufficient cause.
2. that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant.
3. that the granting of the variance will (i) neither result in an
unacceptable or prohibited increase in flood heights, additional
threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense; (ii) nor
create nuisances, cause fraud on, or victimize the public, or
conflict with any other applicable state or local ordinances and
regulations.
F. A complete record of all variances requests and related actions shall be
maintained by Council. In addition, a report of all variances granted
during the year shall be included in the annual report to the Federal
Insurance Administration.
Notwithstanding any of the
constructed so as to have
flood.
above, however, all structures shall be designed and
the capabilities of resisting the one hundred (100) year
ARTICLE IX – REPEALER
SECTION 9.00
Ordinance No. 22 of Sugarcreek Borough adopted by Resolution of the
Borough Council, said Ordinance No. 22 of 1969 as amended dealing with the
subject matter covered herein, is hereby repealed.
Adopted this 16th day of January, 1985.
Signed: Sugarcreek Borough Council President
Attest: Sugarcreek Borough Council Secretary
35 of 35
ORDINANCE NO. 117 OF 1987 “SOLICITATION ORDINANCE”
ORDINANCE NO. 117 OF 1987
Borough of Sugarcreek
Venango County Pennsylvania
“AN ORDINANCE DEFINING REGULATING AND LICENSING PEDDLERS, CANVASSERS
AND SOLICITORS; PROVIDING PENALITIES FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING
FOR INFORMATION TO BE SUPPLIED IN THE APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; PROVIDING
FOR THE ISSUANCE AND FORM OF LICENSE AND PROVIDING FOR THE PAYMENT,
PRIOR TO ISSUANCE OF LICENSE, OF A FEE OF TWENTY-FIVE DOLLARS ($25.00)
TO COVER THE COST OF INVESTIGATION, ISSUANCE OF LICENSE AND REGULATION
OF LICENSED ACTIVITY DURING A ONE YEAR PERIOD.”
BE IT ENACTED AND ORDAINED by the Borough of Sugarcreek in Council assembled and
it is hereby enacted and ordained by authority of the same:
SECTION 1.
(a) A peddler, canvasser or solicitor, as used in the Ordinance is defined as any
person, whether resident of the Borough of Sugarcreek or not, traveling by foot, vehicle, or
any type of conveyance from place to place, from house to house or from street to street
offering and exposing for sale, making sales and delivery articles to purchasers, taking or
attempting to taker orders for sale of goods, wares and merchandise, personal property of
any nature whatsoever for future delivery, or for services to be furnished or performed in
the future, whether or not such person has, carries or exposes for sale a sample of the
subject of such sale or whether he is collecting advance payments on such sales or not,
provided, however, that the term peddler, canvasser or solicitor, as used herein, shall not
apply (1) to farmers selling their own produce (2) to persons selling goods, wares and
merchandise, donated by the owners thereof, the proceeds whereof are to be applied to
any charitable, civic or philanthropic purpose, or (3) to any manufacturer or producer in
the sale of bread and bakery products, meat and meat products, or milk or milk products.
Or (4) to boys legally engaged in the sale of and delivery of newspapers.
(b) The word “person” as used in this ordinance shall mean any person,
association, partnership, firm or corporation.
(c) In this ordinance, the singular shall include the plural and the masculine shall
include the feminine and the neuter.
1
ORDINANCE NO. 117 OF 1987 “SOLICITATION ORDINANCE”
SECTION 2.
No person shall engage in peddling, canvassing or soliciting in the Borough of
Sugarcreek without first having taken out a license as herein provided.
SECTION 3.
Application: Applicants for permits and licenses under this ordinance must file with the
Secretary a sworn application executed in duplicate on a form to be furnished by the
Secretary which shall give the following information.
(a) Name and description of applicant:
(b) Address (legal and local);
(c) A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be sold
and in the case of products of farm or orchard, whether produced or grown
by the applicant;
(d) If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with credentials
establishing the exact relationship;
(e) The length of time for which the right to do business is desired;
(f) If a vehicle is to be used, a description of the same, together with license
number or other means of identification;
(g) A photograph of the applicant taken within sixty (60) days immediately prior
to the date of the filing of the application, which picture shall be two (2”)
inches by two (2”) inches, showing the head and shoulders of the applicant
in a clear, distinguishing manner;
(h) Fingerprints of the applicant and the name of at least two reliable property
owners of Venango County, Pennsylvania, who will certify as to the applicants
good character and business responsibility, or in lieu of the names of
references, any other available evidence as to the good character and business
responsibility of the applicant as will enable an investigator to properly evaluate
2
ORDINANCE NO. 117 OF 1987 “SOLICITATION ORDINANCE”
such character and business responsibility;
(i) A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any
crime, misdemeanor or violation or any municipal ordinance, the nature of the
offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor;
(j) A copy of any printed contract; agreement, or order form used in the
transaction, as well as any printed material advertising or describing the subject
of the transaction;
(k) At the time of filing the application, a fee of twenty-five ($25.00) dollars
shall be paid to the Secretary to cover the cost of processing and
investigation.
SECTION 4.
(a) Upon receipt of such application, the original shall be referred to the Chief of
Police, who shall cause such investigation of the applicant's business and
moral character to be made as he deems necessary for the protection of the
public good.
(b) If as a result of such investigation the applicant's character or business
responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, the Chief of Police shall endorse on
such application his disapproval and his reasons for the same, and return said
application to the Secretary, who shall notify the applicant that his application
is disapproved and that no permit and license will be issued.
(c) If as a result of such investigation, the character and business responsibility of
the applicant are found to be satisfactory, the Chief of Police shall endorse on
the application, his approval, and return said application to the Secretary, who
shall, upon payment of the prescribed license fee, deliver to the applicant his
permit and issue a license. Such license shall contain the signature and seal
of the issuing officer and shall show the name, address and photograph of the
licensee, the class of license issued, and the type of goods to be sold
thereunder, the amount of fee paid, the date of issuance and the length of
time the same shall be operative, as well as the license number and any
3
ORDINANCE NO. 117 OF 1987 “SOLICITATION ORDINANCE”
other identifying description of any vehicle used by the licensee. The Secretary
shall keep a permanent record of all licenses issued.
(d) No license issued hereunder shall be transferable from one person to another.
SECTION 5.
Fees. No license shall be issued under this ordinance until the proper fee, payable
to the Borough of Sugarcreek for the use of the Borough, shall be paid namely, twentyfive
($25.00) dollars. The permit is good for one (1) year unless otherwise revoked.
SECTION 6.
Badges. The Secretary shall issue to each license at the time of delivery of his
license a badge bearing the words “licensed peddler”, containing the photograph of the
licensee and indicating the period for which the license is issued and the number of the
license in letters and figures plainly discernible. Every peddler, canvassor and solicitor shall
at all times when engaged in peddling, soliciting and canvassing within the Borough of
Sugarcreek carry such license upon his person and shall exhibit the same upon request to
all police officers and citizens.
SECTION 7.
Loud Noises and Speaking Devises. No peddler, nor any person in his behalf, shall
shout, make any cry out, blow a horn, ring a bell, or use any sound device, including and
loud-speaking radio or sound amplifying system upon any of the streets, alleys, parks or
other public places of Borough of Sugarcreek, or upon any private premises in the Borough
where sound of sufficient volume is emitted or produced therefrom to be capable of being
plainly heard upon the streets, avenues, alleys, parks or other public places, for the
purpose of attracting attention to any goods, wares or merchandise which such licensee
purposes to sell.
SECTION 8.
Hours. No person licensed hereunder shall engage in peddling, canvassing or
soliciting at anytime on Sunday, or upon any other day of the week before the hour of
4
ORDINANCE NO. 117 OF 1987 “SOLICITATION ORDINANCE”
nine o'clock a.m. or after six o'clock p.m.
SECTION 9.
Location. No person licensed as a peddler, canvassor or solicitor shall be permitted
a stationary location upon the public streets nor shall he be permitted to operate in any
congested area where his operations might impede or inconvenience the public. For the
purpose of this ordinance, the judgment of a police officer, exercised in good faith, shall be
deemed conclusive as to whether the area is congested or the public impeded or
inconvenienced.
SECTION 10.
Duty of Police to Enforce. It shall be the duty of any police officer of the Borough
of Sugarcreek to require any person seen peddling, and who is not known by such officer
to be duly licensed, to produce his peddler's license and to enforce the provisions of this
ordinance against any persons found to be violating the same.
SECTION 11.
Revocation of Licenses.
(a) Permits and licenses issued under the provisions of this ordinance may be
revoked by the Mayor of the Borough of Sugarcreek or his authorized deputy,
after notice and hearing, for any of the following causes:
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in the application for
license;
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement made in the course of carrying on
his business as peddler;
(3) Any violation of this ordinance;
(4) Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude;
5
ORDINANCE NO. 117 OF 1987 “SOLICITATION ORDINANCE”
(5) Conducting the business of peddling, canvassing or soliciting in an unlawful
manner or in such manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or a
menace to the health, safety or general welfare to the public.
(b) Any license issued under the provisions of this ordinance may be suspended
at any time upon well-founded complaint of any resident or police officer of
the Borough of Sugarcreek and shall be forthwith surrendered upon demand to
the Secretary or to any police officer of the Borough of Sugarcreek and
following a hearing of said complaint within twenty-four (24) hours after
suspension of the license, the Mayor may, for proper cause shown, revoke the
license. The licensee shall present himself before the Mayor upon notice to do
so by any police officer and his failure to appear shall be sufficient cause for
revocation or the license.
SECTION 12.
Appeal. Any person aggrieved by the action of the Chief of Police or the Secretary
in the denial of an application for permit or license, as provided in the ordinance, or in the
decision with reference to the revocation of a license as provided in this ordinance, shall
have the right of appeal to the Borough Council. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with
the Council within thirty (30) days of the action complained of, a written statement setting
forth fully the grounds for the appeal. The Council shall set the time and place for a
hearing on such appeal and shall give timely notice of such hearing to the appellant. The
decision and order of the Council on such an appeal shall be final and conclusive.
SECTION 13.
Expiration of License. All annual licenses issued under the provisions of this
ordinance shall expire on the 31st day of December in the year when issued. Other than
annual licenses shall expire on the date issued specified in the license.
SECTION 14.
Penalty. Any person violating any of the provisions of this ordinance shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not to exceed one hundred ($100.00) dollars
and costs of prosecution or by imprisonment not to exceed thirty (30) days, or both fine
and imprisonment.
6
ORDINANCE NO. 117 OF 1987 “SOLICITATION ORDINANCE”
SECTION 15.
Severability. The provisions of this ordinance shall be severable and if any section,
sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance shall for any reason be held to be invalid or
unconstitutional, such decision shall not effect the validity of the remaining sections,
sentences, clause and phrases of this ordinance, but they shall remain in effect. It is
hereby declared as a legislative intent that this ordinance shall stand, notwithstanding the
invalidity of any part.
SECTION 16.
Repeal of Conflicting Ordinances. All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent
with the provisions of this ordinance are hereby repealed.
SECTION 17.
Effective Date. This ordinance shall take effect from and after its passage and
publication as provided by law.
Adopted May 6, 1987
7
ORDINANCE NO. 124 OF 1989 "Speed Limit"
ORDINANCE NO. 124 OF 1989
Borough of Sugarcreek
Venango County, Pennsylvania
AN ORDINANCE FIXING THE MAXIMUM SPEEDS AT WHICH VEHICLES MAY BE OPERATED UPON PUBLIC HIGHWAYS, STREETS, ROADS, WAYS,
LANES, ALLEYS AND AVENUES WITHIN THE BUSINESS, RESIDENTIAL AND RURAL DISTRICTS OF THE BOROUGH OF SUGARCREEK AND
PROVIDING PENALTIES FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF.
WHEREAS, the Borough of Sugarcreek desires to limit the speed at which a vehicle, as defined in the Vehicle Code of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, may be operated upon the public Highways, Streets, Roads, Ways, lanes, Alleys and Avenues within the Business, Residential and Rural
districts of the Borough of Sugarcreek.
WHEREAS, under the provisions of the Vehicle Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the Borough of Sugarcreek may establish speed limits
of twenty-five (25), thirty-five (35) and forty-five (45) miles per hour upon those Highways, Streets, Roads, Ways, Lanes, Alleys and Avenues within
it Business, Residential and Rural districts where official signs have been erected and are maintained by the Borough of Sugarcreek in a manner provided
by the Vehicle Code and Manual of Regulations for official traffic signs and signals established by the Secretary of Highways of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
NOW, THEREFORE, be it enacted and ordained by the Borough of Sugarcreek in Council assembled, and it is hereby enacted and ordained by
Authority of the same that:
Section 1. Words and phrases when used in this Ordinance shall have the meanings ascribed to them in the Vehicle Code of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania and now in force or as hereafter amended, except in those instances where the context clearly indicates a different meaning.
Section 2. A speed limit of twenty-five (25) miles per hour is hereby established for the following Zones within the Business, Residential and
Rural districts of the Borough of Sugarcreek.
(a) Allenbaugh Road, from Meadville Pike to Patchel Run Road.
(b) Baker Street, from Second Avenue to Observation Street
(c) Bell Avenue, from Meadville Pike to Prospect Avenue
(d) Causeway Drive, from Sugarcreek Drive to Buttermilk Hill Road.
(e) Cedar Street, from Route #417 to Duke Street
(f) Cherry Tree Road, from Keely Road to Borough Line.
(g) Chestnut Street, from Fifth Street to Dead End
(h) Circle Street, from Spruce to Walnut Drive
(i) Crestview Road, from Manor Drive to Roccaway
(j) Duke Street, from Cedar Street to Second Ave
(k) Egbert Street, from Front Street to Maple Street
(l) Eighth Street, from Walnut Street to Chestnut Street
(m) Elm Street, from Fox Street to Egbert Street
(n) Fern Street, from North Front Street to Grimm Street
(o) Fifth Street, from PA Rte. 8 & US 62 to Chestnut Street
(p) First Avenue, from Baker Street to Second Avenue
(q) First Street, from PA Rte. 8 & US 62 to Walnut Street
(r) Foster Road, from Two Mile Run Road to Borough Line
1 Of 4
ORDINANCE NO. 124 OF 1989 "Speed Limit"
(s) Fourth Street, from PA Rte. 8 & US 62 to Oak Street
(t) Fox Street, from Cedar Street to Dead End
(u) Gibb Road, from PA Rte 8 & US 62 to PA Rte 8 & US 62
(v) Gilfillan Street, from McCalmont Street to Wiley Ave
(w) Grimm Street, from Route #417 to Fern Street
(x) Hazel Street, from Park Ave to Prospect Ave
(y) Hickory Street, from Park Ave to Circle Street
(z) James Street, from Route #417 to Fern Street
(aa) Karns Street, from Lamberton Street to Gilfillan Street
(bb) Keely Road, from Two Mile Run Road to Cherry Tree Road
(cc) Keely Road, from Route #427 East to Paved portion
(dd) Kennerdell Street, from Lamberton Street to Nesbit Street
(ee) Kenneth Street, from First Ave to Second Ave
(ff) Kistler Street, from Meadville Pike to Prospect Ave
(gg) Lamberton Street, From Route #417 to Karns Street
(hh) Manor Drive, from Front Street to Roccaway
(ii) Maple Street, from Fox Street to Egbert Street
(jj) Marshal Street, from Buttermilk Hill Road to Wilson Street
(kk) Johnny Martin Hill Road, from Two Mile Run Road to Shaffer Run Road
(ll) McCalmont Street, from Gilfillan Street to Grimm Street
(mm) McCleary Road, from US Rte 322 to Buttermilk Hill Road
(nn) McQuaid Street, from Buttermilk Hill Road to Dead End
(oo) Miller Street, from Parker Ave to Wiley Ave
(pp) Mong Way, from PA Rte 8 & US 62 to Dead End
(qq) Murdock Street, from Palmer Ave to Prospect Ave
(rr) Nesbit Street, from Fox Street to Egbert Street
(ss) Ninth Street, from PA Rte 8 & US ^@ to Chestnut Street
(tt) North Front Street, from Rte #417 to Fern Street
(uu) Oak Street, from Third Street to Dead End
(vv) Oak Street, from Park Avenue to Circel Street
(ww) Observation Street, from Baker Street to Dead End
2 Of 4
ORDINANCE NO. 124 OF 1989 "Speed Limit"
(xx) Palmer Ave, from Rte 417 to Prospect Ave
(yy) Park Ave, from Palmer Ave to Prospect Ave
(zz) Park Street, from Maple Street to First Ave
(aaa) Parker Ave, from Route #417 to Miller Street
(bbb) Patchel Run Road (Dirt), from US 322 to Patchel Run Road
(ccc) Patchel Run Road (Dirt), from Patchel Run Road to Meadville Pike
(ddd) Pennell Street, from Route 417 to Fox Street
(eee) Phipps Street, from Route 417 to Fox Street
(fff) Prospect Ave, from Park Ave to Kistler Street
(ggg) Roccaway, from Front Street to Dead End
(hhh) Russell Street, from Venango Street to Second Ave
(iii) Second Ave, from Coefield Corners to First Ave
(jjj) Second Street, from PA Rte 8 & US 62 to Walnut Street
(kkk) Seventh Street, from Walnut Street to Chestnut Street
(lll) Shaffer Run Road, from Reno Limits to First Street
(mmm) Sixth Street, From PA Rte 8 & US 62 to Oak Street
(nnn) Sleepy Hollow Drive, from Rte 427 to Borough Line
(ooo) Spruce Street, from Prospect Ave to Circle Street
(ppp) Take-it-easy Road, from Causeway Dr to Dead end
(qqq) Tenth Street, from Walnut Street to Oak Street
(rrr) Third Street, from PA Rte 8 & US 62 to Oak Street
(sss) Transit Street, From PA Rte 8 & US 62 to to First Street
(ttt) Venango Street, from Cedar Street to Second Ave
(uuu) Walnut Street, from Palmer Ave to Dead End
(vvv) Walnut Street, from First Street to Dead End
(www) Warren Road, from Seysler Road to Two Mile Run Road
(xxx) Whitman Road, from Patchel Run Road to Lamberton Hill Road
(yyy) Wible Way, from PA Rte 8 & US 62 to Dead End
(zzz) Wilson Avenue, from Grimm Street to Dead End
(aaaa) Wilson Street, from Sugarcreek Drive to Dead End
(bbbb) Wood Street, from Route 417 to Dead End
3 Of 4
ORDINANCE NO. 124 OF 1989 "Speed Limit"
(cccc) Wiley Avenue, from Front Street to Egbert Street
Section 3. A speed limit of thirty-five (35) miles per hour is hereby established for the following Zones within the Business, Residential and
rural districts of the Borough of Sugarcreek:
(a) Cherry Tree Road, from Route 417 to Keely Road
(b) Independent Drive, from Route 427 to Borough Line
(c) Keely Road, from Cherry Tree Road West to Dirt Portion
(d) Seysler Road, from Route 417 to Warren Road
(e) Shaffer Run Road, from Rte 428 to Johnny Martin Hill Road
(f) Sugarcreek Drive, from Meadville Pike to Buttermilk Hill Road
(g) Warren Road, from Rte 417 to Seysler Road.
Section 4. A speed limit of forty-five (45) miles per hour is hereby established for the following Zones within the Business, Residential and
Rural districts of the Borough of Sugarcreek.
(a) Shaffer Run Road, from Johnny Martin Hill Road to Reno Limits
Section 5. Official signs giving notices of such speed limits shall be erected by the Borough of Sugarcreek on said highways in a manner
required by, and in accordance with the provisions of the Vehicle Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and Regulations for the official traffic signs
and signals established by the Secretary of Highways of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
Section 6. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate a vehicle upon the highways within the Borough of Sugarcreek at a rate of
speed greater than established by this ordinance.
Section 7. Nothing in this ordinance contained is intended to increase, nor shall any provision hereof be construed as increasing maximum speed
limits established by the Vehicle Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and where a lower rate of speed is established by the Vehicle Code, such
lower rate of speed shall govern and shall constitute the maximum legal rate of speed at which a vehicle may be driven or operated upon the highways
within the Borough of Sugarcreek.
Section 8. This ordinance is intended to supplement the provision of the Vehicle code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and to establish
within the limits authorized by the Vehicle Code the maximum speed at which a vehicle may be driven or operated within the Business, Residential, or
Rural districts of the Borough of Sugarcreek.
Section 9. Any person violating any of the provisions of the ordinance shall, upon summary conviction before a Magistrate, be sentenced to pay a
fine of $35.00 Dollars and cost of prosecution. Any person exceeding the maximum speed limit by more than five miles per hour shall pay an additional
fine of $2.00 Dollars per mile for each mile in excess of five miles per hour over the maximum speed limit.
Adopted this 17th day of May 1989
4 Of 4
ORDINANCE NO. 125 of 1989
ORDINANCE NO. 125 OF 1989
Borough of Sugarcreek
Venango County, Pennsylvania
AN ORDINANCE OF THE BOROUGH OF SUGARCREEK, VENANGO COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA,
PROHIBITING THE OFF-SITE RELEASE OF HAZARDOUS AND/OR FLAMMABLE MATERIALS BY
BUSINESSES; ESTABLISHING NOTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS; ESTABLISHING REQUIREMENTS FOR
THE ON-SITE POSSESSION OF CONTAINMENT MATERIALS; AND ESTABLISHING PENALTIES.
BE IT ORDAINED AND ENACTED, by the Borough Council of the Borough of Sugarcreek, Venango
County, Pennsylvania and it is hereby ordained and enacted by the authority of the same as follows:
Section 1: Title
Section 101: The title of this ordinance shall be the “Borough of Sugarcreek Hazardous/Flammable
Release Ordinance.”
Section 2: Definitions:
Section 102: As used in the ordinance, the following terms shall have the meaning indicated,
unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
Hazardous or Flammable Materials: Solids, liquids or gases that are hazardous or flammable, as
defined by the 1987 Edition of the Building Officials and Code Administrators International, Inc.
(BOCA) National Fire Prevention Code, and the Superfund Amendment and Re-authorization Act.
Title III of 1986 (SARA-Title III).
Business: any person, partnership, limited partnership, unincorporated association, institution,
trust, corporation, governmental agency, or in other body engaged in business or
situated in the Borough of Sugarcreek, employing one or more employees engaged in
any occupation.
Site: Property limits of a business facility.
Section 3: Release or Discharge of Hazardous or Flammable Substances is Prohibited.
Section 103: The release or discharge of flammable or hazardous substances off-site of a
business, whether accidental or intentional, is prohibited.
Section 4: Notification Requirements
1 Of 3
ORDINANCE NO. 125 of 1989
Section 104: The operator of any facility shall immediately notify the Sugarcreek Borough
Police Department of any off-site release or discharge of hazardous or
flammable material.
Section 5: Failure to Notify the Borough of a Release or Discharge
Section 105: It is illegal for any person or business to withhold, misrepresent, or falsify
information concerning the release or discharge of hazardous or flammable
materials.
Section 6: Containment and Absorption Materials Required.
Section 106: All facilities shall have equipment and materials to absorb and contain the
discharge or release of flammable or hazardous substances in a solid or liquid
form. Absorption and containment materials, once used, shall be promptly
disposed of in a manner which meets the applicable federal and state
requirements, and shall be immediately replaced.
Section 6A: Emergency Response Cost Recovery
Section 106A: Emergency responders (fire, police, emergency medical,
hazardous materials teams, etc.) can recover all costs of
responding to a hazardous material spill or release. Costs
to include materials used, foam, hazmat suits, contaminated
equipment or fire equipment, other contaminate items,
manpower hours, equipment hours and a maximum 10%
administrative costs. The business responsible for the
release must pay all emergency response costs as billed
by the emergency services.
Section 7: Enforcement
Section 107: This ordinance shall be enforced by the Borough of Sugarcreek or other
designated official of the Borough of Sugarcreek.
Section 8: Penalties
Section 108: Violations of any and all parts of this ordinance shall result in a fine of not
less that fifty ($50) dollars or more than three hundred ($300) dollars.
Section 9: Repealer
2 Of 3
ORDINANCE NO. 125 of 1989
Section 109: All ordinances or parts of ordinances which are inconsistent herewith are
hereby repealed.
Section 10: Effective Date
Section 110: This ordinance shall become effective 60 days after enactment
ORDAINED AND ENACTED, this 6th day of December, 1989.
3 Of 3
ORDINANCE NO. 131 OF 1991 “DOG CONTROL”
ORDINANCE NO. 131 OF 1991
Borough of Sugarcreek
Venango County, Pennsylvania
AN ORDINANCE REGULATING THE CONTROL OF DOGS WITHIN THE BOROUGH OF
SUGARCREEK
BE IT ENACTED AND ORDAINED, and it hereby is enacted and ordained by the Council
of the Borough of Sugarcreek, County of Venango, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, under
Borough Code, Act of February 1, 1965, P.L. No. 1656, Act No. 581, as amended, as
follows:
PART 1
D O G S
101. SHORT TITLE: This ordinance (101 to 109 this Part 1) shall be known as the
Borough of Sugarcreek Dog Control Ordinance. (Ordinance 89, January 21, 1981, 1)
102. PREFACE: The people and citizens of the Borough of Sugarcreek and their duly
elected governmental body are aware, and the Council has found as a fact, that numerous
owners of dogs are permitting their animals to run at large upon the public property and
the private property of others, that these owners are permitting their dogs to constitute a
public nuisance and, through lack of adequate control, are allowing them to cause personal
injury to other persons and property damages to the holdings of others, therefore, in
response to this situation and in the interest of the safety, health and convenience of the
general public, Council has caused this ordinance (101 to 109 this part 1) to be enacted.
(Ordinance 89, January 21, 1981, 2)
103. AUTHORITY: This ordinance and the objectives leading to its enactment, are
authorized under the following provisions of the Borough Code, to wit: ARTICLE XII,
SECTION 1202, PARAGRAPH (13)[53 P.S 46202(13)] and in part under the “Dog
Law” being the Act of December 7, 1982, P.L. 784 (3 P.S. S 459-101 et. seq.)
(ORDINANCE 89, January 21, 1981, 3)
104. DEFINITIONS: The following words and phrases when used in the ordinance shall
have, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the meanings given to them in this
1
ORDINANCE NO. 131 OF 1991 “DOG CONTROL”
section:
DEPARTMENT: The Sugarcreek Borough Police Department and its members.
DOG: The genus and species known as Canis familiaris; regardless of age or sex.
OWNER: When applied to the proprietorship of a dog, includes every person having a
right of property in such dog, and every person who keeps or harbors such dog or has it
in his care, and every person who permits such dog to remain on or about any premises
occupied by him.
PERSONS: Includes State and local officers, or employees, individuals, corporations, copartnerships
and associations. Singular words shall include the plural. Masculine words shall
include feminine and neuter.
POLICE OFFICER: Any person employed or elected by this Commonwealth, or by any
municipality and whose duty it is to preserve peace or to make arrests or to enforce the
law.
KENNEL: is a facility where animals, normally dogs, not owned by the proprietor or
keeper, are temporarily sheltered, fed, and watered in return for a fee.
(Ordinance 131, August 21, 1981)
105. DOGS AS PUBLIC NUISANCE: No person being the owners or keeper of a dog,
shall permit a dog, or dogs, under their control or responsibility to become a public
nuisance. A dog or dogs, shall be considered a public or private nuisance if it:
1. SHALL CONTINUALLY OR PERSISTANTLY, be it (constant or periodically)
bark and/or howl for an extended period of time of at least 20 minutes during the hours
of 8:00 am to 9:00 pm prevailing time or of 15 minutes during the hours of 9:00 pm
and 8:00 am prevailing time.
2. Shall cause personal injury to any person, or persons, or damage the property
of a person, or persons, other than that of the owner, custodian or keeper of the offending
animal or animals, except where defending the owner, custodian, or keeper from physical
assault on premises owned or rented by said person.
Ordinance 89, January 21, 1981, 5; as amended by Ordinance 131, August 21, 1991)
2
ORDINANCE NO. 131 OF 1991 “DOG CONTROL”
106. SHELTERS, KENNELS, RUNS, ETC.: No owner, custodian or keeper of any dog,
or dogs, shall permit any shelter, kennel, run or similar facility maintained for the housing
or exercise area of any dog or dogs, to become a public or private nuisance and/or health
hazard by allowing fecal matter to accumulate more than one day or by reason of
permitting feed or refuse to accumulate more than one day in and about said shelter areas.
Similarly, any owner or keeper of any dog, or dogs, shall insure that their property is free
of any accumulations of matter for more than one day which could constitute a public or
private nuisance and/or health hazard. (Ordinance 89, January 21, 1981, 6)
107. APPREHENSION AND DETENTION AND PENALITES: The members of the
department may cause any dog found running at large, either upon the public streets or
highways of the Commonwealth or upon property of a person other than the owner of such
dog, and unaccompanied by the owner or keeper, (BEARING OR NOT BEARING a proper
license or legible tattoo) to be seized and detained and to properly keep and provide feed
(within its kennel) and shall cause immediate notice by certified mail with return receipt
required, to the person whose name the license was procured, or his agent, to claim such
dog within five (5) days after the receipt thereof. The owner or claimant of a dog so
detained shall pay a penalty of fifteen dollars ($15.00) to the political subdivision whose
police officers make such seizure and detention and a detaining fee in the amount of
twelve dollars ($12.00) will be charged if the animal is detained over a period of eight
(8) hours, with an additional detaining fee of six ($6.00) dollars for each day or part of
a day after the first 24 hours detained, prior to the dog being returned to the claimant.
ALL DETAINING FEE MONIES COLLECTED WILL BE MAINTAINED IN AN ACCOUNT FOR
THE MAINTENANCE OF THE KENNEL AT THE MUNICIPAL BUILDING AND THE
PURCHASING OF FOOD AND SANITATION MATERIALS.
108. VIOLATIONS AND PENALITIES: Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate
provisions (105-107) of this ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay
fines not exceeding three hundred dollars ($300.00) together with costs of prosecution, or
to imprisonment for a term not to exceed thirty (30) days. Ordinance 89, January 21,
1981, 7, as amended by Ordinance 95, July 21, 1982, as amended by Ordinance 131,
August 21, 1991)
ALL PENALITIES FOR SECTION 107 ARE COVERED AND LISTED UNDER THAT
SECTION
109. SEVERABILITY: If any provision of this ordinance, or the application thereof, to any
3
ORDINANCE NO. 131 OF 1991 “DOG CONTROL”
person or circumstances is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect the other provisions or
applications of the ordinance which can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application, and to this end, the provisions and applications of this ordinance are severable.
(Ordinance 89, January 21, 1981, 8)
All ordinances, or parts of Ordinances, inconsistent herewith hereby are repealed.
ADOPTED this twenty-first (21) day of August, 1991
4
ORDINANCE NO. 142 OF 1993 "The Parking Ordinance"
ORDINANCE NO. 142 OF 1993
Borough of Sugarcreek
Venango County, Pennsylvania
AN ORDINANCE OF THE BOROUGH OF SUGARCREEK, COUNTY OF VENANGO, COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA,
PROVIDING FOR AREAS OF NO PARKING AND PROVIDING FOR PENALITIES FOR VIOLATIONS OF THE ORDINANCE.
BE IT ENACTED AND ORDAINED, and it is hereby enacted and ordained, under the Authority of the Borough Code, Act of February
1, 1966, (1965 P.L. 1656, Act No. 581) as amended by the Council of the Borough of Sugarcreek, County of Venango, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, as follows:
Section One: Title: This Ordinance shall be known as and may be cited as "The Parking Ordinance".
Section Two: Definitions: The following words and phrases when used in this Ordinance, shall, for the purpose of this Ordinance,
have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section, except in those instances when the context clearly indicates a different
meaning:
a. Council: The Council of the Borough of Sugarcreek.
b. Borough: The Borough of Sugarcreek.
c. Crosswalk:
(1) That part of the roadway at an intersection included within the connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on
opposite sides of the highway, measured from the curbs, or, in the absence of curbs, from the edge of the
traversable roadway; and in the absence of a sidewalk on one side of a roadway, that part of a roadway included
within the extension of the lateral lines of the existing sidewalk.
(2) Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other
markings on the surface.
d. Driver: A person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle.
e. Driveway: A way or place extending from a roadway onto or towards an abutting lot used for vehicular travel and pedestrian
traffic by the owner of the abutting lot and those having express or implied permission from the owner, and not by other
persons.
f. Highway: The entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the
use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. The term includes a roadway open to the use of the public for vehicular
travel on grounds of a public or private school or public or historical park.
g. Official traffic-control devices: Signs, signals, marking and devices not inconsistent with this title placed or erected by authority
of a public body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating, warnings or guiding traffic.
h. Operator: A person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle.
i. Owner: A person, other than a lien holder, having the property right in or title to a vehicle. The term includes a person
entitled to the use and possession of a vehicle subject to a security interest in another person, but excludes a lessee under
a lease not intended as security.
j. Park or Parking:
(1) When permitted, means the temporary storing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, off the roadway.
(2) When prohibited, means the halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except momentarily for the purpose of
and while actually engaged in loading or unloading property or passengers.
1 Of 4
ORDINANCE NO. 142 OF 1993 "The Parking Ordinance"
k. Pedestrian: A natural person afoot.
l. Person: A natural person, firm, co-partnership, association or corporation.
m. Police Officer: A natural person authorized by law to make arrests for violations of law.
n. Private road or driveway: A way or place in private ownership and used for vehicular travel by the owner and those having
express or implied permission from the owner, but not by other persons.
o. Railroad grade crossing: One or more railroad tracks, but not streetcar tracks, which intersect or cross a highway at the
same level or grade.
p. Roadway: That portion of a highway, improved, designed, or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the sidewalk,
berm, or shoulder even though such sidewalk, berm or shoulder is used for pedal cycles. In the event a highway includes
two or more separate roadways, the term "roadway" refers to each roadway separately, but not all such roadways
collectively.
q. Shall: Indicates that an action is required or prohibited.
r. Should: Indicated that an action is advisable, but not required.
s. Sidewalk: That portion of a street between curb lines, or the lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines,
intended for use by pedestrians; or that portion of a street right-of-way outside the lateral lines of the main travelled portion
of the street or road, intended for use by pedestrians.
t. Stand of Standing: When prohibited, means the halting of a vehicle whether occupied or not, except momentarily for the
purpose of and while actually engaged in receiving of discharging passengers.
u. Stop or Stopping:
(1) When required, means complete cessation from movement.
(2) When prohibited, means any halting even momentarily of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary
to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic-control sign or
signal.
v. Traffic: Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, streetcars and other conveyances, whether singly or together, using
any highway for purposes of travel.
w. Traffic Control Signal: A device, whether manually, electrically or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed
to stop and permitted to proceed.
x. Trailer: A vehicle designed to be towed by a motor vehicle.
y. Truck: A motor vehicle designed, used or maintained primarily for the transportation of property.
z. Vehicle: Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway,
except devices used exclusively upon rails or tracks.
Section Three: The proper officers of the Borough shall erect and cause to be maintained official signs regulating, requiring and
prohibiting parking, stopping, loading and unloading vehicles in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance.
2 Of 4
ORDINANCE NO. 142 OF 1993 "The Parking Ordinance"
Section Four: PARKING/NO PARKING
Paragraph One: The term "No Parking", when used in this Ordinance, shall mean that no person shall park a vehicle or permit it to
stand, either attended or unattended, between the hours specifically ordered in the appropriate sections of this Ordinance.
Paragraph Two: No person shall park a vehicle or permit it to stand, either attend or unattended, for more than 48 hours at any
one time upon the passageway of any street in the Borough.
Paragraph Three: No owner, operator, or other person shall park a vehicle or permit a vehicle to stand, either attended or
unattended, in any of the following places, on or in the vicinity of, a highway:
a. Within an intersection
b. On a crosswalk
c. Within twenty-five (25) feet of the intersection of curb lines, or if none, then within 15 (15) feet of the
intersection of street or road right-of-way lines, at an intersection of highways or streets.
d. Within fifteen (15) feet of a fire hydrant
e. In front of private driveway
f. On a sidewalk
g. Alongside a street or highway excavation or obstruction, or opposite the same, unless a clear and unobstructed
width of not less than one-half (1/2) of the main traveled portion of said street or highway shall be left free for
passage of other vehicles thereon.
h. On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the curb or edge of the highway.
i. At any place where official signs have been erected prohibiting standing and/or parking.
j. In a position other than parallel with the edge of the highway, headed in the direction of traffic, and with the curb
side of the vehicle within six (6) inches of the edge of the highway or curb, except where angle parking i
directed and permitted.
k. In a position other than with the front of the vehicle toward the curb of a highway when angle parking is directed
and permitted, except a tractor vehicle while being loaded or unloaded.
l. In the part of the public street right-of-way or highway or alley not occupied by the roadway except in a driveway.
m. In parking areas designated for Handicapped Parking Without a Handicapped vehicle license or a Handicapped
Parking Placard or Severely Disabled Veteran Parking Placard (as prescribed in the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code).
n. In a fire lane designated by signs
Paragraph Four: This Ordinance may restrict parking for vehicles or combinations of vehicles which exceed or exceeds twenty (2)
feet in length overall where designated by official signs erected on said street or streets.
Section Five:
Paragraph One: An officer shall by signal, order or direction require the removal of a legally or illegally parked vehicle for, and
temporarily prohibit the operation or parking of a vehicle in sections or areas of highways in the operation without delay, obstruction
and interruption in said sections or areas, of vehicles and equipment owned or leased by the Borough, including fire and police
vehicles, shovel and equipment engaged in the opening of excavations, and refilling of excavations, and the repair, resurfacing and the
cleaning of the surface of the highway or the removal of snow therefrom.
3 Of 4
ORDINANCE NO. 142 OF 1993 "The Parking Ordinance"
Paragraph Two: It shall be unlawful for an owner or operator of a vehicle to fail or refuse to comply with an order, signal, direction
or request given by an officer in accordance with, and as provided in, Paragraph One of Section nine of this Ordinance.
Section Six: This Ordinance is not intended and shall not be construed to any manner supersede, suspend, revoke, alter or
amend any provisions of the "Motor Vehicle Code" of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
Section Seven:
Paragraph One: Any person violating a provision of this Ordinance or aiding, abetting, or assisting in the violation of a provision
hereof, shall upon conviction in a summary proceeding before a District Magistrate, be subject to a fine of not less than Twenty
Dollars ($20.00), or more than Twenty-five Dollars ($25.00), together with the costs of prosecution; and in default of the
payment of fine and costs shall undergo imprisonment in the jail of the County of Venango, Pennsylvania, for a period to exceed no
more than ten days.
Paragraph Two: Any person receiving a ticket or notice of a parking violation may, in lieu of a summary proceeding before a District
Magistrate, pay to the borough:
(a) Within seventy-two hours at the Borough Office:
(1) $5.00 for parking in a No Parking area of prohibited parking area.
(2) $10.00 for parking in a Fire Lane, or within fifteen (15) feet of a fire hydrant, or in an area designated for
Handicapped Parking.
(3) $5.00 for any other violation of this Ordinance.
(b) After seventy-two (72) hours, but within one hundred twenty (120) hours:
(1) $10.00 for parking in in No Parking area or prohibited parking area.
(2) $20.00 for parking in a Fire Lane, or within fifteen (15) feet of a fire hydrant, or in an area designated for
Handicapped Parking.
(3) $10.00 for any other violation of this Ordinance.
The time periods herein provided for payment of fines without a summary proceeding shall commence at the time of the issuance of
the ticket or notice of a parking violation. Failure to pay within said periods of time shall result in a summary proceeding as provided
in Paragraph One of this Section.
Section Eight: If any provision, section, or part of this Ordinance shall be adjudicated invalid or unconstitutional by a court of
competent jurisdiction, this adjudication shall not affect the validity of this Ordinance as a whole, or any section, provision, or part thereof not
adjudged invalid or unconstitutional.
Section Nine: This Ordinance shall become effective at the earliest date permitted by law.
ENACTED AND ORDAINED into law by the Council of the Borough of Sugarcreek, Venango County, Pennsylvania, in lawful session
this 16th day of June, 1993.
4 Of 4
ORDINANCE NO. 143 OF 1993 "The Traffic Ordinance"
ORDINANCE NO. 143 OF 1993
Borough of Sugarcreek
Venango County, Pennsylvania
AN ORDINANCE PROVIDING FOR THE REGULATION OF TRAFFIC BY OFFICIAL TRAFFIC SIGNS OR TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES AND
REGULATING AND/OR PROHIBITING PARKING, STOPPING, AND/OR OPERATION OF VEHICLES UPON CERTAIN STREETS, ROADS OR
HIGHWAYS, OR PARTS THEREOF; PROVIDING PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS THEREOF; AND REPEALING ORDINANCE NO. 134
BE IT ORDAINED AND ENACTED by the Council of the Borough of Sugarcreek, and it hereby is ordained and enacted by the
authority of the same:
SECTION ONE: TITLE
This Ordinance shall be known as and may be cited as "The Traffic Ordinance"
SECTION TWO: DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATION
Words and phrases, when used in the Chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in the Vehicle Code of Pennsylvania, as
not in force, or as hereafter amended, enacted or reenacted, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning.
In this Ordinance, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall include the singular, and the masculine shall include the
feminine.
SECTION THREE:
It shall be unlawful for the operation of a vehicle, when an official traffic sign or signs or official traffic-control devices has or have
been erected in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance and/or the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, to fail to comply with
the parking, stopping and/or traffic controls imposed by the subject signs or devices.
SECTION FOUR: STOP AND YIELD INTERSECTIONS
A. STOP SIGNS The operator of any vehicle shall comply with the signs erected to control vehicular traffic on designated
Borough roads, streets or highways, by bringing his vehicle to a complete stop and proceeding only when such action is safe and
prudent. Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or appropriately attired person authorized to direct, control or regulate
traffic, every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop sign shall stop at a clearly marked stop line or, if none, before entering a
crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway before entering. After
having stopped, the driver shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian in a crosswalk or to any vehicle in the intersection of
approaching or another roadway so closely as to constitute a hazard during the time when the driver is moving across or within the
intersection or junction of roadways.
The following intersections are hereby established as stop intersections and official stop signs shall be erected (or are rectified if
heretofore erected) in such a position as prescribed by law.
Traffic proceeding on:
CHESTNUT STREET at EIGHT STREET in RENO (east and west points of intersection - direction of travel: east and
west)
CRESTVIEW DRIVE at MANOR DRIVE in ROCKY GROVE (direction of travel: south)
DUKE STREET at SECOND STREET in ROCKY GROVE (direction of travel: south)
EIGHT STREET at WALNUT STREET in RENO (north point of intersection - direction of travel : east and west)
HAZEL STREET at PARK STREET in ROCKY GROVE (direction of travel: east)
HICKORY STREET at CIRCLE STREET in ROCKY GROVE (direction of travel: west)
1 Of 10
ORDINANCE NO. 143 OF 1993 "The Traffic Ordinance"
KENNETH STREET at FIRST AVENUE in ROCKY GROVE (direction of travel: north)
LAMBERTON HILL ROAD at KEELY ROAD in OUTER BOROUGH (south and north points of intersection - direction of
travel: north and south)
LAMBERTON HILL ROAD at WHITMAN ROAD in OUTER BOROUGH (south point of intersection - direction of travel:
north)
NINTH STREET at WALNUT STREET in RENO (north point of intersection - direction of travel: south)
OAK STREET at CIRCLE STREET in ROCKY GROVE (direction of travel: west)
PROSPECT AVENUE at SPRUCE STREET in ROCKY GROVE (south point of intersection - direction of travel: west)
RUSSELL STREET at SECOND AVENUE in ROCKY GROVE (north approximately 25 feet NO PARKING HERE TO
CORNER - direction of travel: north)
RUSSELL STREET at VENANGO STREET in ROCKY GROVE (west between 12 and 20, NO PARKING BETWEEN SIGNS
- direction of travel: west)
SECOND STREET at WALNUT STREET in RENO (north point of intersection - direction of travel: south)
TENTH STREET at OAK STREET in RENO (south point of intersection - direction of travel: north)
TENTH STREET at WALNUT STREET in RENO (north point of intersection - direction of travel: south)
THIRD STREET at WALNUT STREET in RENO (north point of intersection - direction of travel: south)
VENANGO STREET at SECOND AVENUE in ROCKY GROVE (direction of travel: south)
(The following stop signs are hereby added in accordance with the findings of traffic and engineering studies on each location to
verify the necessity of such posting. The traffic and engineering studies were done in accordance with Title 75 of the Pennsylvania
Consolidated Statutes and the regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.)
Traffic proceeding on:
SEVENTH STREET at WALNUT STREET in RENO (southwest point of intersection - direction of travel: east and west)
SIXTH STREET at WALNUT STREET in RENO (northeast and southwest points of intersection - direction of travel: east and
west)
SIXTH STREET at OAK STREET in RENO (northeast point of intersection- direction of travel: east and west)
WILSON AVENUE at NORTH FRONT STREET in ROCKY GROVE - TWO WAY STOP (east and west points of intersection
- direction of travel: north and south)
MCCALMONT STREET at NORTH GILFILLAN STREET in ROCKY GROVE (east and west points of intersection - direction
of travel: north and south)
MCCALMONT STREET at NORTH FRONT STREET in ROCKY GROVE (east and west points of intersection - direction of
travel: north and south)
MCCALMONT STREET at JAMES STREET in ROCKY GROVE (north and south points of intersection - direction of travel:
east and west)
MCCALMONT STREET at GRIMM STREET in ROCKY GROVE (east points of intersection - direction of travel : east and
west)
2 Of 10
ORDINANCE NO. 143 OF 1993 "The Traffic Ordinance"
ELM STREET at FOX STREET in ROCKY GROVE (north point of intersection - direction of travel: east and west)
ELM STREET at EGBERT STREET in ROCKY GROVE (south point of intersection - direction of travel: east and west)
MAPLE STREET at FOX STREET in ROCKY GROVE (north point of intersection - direction of travel: east and west)
DUKE STREET at PARK STREET in ROCKY GROVE (east point of intersection - direction of travel: north and south)
FOX STREET at CEDAR STREET in ROCKY GROVE (west point of intersection - direction of travel: north and south)
PARK STREET at FIRST AVENUE in ROCKY GROVE (west point of intersection - direction of travel: north and south)
PARK STREET at SECOND AVENUE in ROCKY GROVE (east and west points of intersection - direction of travel: north
and south)
PARK STREET at MAPLE STREET in ROCKY GROVE (east point of intersection - direction of travel: north and south)
BAKER STREET at FIRST AVE in ROCKY GROVE (east point of intersection - direction of travel: north and south)
BAKER STREET at SECOND AVE in ROCKY GROVE (east point of intersection - direction of travel: north and south)
VENANGO STREET at CEDAR STREET in ROCKY GROVE (east point of intersection - direction of travel: north and
south)
CAMPBELL ALLEY at HAZEL STREET in ROCKY GROVE (south point of intersection - direction of travel: east)
PARK AVENUE at OAK STREET in ROCKY GROVE (west point of intersection - direction of travel: north and south)
CRESTVIEW DRIVE at ROCCA WAY in ROCKY GROVE (east and west point of intersection - direction of travel: north and
south)
MANOR DRIVE at ROCCA WAY in ROCKY GROVE (south point of intersection - direction of travel: east and west)
WILEY AVE at EGBERT STREET in ROCKY GROVE (north point of intersection - direction of travel: east and west)
KENNERDELL STREET at NESBIT STREET in ROCKY GROVE (west point of intersection - direction of travel: north and
south)
KENNERDELL STREET at PARKER AVE in ROCKY GROVE (east and west points of intersection - direction of travel: north
and south)
KENNERDELL STREET at GILFILLAN STREET in ROCKY GROVE (east and west points of intersection - direction of travel:
north and south)
KENNERDELL STREET at LAMBERTON STREET in ROCKY GROVE (east point of intersection - direction of travel: east
and west)
PHIPPS STREET at FOX STREET in ROCKY GROVE (south point of intersection - direction of travel: east and west)
NESBIT STREET at FOX STREET in ROCKY GROVE (north point of intersection - direction of travel: east and west)
NESBIT STREET at EGBERT STREET in ROCKY GROVE (south point of intersection - direction of travel: east and west)
LAMBERTON STREET at FOX STREET in ROCKY GROVE (north and south points of intersection - direction of travel: east
and west)
3 Of 10
ORDINANCE NO. 143 OF 1993 "The Traffic Ordinance"
LAMBERTON STREET at EGBERT STREET in ROCKY GROVE (north and south points of intersection - direction of travel:
east and west)
WOOD STREET at FOX STREET in ROCKY GROVE (north and south points of intersection - direction of travel: east and
west)
JAMES STREET at FERN AVENUE in ROCKY GROVE (dirt/gravel roadway) (north point of intersection - direction of
travel: east and west)
JAMES STREET at WILSON AVE in ROCKY GROVE (dirt/gravel roadway) (north and south points of intersection -
direction of travel: east and west)
WALNUT DRIVE at PALMER AVE in ROCKY GROVE (east points of intersection - direction of travel: north and south)
WALNUT DRIVE at CIRCLE STREET in ROCKY GROVE (east points of intersection - direction of travel: north and south)
CIRCLE STREET at SPRUCE STREET in ROCKY GROVE (north point of intersection - direction of travel: east and west)
PROSPECT AVE at BELL AVE in ROCKY GROVE (north and south points of intersection - direction of travel: east &
west)
PROSPECT AVE at MURDOCK STREET in ROCKY GROVE - THREE WAY STOP EXCEPT FOR RIGHT TURN OFF OF
PROSPECT AVE ONTO MURDOCK STREET NORTH BOUND (east and west points of intersection - direction of
travel : north and south)
PROSPECT AVE at PALMER AVE in ROCKY GROVE (east point of intersection - direction of travel: north and south)
MURDOCK STREET at PALMER AVE in ROCKY GROVE (east point of intersection - direction of travel: north and south)
MURDOCK STREET at PROSPECT AVE in ROCKY GROVE (west point of intersection - direction of travel: north & south)
FIRST STREET at WALNUT STREET in RENO (south and north points of intersection - direction of travel: east and west)
SECOND STREET at WALNUT STREET in RENO (south and north points of intersection - direction of travel: east & west)
THIRD STREET at WALNUT STREET in RENO (south and north points of intersection - direction of travel: east & west)
FIFTH STREET at WALNUT STREET in RENO (south and north points of intersection - direction of travel: east & west)
OAK STREET at EIGHTH STREET in RENO (east and west points of intersection - direction of travel: north and south)
OAK STREET at NINTH STREET in RENO (east and west points of intersection - direction of travel: north and south)
OAK STREET at TENTH STREET in RENO (east and west points of intersection - direction of travel: north and south)
CHESTNUT STREET at SEVENTH STREET in RENO (east and west point of intersection - direction of travel: north and
south)
OAK STREET at FIFTH STREET in RENO (east and west points of intersection - direction of travel: north and south)
OAK STREET at SEVENTH STREET in RENO (east and west points of intersection - direction of travel: north & south)
WALNUT STREET at FOURTH STREET in RENO - FOUR WAY STOP (north, east, south and west points of intersection
- direction of travel: north and south)
WALNUT STREET at NINTH STREET in RENO (east and west points of intersection - direction of travel: north & south)
4 Of 10
ORDINANCE NO. 143 OF 1993 "The Traffic Ordinance"
PARKER AVE at FOX STREET in ROCKY GROVE (south and north points of intersection - direction of travel: east and
west)
PARKER AVE at EGBERT STREET in ROCKY GROVE (south and north points of intersection - direction of travel: east
and west)
PENNELL STREET at FOX STREET in ROCKY GROVE (south point of intersection - direction of travel: east and west)
GILFILLAN STREET at FOX STREET in ROCKY GROVE (south and north points of intersection - direction of travel: east
and west)
GILFILLAN STREET at EGBERT STREET in ROCKY GROVE (south and north points of intersection - direction of travel:
east and west)
GILFILLAN STREET at WILEY AVE in ROCKY GROVE (south point of intersection - direction of travel: east and west)
MARSHALL STREET at WILSON STREET in SUGARCREEK (west point of intersection - direction of travel: north & south)
MCQUADE STREET at WILSON STREET in SUGARCREEK (east and west points of intersection - direction of travel: north
and south)
TAKE-IT-EASY ROAD at CAUSEWAY DR in SUGARCREEK (south point of intersection - direction of travel: east & west)
WEAVER STREET at SUGARCREEK DR in SUGARCREEK (south point of intersection - direction of travel: east & west)
KEELY ROAD at CHERRYTREE RD in OUTER BOROUGH (north and south of intersection - direction of travel: east &
west)
SEYSLER ROAD at WARREN ROAD in OUTER BOROUGH (south points of intersection - direction of travel: east & west)
CHERRYTREE ROAD at SEYSLER ROAD in OUTER BOROUGH (east and west points of intersection - direction of travel:
north and south)
JOHNNY MARTIN HILL ROAD at SHAFFER RUN ROAD in OUTER BOROUGH (south point of intersection - direction of
travel: east and west)
B. YIELD SIGNS The following intersections are hereby established as yield-right-of-way intersections and official yield signs
shall be erected (or are ratified if heretofore erected) in such a position as prescribed by law and as directed in this Ordinance. All
vehicles approaching any such signed intersection, shall yield the right of way to any vehicle in or entering into the intersection.
The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall, in obedience to the sign, slow down to a speed reasonable for the
existing conditions and, if required for safety to stop, shall stop before entering a crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if
none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting
roadway before entering. After slowing down or stopping, the driver shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the intersection or
approaching on another roadway so closely as to constitute a hazard during the time the driver is moving across or within the
intersection of roadways. If a driver is involved in a collision with a vehicle in the intersection or junction of roadways after driving
past a yield sign, the collision shall be deemed prima facie evidence of failure of the driver to yield the right-of-way.
Traffic proceeding on:
CEDAR STREET at PARK STREET in ROCKY GROVE (east point of intersection - direction of travel: east)
KENNETH STREET at FIRST AVE in ROCKY GROVE (east point of intersection - direction of travel: north)
MCCALMONT STREET at NORTH GILFILLAN in ROCKY GROVE (east point of intersection - direction of travel: north)
MCCALMONT STREET at NORTH GILFILLAN in ROCKY GROVE (south point of intersection - direction of travel: east)
5 Of 10
ORDINANCE NO. 143 OF 1993 "The Traffic Ordinance"
PATCHEL RUN ROAD at ALENBAUGH ROAD in OUTER BOROUGH (direction of travel: east)
TRANSIT STREET at FIRST STREET in RENO (direction of travel: east)
(The following yield signs are hereby added in accordance with the findings of traffic and engineering studies on each location to
verify the necessity of such posting. The traffic and engineering studies were done in accordance with Title 75 of the Pennsylvania
Consolidated Statutes and the regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.)
SECTION FIVE: PARKING REGULATIONS
A. Vehicles to be Parked Within Marked Spaces: Parking Prohibited in Certain Marked Areas.
1. Wherever a particular parking space shall be lined or marked off on any street or alley or upon the adjacent curb,
every vehicle parked shall be parked within the lines marking such parking space; and all vehicles parked on streets or
alleys within the Borough of Sugarcreek whether parking spaces are marked or not shall be only in the direction of permitted
traffic flow.
2. No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle which in any way will block the intersection of a street, with any
alleys, so as to block the entrance or exit from any alley; at any point within fifteen (15) feet of any fire hydrant; at any
point within the painted line area marking permissible distance to park from any intersection; in any area where erected signs
or painted lines indicate a "No Parking" area; in any manner so as to block any public driveway or access way to a
parking lot or parking facility or other facility of the Borough of Sugarcreek; or so as to block any private driveway within the
Borough of Sugarcreek.
B. Handicapped or Fire Lanes
1. It shall be unlawful to park a vehicle within a space designated for handicapped parking unless the vehicle is a
vehicle designated for operation by a handicapped person by the official designation of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
and said vehicle is, in fact, parked by a handicapped person in said space.
Handicapped sign posted on: FIRST AVENUE South Side (even) in front of 66 First Ave. handicapped loading and
unloading only.
2. It shall be unlawful to park a vehicle in a designated fire lane.
C. Parking, Standing, or Stopping Prohibited at Specified Times in Certain Locations.
Parking shall be prohibited at specified times in the following locations and no person shall park a vehicle in the following
areas or at the prohibited times:
STREET SIDE PROHIBITED ZONE
BAKER STREET West (Even) Entire Length
BELL AVE East (Even) Entire Length
West (Odd) Entire Length
CEDAR STREET North (Odd) Fox Street to Park Street
South (Even) Rt. 417 to Park Street
CIRCLE STREET South (Odd) Entire Length
North (Even) Entire Length
CRESTVIEW DRIVE East (Even) Entire Length
EGBERT STREET East(Even) Entire Length
West (Odd) Entire Length
6 Of 10
ORDINANCE NO. 143 OF 1993 "The Traffic Ordinance"
ELM STREET South (Even) Entire Length
North (Odd) No parking here to corner sign - 25' east of Fox Street
FERN AVENUE East (Even) Entire Length
FIFTH STREET East (Even) Entire Length
West (Odd) Entire Length
FIRST AVENUE North (Odd) Baker to Kenneth Street
Sough (Even) No Parking here to corner, 50' east of Baker Street
FOURTH STREET West (Odd) Rt. 8 to Walnut Street
FOX STREET East (Even) Lamberton to Wood Street
East (Even) Pennell to Parker Avenue
West (Odd) Pennell to Cedar Street
West (Odd) Pennell to Terminus
FRONT STREET South (Even) Egbert to Manor Drive
North (Odd) Rt. 417 to Manor Drive
South (Even) Two signs 10' to east and west of Fox Street (No parking here to
corner)
South (Even) One sign (No parking here to corner); 50' east to Rt. 417
GILFILLAN STREET North (Odd) Rt. 417 to Karns Street
HICKORY STREET North (Even) Entire Length
South (Odd) Entire Length
KENNERDELL STREET East (Even) Entire Length
LAMBERTON STREET North (Odd) Entire Length
MANOR DRIVE North (Odd) Entire Length
MAPLE STREET North (Odd) Fox Street to Park Street
South (Even) Park Street to Egbert Street
MILLER STREET East (Even) Entire Length (No parking 7-9AM & 2-4PM)
West (Odd) Entire Length (No parking anytime)
MILLER SIBLEY North & South Entire Length
COMPLEX North Walnut Drive to pool lot (east) (No parking 5PM - 10PM)
MEADVILLE PIKE North (Even) (4) No parking signs, 50' east and west of Bell Ave.
MCCALMONT STREET West (Odd) North Gilfillan to North Front Street
East (Even) North Front to Grimm Street
NESBIT STREET North (Odd) Entire Length
N. GILFILLAN STREET South (Even) McCalmont to Rt. 417 (No Parking 8-9AM & 2-4PM)
N. FRONT STREET North (Odd) Rt. 417 to Terminus
South (Even) Rt. 417 to Terminus
7 Of 10
ORDINANCE NO. 143 OF 1993 "The Traffic Ordinance"
OAK STREET North (Even) Between 4th & 7th Streets
South (Odd) Between 7th & 10th Streets
PARK STREET East (Odd) Entire Length
PATCHEL RUN RD West (3) signs along west berm between Eakin Auto & Franklin Gravel
PENNELL STREET North (Odd) Entire Length
South (Even) Entire Length
PHIPPS STREET South (Even) Entire Length
PROSPECT AVE East (Even) Palmer Ave to Bell Ave - Entire Length
West (Odd) NO parking 8-10AM & 3-4PM Mon-Fri at Bell Ave to Medical Center
entrance to the west.
ROCCAWAY South (Even) Crestview to Manor Dr
ROCKY GROVE AVE East (Even) (3) Signs Parker Avenue South to 328 Rocky Grove Ave (10 minute
parking only)
Rt. 8 West (Berm) (4) Signs between the entrance to PennDot Property & Fagen Lumber
Rt. 322 North (Berm) (4) signs at station marker 2/25
Rt. 417 East (Even) Front St. to Wood St.
West (Odd) Pennell St. to Palmer Ave.
RUSSELL STREET East & South (Odd) Entire Length
West & North (Even) 12 Russell St. to 20 Russell St. (No parking between signs)
SECOND AVENUE South (Even) N. 13th Street to Kenneth Street
SIXTH STREET East (Even) Rt. 8 to Walnut
West (Odd) Rt. 8 to Walnut
SPRUCE STREET East (Even) Entire Length
West (Odd) Entire Length
VENANGO STREET West (Odd) Entire Length
WALNUT STREET North (Even) Between 1st & 2nd Streets
North (Even) Between 2nd & 4th Streets (No parking except Sunday 9AM - 1PM)
WILEY AVENUE North (Odd) Between Front St. & Gilfillan St.
South (Even) Between Gilfillan St. & Egbert St.
North (Odd) Between Miller St. & Egbert St. (No parking 8-9AM & 3-4PM)
WILSON AVENUE East (Even) N. Front to Grimm St.
WOOD STREET North (Odd) Rt. 417 to Fox Street
South (Even) Rt. 417 to Fox Street
SECTION SIX: SIDEWALKS AND CLOSED STREETS
A. Motor Vehicles not to be Driven on Sidewalks. No person shall drive or park any vehicle except human powered vehicle
upon a sidewalk or sidewalk area except upon a permanent or duly authorized temporary driveway.
8 Of 10
ORDINANCE NO. 143 OF 1993 "The Traffic Ordinance"
B. Unlawful to Operate Motor Vehicles on Streets Closed for Construction or Repair. It shall be unlawful for any person to
operate any vehicle upon any street in the Borough that is under construction, resurfacing or repair, in disregard of any
official sign, barricade or notice that the same is closed to vehicular traffic.
SECTION SEVEN: ONE-WAY STREETS
A. Streets Posted One-Way. The following are hereby established as one-way streets:
STREET FROM TO DIRECTION OF TRAVEL
CAMPBELL ALLEY Entire Length South
LAMBERTON ST Rocky Grove Ave Fox Street East
MANOR DRIVE Front Street Crestview Drive East
PROPER ALLEY Observation Street First Ave. North
WILSON SREET Sugarcreek Drive McQuaid Street West
B. Prohibited to Travel in Direction Other Than That Posted for One-Way Street It shall be prohibited for any person to
operate a motor vehicle upon any street or portion thereof hereby established as a one-way street other than in the direction
hereby established for traffic thereon.
SECTION EIGHT: EMERGENCY SITUATIONS
A. Temporary and Emergency Regulations. The Mayor shall have the following powers to regulate traffic and parking
temporarily and in time of emergency:
1. In the case of fire, flood, storm, accident of any type or other emergency, to establish temprary traffic and/or
parking regulations;
2. In the case of emergency or to facilitate public works, or in the conduct of parades, processions or public events,
to restrict or prohibit traffic and/or parking in limited areas for periods of not more than seventy-two (72) hours.
Such temporary and emergency regulations shall be enforced by the Secretary and the Police Department in the same
manner as permanent regulations. No person shall operate of park a vehicle or tractor in violation of any such regulations,
nor shall move, remove, destroy, injure or deface any sign or marking erected posted or made to give notice of any such
regulation.
SECTION NINE: FINES AND PENALTIES
Any person violating a provision of this Ordinance or aiding, abetting, or assisting in the violation of a provision hereof, shall
upon conviction in a summary proceeding before a District Magistrate, be subject to a fine of not less than One Dollar ($1.00), or
more than Twenty-Five Dollars ($25.00), together with the costs of prosecution; and in default of the payment of fine and costs
shall undergo imprisonment in the jail of the Borough of Sugarcreek or the jail of the County of Venango, Pennsylvania for a period
to exceed no more than ten days.
SECTION TEN: REPEALER
Ordinance No. 134 and all Ordinances, local laws and/or resolutions of the Borough of Sugarcreek inconsistent with the provisions of
this Ordinance are hereby repealed; provided however, that such repeal shall only be to the extent of such inconsistency and that in
all respects this Ordinance shall be in addition to other legislation regulating and governing the subject matter covered in this
Ordinance.
9 Of 10
ORDINANCE NO. 143 OF 1993 "The Traffic Ordinance"
SECTION ELEVEN: SEVERABILITY
If any section, paragraph, subsection or provision of this Ordinance shall be adjudicated invalid or held unconstitutional, the same shall
not affect the validity of this Ordinance as a whole or any part or provision thereof other than the part so decided to be invalid or
unconstitutional.
ENACTED AND ORDAINED into Law by the Council of the Borough of Sugarcreek, Venango County, Pennsylvania, in the lawful
session this 16th day of June, 1993.
10 Of 10
ORDINANCE NO. 145 OF 1993 “CURFEW FOR MINORS”
ORDINANCE NO. 145 OF 1993
AN ORDINANCE OF THE BOROUGH OF SUGARCREEK, VENANGO COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA, ESTABLISHING A
CURFEW FOR MINORS SUBJECT TO CERTAIN EXCEPTIONS: PROVIDING FOR DEFINITIONS THEREFOR AND
THE PURPOSES THEREOF; FIXING RESPONSIBILITY UPON PARENTS AND POLICE; AND DETERMINING THE
PENALITIES FOR AND THE PROCEDURES UPON VIOLATION.
The Borough of Sugarcreek, Venango County, Pennsylvania, by and through its duly elected members of the
Borough Council, hereby Ordains:
SECTION 1: Short Title
(1) This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the “Curfew for Minors Ordinance.”
SECTION 2: Legislative Findings
(1) The Borough hereby finds and determines that:
(a) The number of minors in or on public places or establishments within the Borough at night is
a grave concern to the citizens of the Borough;
(b) The number of citizen complaints regarding minors in or on public places or
establishments within the Borough is increasing;
(c) The number of minors in or on public places or establishments within the Borough at night is
contrary to the prevailing community standards within the Borough;
(d) The number of minors in or on public places or establishments within the Borough at night is
contrary to the fundamental principles and values of the family and the parental role of child
rearing and otherwise being responsible for the control of their children;
(e) The number of minors in or on public places or establishments within the Borough at night is
not conducive to having such minors be adequately rested and mentally alert for proper
performance within the educational system;
(f) The majority of public places or establishments located within the Borough are closed to
minors between the hours of 12:01 o'clock a.m. prevailing time, and 5:00 o'clock a.m.
prevailing time;
(g) The incidents of juvenile criminal activity and mischief by minors is higher during the night
than during the day;
1 of 8
ORDINANCE NO. 145 OF 1993 “CURFEW FOR MINORS”
(h) Minors and the congregation of minors in groups in public places or establishments within the
Borough at night present a potential and actual threat to themselves and to the general good,
health, morals, safety and welfare of the public;
(i) The regulation of minors in or on public places or establishments within the Borough in order
to protect the minors and the general public is a proper exercise of the police powers of the
Borough.
SECTION 3: Purposes
(1) This is a curfew ordinance prescribing, in accordance with prevailing community standards,
regulations for the conduct of minors in or on public places and establishments at night, for the
protection of younger children in the Borough from each other and from other persons therein and
thereon during nighttime hours, for the enforcement of parental control and responsibility for their
children, for the protection of the general public from nocturnal mischief by minors and for the
reduction of the incident of juvenile criminal activity, all for the good of minors, for the furtherance of
family responsibility and for the general good, health, morals, safety and welfare of the public.
SECTION 4: Authority
(1) This Ordinance, and the objectives leading to its enactment, are authorized by the Borough Code, as
amended, and codified at 53 P.S. Section 45101 et seq.
SECTION 5: Definitions
(1) For the purposes of this Ordinance, the following words and phrases when used in this Ordinance
shall have the meanings given to them in the Section unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.
Moreover, those words and phrases not specifically defined herein shall have a common meaning as
expressed in Merriam Websters Collegiate Dictionary Tenth Addition 1993 in the Municipal Building of
the Borough of Sugarcreek. Additionally, in this Ordinance, the singular shall include the plural, the
plural shall include the singular; and the masculine shall include the feminine and the neuter.
(a) BOROUGH: The Borough of Sugarcreek, Venango County, Pennsylvania.
(b) CUSTODIAN: Any person over the age of twenty-one (21) years who stands in loco
parentis to a minor or any person to whom legal custody of a minor has been given by
order of a court having jurisdiction thereof.
2 of 8
ORDINANCE NO. 145 OF 1993 “CURFEW FOR MINORS”
(c) ESTABLISHMENT: Any place of business to which the general public has access and a right
to resort for business, entertainment or other lawful purpose. An establishment shall inlcude,
but not be limited to, any store, shop, restaurant, tavern, bowling alley, cafe, theater, drug
store, pool room or shopping center.
(d) GUARDIAN: Any person other than a parent who has legal guardianship of the person of a
minor.
(e) MINOR: Any unmarried person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
(f) OPERATOR: Any individual, firm, association, partnership or corporation operating, managing,
conducting or having charge of any establishment; and whenever used in any section of this
Ordinance prescribing a penalty, the term “operator” as applied to firms, associations or
partnerships shall include the members or partners thereof and as applied to corporations shall
include the officers thereof.
(g) PARENT: The natural or adoptive parent of a minor. When used in this Ordinance, the term
“parent” shall mean one or both parents.
(h) PUBLIC PLACE: Any public street, roadway, alley, sidewalk, park, playground, public building,
vacant lot or public parking area within the Borough.
(i) REMAIN: To stay behind, to tarry and to stay unnecessarily in, on or upon any establishment
or public place, including the congregating of groups (or of interacting minors) totaling four or
more persons in which any minor involved would not be using such establishment or public
place any minor involved would not be using such establishment or public place for
emergencies or ordinary purposes such as mere passage of going home.
(j) VEHICLE: Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be
transported.
SECTION 6: Application
(1) The provisions of this Ordinance shall supplement local laws, ordinances or regulations existing in the
Borough or those of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. Where a provision of this Ordinance is
found to be in conflict with any provision of a local law, ordinance, code or regulations or those of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the provisions which are more restrictive or which establish the
higher standard shall prevail.
3 of 8
ORDINANCE NO. 145 OF 1993 “CURFEW FOR MINORS”
SECTION 7: Curfew for Minors; Exceptions
(1) It shall be unlawful for any minor to be or remain in, on or upon any public place or establishment,
whether on foot or otherwise, within the Borough, or in any enclosure or vehicle which is on or in
close proximity to any such public place or establishment within the Borough, between the hours of
12:01 o'clock a.m. and 5:00 o'clock a.m., prevailing time, both times inclusive.
(2) The provisions of Paragraph (1) of this Section shall not apply to any minor accompanied by a
parent, guardian, custodian or other adult person having legal care or custody of such minor.
(3) The provisions of Paragraph (1) of this Section shall not apply to any minor who is or remains in,
on or upon a public place or establishment during the prohibited hours due to the requirement of
said minors employment or public or charitable service, provided that said minor is carrying an
affidavit signed by the minor's said employer or supervisor indicating the probable schedule of the
minor's said employment, public or charitable activities. Upon termination of the activity or employment,
the minor shall surrender the affidavit to the employer or supervisor; and if the minor shall fail to
surrender said affidavit, the employer or supervisor shall, within ten (10) days of the termination of
the activity or employment, notify in writing the Borough Administratior.
(4) The provisions of Paragraph (1) of this Section shall not apply to any minor possessing a written
statement dated that day and signed by the minor's parent, guardian, custodian, or other adult person
having legal care or custody of such minor, which written statement specifies the time, place, purpose
and necessity of the minor being or remaining in, on or upon a public place, establishment or
vehicle contrary to the provisions of this Ordinance.
(5) The provisions of Paragraph (1) of this Section shall not apply to any minor who is legitimately on
an emergency errand.
SECTION 8: Duties of Operators of Establishments
(1) It shall be unlawful for any operator of an establishment or any person having control over or charge
of any establishment to knowingly permit of suffer any minor, unaccompanied by a parent, guardian,
custodian or other adult person having legal care or custody of such minor, to be or remain in, on
or upon the premises of such establishment between the hours of 12:01 o'clock a.m. and 5:00
o'clock a.m., prevailing time, both times inclusive.
4 of 8
ORDINANCE NO. 145 OF 1993 “CURFEW FOR MINORS”
SECTION 9: Duties of Parents, Guardians, Custodians and Other Adult Person Having Legal Care or Custody of a
Minor
(1) It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian, custodian or other adult person having legal care or
custody of such minor to suffer or permit or by insufficient control allow such minor to be or remain
in, on or upon any public place or establishment, whether on foot or otherwise, within the Borough,
or in any enclosure or vehicle which is on or in close proximity to any such public place or
establishment within the Borough, between the hours of 12:01 o'clock a.m. and 5:00 o'clock a.m.,
prevailing time, both times inclusive, such as would constitute a violation by the minor of the
Provisions of Section 7 of this Ordinance.
(2) The provisions of Paragraph (1) of this Section shall not apply when said minor is accompanied by
a parent, guardian, custodian or other adult person having legal care or custody of such minor or
when a parent, guardian, custodian or other adult person having legal care or custody of such minor
has made a missing person notification to the Police Department of the Borough, in regard to said
minor.
(3) The provisions of Paragraph (1) of this Section shall not apply to a parent, guardian, custodian or
other adult person having legal care or custody of such minor, if said minor is exempt from the
provisions of Section 7 of this Ordinance by reason of Section 10 of this Ordinance.
SECTION 10: Functions of Churches, Schools, Clubs or Other Organizations
(1) Any minors attending a function or entertainment of any church, school, club or other organization that
requires such minor to be away from their homes or usual places of abode between the hours of
12:01 o'clock a.m. and 5 o'clock a.m., prevailing time, both times inclusive, shall be exempt from
the provisions of Section 7 hereof, while attending or participating in such function or entertainment
and for one-half hour after said function or entertainment is ended; provided that the church, school,
club or other organization shall have registered in advance with the Borough Administrator, or his/her
designate, to have the minors be away from their homes or usual places of abode during all or a
portion of the prohibited hours and stating times that the said function or entertainment shall begin
and end.
SECTION 11: Enforcement and Penalties
(1) Any police officer upon reasonable cause to believe a minor to be in violation of any provision of
Section 7 of this Ordinance shall ascertain the age, name and address of such minor and the name
or names of said minor's parent, guardian, custodian or other adult person having legal care or
custody of such minor, and shall warn the minor to proceed at once to his or her home or usual
place of abode. The police officer shall report such action to the Borough Administrator, or her/his
designate, who, in turn, shall cause a written notice to be mailed to the said minor's parent,
5 of 8
ORDINANCE NO. 145 OF 1993 “CURFEW FOR MINORS”
guardian, custodian or other adult person having legal care or custody of such minor advising of the
violation of this Ordinance and the penalty provisions contained in this Ordinance.
(2) If such minor refuses to comply with the aforesaid direction by the police officer or refuses to give
the police officer his correct age, name and address, or if said minor has been warned on a
previous occasion within the preceding twelve (12) months that he or she is in violation of curfew,
then the said minor shall be presumed to have run away from his parent, guardian, custodian or
other adult person having legal care or custody of such minor, and the said minor shall be taken to
police headquarters, and a parent, guardian, custodian or other adult person having legal care or
custody of such minor shall be notified as soon as practicable of the violation and required to report
to police headquarters for the purpose of accompanying the said minor to his or her home. If, within
a reasonable time, the parent, guardian, custodian or other adult person having legal care of custody
of such minor cannot be located or fails to come and take charge of the minor, then the minor shall
be released into the custody of the appropriate juvenile authorities pursuant to all applicable laws and
rules of Court.
(3) Any minor who violates any provision of Section 7 of this Ordinance and who has been warned on
one or more previous occasions within the immediately preceding twelve (12) month period that he
or she is in violation of curfew, shall upon conviction thereof in a summary proceeding before any
District Justice having jurisdiction of such offense, be sentenced to pay a fine not less the ten
($10.00) dollars, nor more than six hundred ($600.00) dollars. Nothing contained herein shall
prohibit or prevent the institution of appropriate proceedings under and pursuant to the Juvenile Act,
Act of July 9, 1976, P.L. 586, No. 142 (42 Pa. C.S. Section 6301, et seq.) and any
amendments or supplements thereto.
(4) Upon a minor's third violation of any provision of Section 7 of this Ordinance, the said minor's
parent, guardian, custodian, or other adult person having legal care or custody of such minor shall
be cited for the violation, and shall, upon conviction thereof in a summary proceeding before any
District Justice having jurisdiction of such offense, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than
twenty-five ($25.00) dollars, nor more than six hundred ($600.00) dollars, and in default of
payment, to imprisonment for a term not to exceed thirty (30) days. Nothing contained herein shall
prohibit or prevent the institution of appropriate proceedings under and pursuant to the Crimes Code
of Pennsylvania, Act of December 6, 1972, P.L. 1482, No. 334 (18 Pa. C.S.A. Section 101, et
seq.) and any amendments or supplements thereto.
(5) Any minor who violates any provision of Section 7 of this Ordinance more than three (3) times
within the immediately preceding twelve (12) month period may, at the discretion of the proper
Borough officials, be reported to a society or organization to the purpose of which is to take charge
of incorrigibles and delinquents, and proceedings shall then be taken in the proper Court for the
permanent welfare of such minor and a like procedure may be taken in cases where the arrest of
the parent is not effective, or where for any other reason the provisions of this Ordinance cannot be
6 of 8
ORDINANCE NO. 145 OF 1993 “CURFEW FOR MINORS”
made effective by the imposition of fines and penalites.
(6) Any parent, guardian, custodian or other adult person having legal care of custody of such minor who
shall violate any provision of Section 9 of this Ordinance and who has been notified pursuant to
Paragraph (1) of this Section 13 on one or more previous occasions within the immediately
preceding twelve (12) month period of violation of this Ordinance by the said minor, shall, upon
conviction thereof in a summary proceeding before any District Justice having jurisdiction of such
offense, be sentenced to pay a fine not less than twenty-five ($25.00) dollars, not more than six
hundred ($600.00) dollars, and in default of payment, to imprisonment for a term not to exceed
thirty (30) days. Nothing contained herein shall prohibit or prevent the institution of appropriate
proceedings under and pursuant to the Crimes Code of Pennsylvania, Act of December 6, 1972, P.L.
1482, No. 334 (18 Pa. C.S.A. Section 101, et seq.) and any amendments or supplements thereto.
(7) Any operator of an establishment or other person having control over or charge of any such
establishment who shall violate any provision of this Ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof in a
summary proceedin before any District Justice having jurisdiction of such offense, be sentenced to pay
a fine of not less than twenty-five ($25.00) dollars, nor more than six hundred ($600.00)
dollars, and in default of payment, to imprisonment for a term not to exceed thirty (30) days.
Nothing contained herein shall prohibit or prevent the institution of appropriate proceedings under and
pursuant to the Crimes Code of Pennsylvania, Act of December 6, 1972, P.L. 1482, No. 334 (18
Pa. C.S.A. Section 101, et seq.) and any amendments or supplements thereto.
(8) Any other individuals, firms, associations, partnerships or corporations, including the members or
partners of such firms, associations, and partnerships and the officers of such corporations, who shall
violate, or aid, assist, or abet the violation of, any provision of this Ordinance shall, upon conviction
thereof in a summary proceeding before any District Justice having jurisdiction of such offense, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not less than twenty-five ($25.00) dollars, nor more than six hundred
($600.00) dollars, and in default of payment, to imprisonment for a term not to exceed thirty
(30) days. Nothing contained herein shall prohibit or prevent the institution of appropriate proceedings
under and pursuant to the Crimes Code of Pennsylvania, Act of December 6, 1972, P.L. 1482, No.
334 (18 Pa. C.S.A. Section 101, et seq.) and any amendments or supplements thereto.
(9) Each violation of any provision of this Ordinance shall constitute a separate offense.
SECTION 12: Police Discretion in Age Determination
(1) The police officers of the Borough in taking minors into custody shall use their discretion in
determining the age of the minor and in doubtful cases may require positive proof of age. Until such
proof is furnished, the police officer's judgment shall prevail.
7 of 8
ORDINANCE NO. 145 OF 1993 “CURFEW FOR MINORS”
SECTION 13: Severability
(1) The provisions of this Ordinance are severable and, if any sentence, clause, section, part or provision
of this Ordinance is for any reason held to be illegal, invalid, or unconstitutional, such illegality, invalidity or
unconstitutionality shall not effect or impair any of the remaining sentences, clauses, sections, part or provisions of
this Ordinance. It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Council of the Borough that this Ordinance would have
been adopted even if such illegal, invalid or unconstitutional sentence, clause, section, part or provision had not
been included herein.
SECTION 14: Repealer
(1) All ordinances or parts of ordinances which are inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed.
SECTION 15: Effective Date and Expiration
(1) This Ordinance shall become official and effective five (5) days from final passage
(2) This Ordinance, as from time to time amended, shall remain in full force and effect from the effective
date hereof until and including December 31, 1995, unless sooner repealed by the Council of the Borough. From
and after January 1, 1996, this Ordinance shall have no further force and effect and shall be deemed to have been
repealed absolutely as of January 1, 1996, unless prior to said date the said Council shall enact an ordinance
repealing this Section, in which event this Ordinance, as from time to time amended, shall continue in full force and
effect unless and until specifically repealed by said Council.
ORDAINED AND ENACTED AS THE CURFEW FOR MINORS ORDINANCE ON THIS 1st DAY OF DECEMBER,
1993, BY THE BOROUGH COUNCIL OF THE BOROUGH OF SUGARCREEK, VENANGO COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA.
8 of 8
ORDINANCE NO. 148 OF 1994 "Amendment to Section Four (4) of The Traffic Ordinance"
ORDINANCE NO. 148 OF 1994
Borough of Sugarcreek
Venango County, Pennsylvania
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING SECTION FOUR (4) OF ORDINANCE NO. 143, AND ORDINANCE OF
THE BOROUGH OF SUGARCREEK ADOPTED JUNE 16, 1993, REGULATING AND/OR PROHIBITING
PARKING, STOPPING, AND/OR OPERATION OF VEHICLES UPON CERTAIN STREETS, ROADS OR
HIGHWAYS, OR PARTS THEREOF; PROVIDING PENALITIES FOR VIOLATIONS THEREOF.
BE IT ORDIANED AND ENACTED by the Council of the Borough of Sugarcreek, and it hereby is
ordained and enacted by the authority of the same:
SECTION ONE: TITLE
This Ordinance shall be known as and may be cited as "Amendment to Section Four (4) of
The Traffic Ordinance".
SECTION TWO: AMENDING SECTION FOUR
A. STOP SIGNS The following intersection is hereby established as a stop intersection
and official stop signs shall be erected (or are ratified if heretofore erected) in such a position as
prescribed by law.
Traffic proceeding on:
CIRCLE STREET at WALNUT DRIVE in ROCKY GROVE (north and south points of intersection -
direction of travel: east & west)
(the stop sign is hereby added in accordance with the findings of a traffic and engineering study
on the location to verify necessity of such posting. The traffic and engineering study was done in
accordance with Title 75 of the Pennsylvania Consolidated Statutes and the regulations of the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.)
ENACTED AND ORDAINED into Law by the Council of the Borough of Sugarcreek, Venango
County, Pennsylvania, in lawful session this 1st day of June, 1994.
1 Of 1
ORDINANCE NO. 151 OF 1994 "Amendment to Section Five (5) of The Traffic Ordinance"
ORDINANCE NO. 151 OF 1994
Borough of Sugarcreek
Venango County, Pennsylvania
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING SECTION FIVE (5) OF ORDINANCE NO. 143, AND ORDINANCE OF THE BOROUGH OF SUGARCREEK
ADOPTED JUNE 16, 1993, REGULATING AND/OR PROHIBITING PARKING, STOPPING, AND/OR OPERATION OF VEHICLES UPON
CERTAIN STREETS, ROADS OR HIGHWAYS, OR PARTS THEREOF; PROVIDING PENALITIES FOR VIOLATIONS THEREOF.
BE IT ORDIANED AND ENACTED by the Council of the Borough of Sugarcreek, and it hereby is ordained and enacted by the
authority of the same:
SECTION ONE: TITLE
This Ordinance shall be known as and may be cited as "Amendment to Section Five (5) of The Traffic Ordinance".
SECTION TWO: AMENDING SECTION FIVE
A. PARKING, STANDING, OR STOPPING PROHIBITED AT SPECIFIED TIMES IN CERTAIN LOCATIONS. Parking shall be prohibited
at specified times in the following locations and no person shall park a vehicle in the following areas or at the prohibited times:
STREET ZONE
James Street NO PARKING HERE TO CORNER to Rocky Grove Ave. Two signs posted 68 feet from the intersection
with Rocky Grove Avenue along the north & south curbs
9th Street NO PARKING HERE TO CORNER to Rt. 8 & 62. Two signs posted 75 feet from the intersection with
Route 8 & 62 along the north and south curbs.
Fox Street NO PARKING HERE TO CORNER from Lamberton Street. One sign posted 50 feet from the intersection
with Lamberton Street along the east curb
Front Street NO PARKING HERE TO CORNER to Egbert Street. One sign posted 60 feet north from the corner of
Egbert Street along the south curb.
Gibb Road NO PARKING - Six signs posted 2/10th of one mile from the north of the most southerly entrance of
Gibb Road and ending at the most northerly entrance of Gibb Road (intersection with Route 8 & 62)
along the east curb. Three signs posted 3/10ths of one mile north of the most southerly entrance of Gibb
Road ending at the most northerly entrance of Gibb Road (intersection with Route 8 & 62) along the
west curb
ENACTED AND ORDAINED into Law by the Council of the Borough of Sugarcreek, Venango County, Pennsylvania, in the lawful
session this 7th day of September, 1994.
1 Of 1
ORDINANCE NO. 155 OF 1995 "Amendment to Section Five (5) of The Traffic Ordinance"
ORDINANCE NO. 155 OF 1995
Borough of Sugarcreek
Venango County, Pennsylvania
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING SECTION FIVE (5) OF ORDINANCE NO. 143, AND ORDINANCE OF THE BOROUGH OF SUGARCREEK
ADOPTED JUNE 16, 1993, REGULATING AND/OR PROHIBITING PARKING, STOPPING, AND/OR OPERATION OF VEHICLES UPON
CERTAIN STREETS, ROADS OR HIGHWAYS, OR PARTS THEREOF; PROVIDING PENALITIES FOR VIOLATIONS THEREOF.
BE IT ORDIANED AND ENACTED by the Council of the Borough of Sugarcreek, and it hereby is ordained and enacted by the
authority of the same:
Section 1: Title
This Ordinance shall be known as and may be cited as "Amendment to Section Five (5) of The Traffic Ordinance".
Section 2: Amending Section 5: Parking Regulations, B. Handicapped or Fire Lanes.
Add VENANGO STREET East Side (odd) in front of 43 Venango Street handicapped parking only.
Add PARKER AVENUE North Side (odd) in front of 39 Parker Avenue handicapped parking only.
Section 3: Amending Section 5: Parking Regulations, C. Parking, Standing, or Stopping Prohibited at Specified Times in Certain
Locations.
Parking shall be prohibited at specified times in the following locations and no person shall park a vehicle in the following
areas or at the prohibited times:
STREET SIDE PROHIBITED ZONE
Delete Circle Street South (Odd) Entire Length
Add Maple Street North (Odd) 40 feet West of the intersection with Egbert Street (NO
PARKING HERE TO CORNER)
Delete Miller Sibley Complex North & South Entire Length
North Walnut Drive to pool lot (east)(NO PARKING)
Delete North Gilfillan Street South (Even) McCalmont to Route 417 (No parking 8-9AM & 2-4PM)
Add Parker Avenue North (Odd) NO PARKING WEDNESDAYS FROM 8AM til 4 PM from
Community Services driveway to a point 40 feet east of the
driveway.
Delete Rocky Grove Avenue East (Even) (3) Signs Parker Avenue south to 328 Rocky Grove Ave
(10 MINUTE PARKING ONLY)
Delete Route 322 North (Berm) (4) Signs at station marker 2/25
Delete Venango Street West (Odd) Entire Length
Section 4: Establishing Right Turn Only.
The Northern Exit of Gibb Road shall be Right Turn Only. Signed posted will indicate no left turn.
ENACTED AND ORDAINED into Law by the Council of the Borough of Sugarcreek, Venango County, Pennsylvania, in lawful session
this 15th day of November, 1995.
1 Of 1
ORDINANCE NO. 156 OF 1995 "The Amendment to the Parking Ordinance"
ORDINANCE NO. 156 OF 1995
Borough of Sugarcreek
Venango County, Pennsylvania
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING SECTION 4 AND 7 OF ORDINANCE NO. 142. AN ORDINANCE OF THE BOROUGH OF SUGARCREEK
ADOPTED JUNE 16, 1993. PROVIDING FOR AREAS OF NO PARKING AND PROVIDING FOR PENALITIES FOR VIOLATIONS OF
THE ORDINANCE.
BE IT ORDAINED AND ENACTED by the Council of the Borough of Sugarcreek, and it hereby is ordained and
enacted by the authority of the same:
Section 1: Title
This Ordinance shall be known as and maybe cited as "The Amendment to the Parking Ordinance".
Section 2: Amending Section 4: Parking/No Parking
Add Paragraph Four: Wherever a parking space is lined or marked off on any street, alley, or highway; every
vehicle parked shall be parked within the lines marking such parking space.
Section 3: Amending Section7: Paragraph Two: (a)
Add (4) $5.00 for not parking within the lines marking a parking space.
ENACTED AND ORDAINED into Law by the Council of the Borough of Sugarcreek, Venango County,
Pennsylvania, in lawful session this 15th day of November, 1995.
1 Of 1
ORDINANCE NO. 202 OF 2001
Borough of Sugarcreek
Venango County, Pennsylvania
AN ORDINANCE TO PROVIDE UNIFORM STANDARDS FOR THE NAMING OF STREETS; FABRICATION,
ERECTION AND MAINTENANCE OF STREET NAME SIGNS; ESTABLISHING A STREET ADDRESS NUMBER
SYSTEM; AND ADDRESSING POSTING REQUIREMENTS AND ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES FOR THE
BOROUGH OF SUGARCREEK
BE IT AND IT IS HEREBY ORDAINED by the Sugarcreek Borough Council, that the following ordinance is adopted
to provide for an orderly method of naming and numbering public and private streets and roadways in the Borough
of Sugarcreek.
I. PURPOSE
The purpose of this ordinance is to better enhance the Venango County E9-1-1/Emergency Communications
System and to provide for a uniform county-wide addressing system with respect to naming of streets and
roadways; fabrication, erection and maintenance of street name signs; address posting requirements;
enforcement procedures; and assigning street or house numbers to all residences and principle buildings and
businesses to assist fire, rescue, ambulance companies, law enforcement agencies, the United States Postal
Service, and the public in the timely and efficient provision of services to residents and businesses of the
County.
II. ADMINISTRATION
The Sugarcreek Borough Council is hereby designated as the agent of the Borough of Sugarcreek,
responsible for the administration, implementation and enforcement of this ordinance.
III. GUIDELINES AND STANDARDS
For new developments the agent shall establish street names as chosen by the Borough, or land developer
or land owner, and street or house numbers in accordance with the guidelines as set forth and described in
Appendix “A”: BOROUGH STREET NAMING AND ADDRESSING POLICY.
IV. ENFORCEMENT
A. Whenever the agent or an officer of the Sugarcreek Borough Police Department has reason to
believe there has been a violation of any provision of this ordinance, the agent, or the designee of
the agent, shall give notice to the person or party failing to comply and order said person or party
to take corrective action or measures within thirty (30) days from the date of notification.
B. If such person or party fails to comply with the duly issued order, the agent, or the designee of the
agent, shall initiate necessary actions to terminate the violation through criminal and/or civil measures.
C. Penalties – Any violation of any provision of this ordinance shall constitute a summary offense,
punishable by a maximum fine of $300.00 per offense. Subsequent to the thirty (30) day period
following a notification of violation, each day of violation shall constitute a separate violation.
All Ordinances, or parts of Ordinances, inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed. Adopted the 3rd day of October
2001 and become effective September 1, 2002.
ORDINANCE NO. 233 OF 2004 LICENSING AND REGULATING SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
ORDINANCE NO. 233 OF 2004
Borough of Sugarcreek
Venango County, Pennsylvania
AN ORDINANCE OF SUGARCREEK BOROUGH TO PROVIDE FOR THE LICENSING AND REGULATING OF SEXUALLY
ORIENTED BUSINESSES AND EMPLOYEES, PRESCRIBE FEES, FINES AND PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS.
It is hereby ENACTED and ORDAINED by the Council of the Borough of Sugarcreek, Venango County, Pennsylvania, as
follows:
SECTION 1. PURPOSE AND FINDINGS:
A. Purpose
Pursuant to the authority granted in the Borough Code to prohibit nuisances; to promote the health, welfare,
cleanliness, comfort, and safety of the citizens of the Borough of Sugarcreek; and to regulate the time of
opening and closing, and the conduct of places of public entertainment, amusement and recreation, the Borough
enacts this Ordinance to minimize and control the adverse secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses and
thereby protect the health, safety and welfare of it citizens; protect the citizens from increased crime; preserve
the quality of life; preserve the property values and character of surrounding neighborhoods; and deter the spread
of blight.
The Council has determined that licensing is a legitimate and reasonable means of accountability to ensure that
operators of sexually oriented businesses comply with reasonable regulations and to insure that operators do not
knowingly allow their establishments to be used as places of illegal sexual activity or solicitation.
The Council does not intend this Ordinance to suppress and speech activities protected by the First Amendment,
but to enact a content neutral ordinance, which addresses the secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses.
B. Legislative Findings
Based upon a public meeting conducted by the Borough, the Council finds:
1. Sexually oriented businesses have adverse secondary effects, which should be regulated to protect
the public health, safety and welfare. These secondary effects include, but are not limited to the
spread of communicable diseases, performance of sexual acts in public places, presence of
discarded sexually oriented material on public and private property, sexual harassment, obscenity,
prostitution and other illegal sexual activities, crime and neighborhood deterioration.
2. A reasonable licensing procedure is an appropriate mechanism to place the burden of the
reasonable regulation on the owners and the operators of the sexually oriented businesses.
Further, such a licensing procedure will place a heretofore-nonexistent incentive on the operators
to see that the sexually oriented business is run in a manner consistent with the health, safety
and welfare of its patrons and employees, as well as the citizens of the Borough. It is
appropriate to require reasonable assurances that the licensee is the actual operator of the
sexually oriented business, full in possession and control of the premises and activities occurring
therein.
1 OF 16
ORDINANCE NO. 233 OF 2004 LICENSING AND REGULATING SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
3. Removal of doors of viewing booths and requiring sufficient lighting on premises with viewing
booth advances a substantial governmental interest in discouraging the illegal and unsanitary sexual
activity occurring in adult theaters.
4. Requiring licensees of sexually oriented businesses to keep information regarding current employees
and certain past employees will help reduce the incident of certain types of criminal behavior by
facilitating the identification of potential witnesses or suspects and by preventing minors from
working in such establishments.
5. The disclosure of certain information by those persons intimately responsible for the day-to-day
operation and maintenance of the sexually oriented business will help limit and control the adverse
secondary effects of such businesses.
6. It is desirable in the prevention of the spread of communicable disease to obtain a limited amount
of information regarding certain employees who may engage in the conduct, which this Ordinance
is designed to prevent or who are likely to be witnesses to such activity.
7. The fact that an applicant for a sexually oriented business license has been convicted of a
sexually related crime leads to the rational assumption that the applicant is likely to engage in
that conduct in contravention of this Ordinance.
8. The barring of such individuals from the management of sexually oriented businesses for a period
of years serves as a deterrent to and prevents conduct which leads to the transmission of
sexually transmitted diseases.
9. The general welfare, health and safety of the citizens of the Borough will be promoted by the
enactment of this Ordinance.
10. Limitation of operating hours of sexually oriented businesses to 1:00 p.m., Monday through
Saturdays, and closure of such businesses on Sundays and holidays reduces the adverse
secondary effects of such businesses, including particularly, but not limited to late night noise
levels, crime and sexually offensive materials and activities in public areas, and promotes the
public health, safety and welfare.
11. No alcohol permitted on premises.
SECTION 2. DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Ordinance, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings indicated unless the context
clearly indicates a different meaning.
A. ADULT ARCADE means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coinoperated, slugoperated,
or for any form of consideration, or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or
motion picture machines, projectors, video or laser disc players, or other image producing devices are
maintained, not located within viewing booths, to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at
any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting of
“specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
2 OF 16
ORDINANCE NO. 233 OF 2004 LICENSING AND REGULATING SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
B. ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE OR ADULT VIDEO STORE means a commercial
establishment, which, as one if its principal business purposes, offers for sale or rental for any form of
consideration any one or more of the following:
1. Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video
cassettes or video reproductions slide, CD ROM discs or other computer software, or other visual
representations which are characterized by the depiction or description of “specified sexual
activities” or “specified anatomical areas”; or
2. Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia, which are designed for use in connection with “specified
sexual activities.”
C. ADULT CABARET means a nightclub, bar, restaurant, or other commercial establishment which regularly
features:
1. Persons who appear in a state of nudity or semi-nudity; or
2. Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of “specified anatomical areas” or by
“specified sexual activities”; or
3. Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, dvd's or other photographic reproductions or visual
presentations of any other kind which are characterized by the depiction or description of
“specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
D. ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER means a commercial establishment where, for any form of
consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions or visual
presentations of any kind are regularly shown which are characterized by the depiction or description of
“specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
E. ADULT THEATER means a theater, concert hall, dance hall, auditorium, or similar commercial
establishment which regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity or semi-nudity, or live
performances, which are characterized by the exposure of “specified sexual activities” or “specified
anatomical areas.”
F. BOROUGH means Borough of Sugarcreek, Venango County, Pennsylvania
G. EMPLOYEE means a person who performs any service on the premises of a sexually oriented business
on a full-time, part-time, or contract basis, whether or not the person is denominated an employee,
independent contractor, agent or otherwise and whether or not said person is paid a salary, wage or
other compensation by the operator of said business. Employee does not include a person exclusively on
the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises or equipment on the premises, or for the delivery
of goods to the premises.
H. ESCORT means a person who, for consideration, agrees of offers to act as a companion, guide or date
for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease
for another person.
3 OF 16
ORDINANCE NO. 233 OF 2004 LICENSING AND REGULATING SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
I. ESCORT AGENCY means a person or business association who furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises
to furnish escorts as one of its primary business purposes for a fee, tip or other consideration.
J. ESTABLISHMENT means and includes any of the following:
1. The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business;
2. The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any
sexually oriented business.
3. The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually oriented business or
to a non-sexually oriented business; or
4. The relocation of any sexually oriented business.
K. LICENSE means a person in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented business has been
issues, as well as the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a license, and in the case
of an employee, a person in whose name a license has been issued authorizing employment in a
sexually oriented business.
L. NUDE MODEL STUDIO means any place where a person who appears semi-nude, in a state of nudity
or who displays “specified anatomical areas” and is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted,
sculptured, photographed or similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of
consideration. Nude Model Studio shall not include a proprietary school licensed by the State of
Pennsylvania or a college, junior college or university supported entirely or in part by public taxation; a
private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are
transferable to a college, junior college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or in a
structure.
1. That no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a
nude or semi-nude person is available for viewing; and
2. Where in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least three days in advance of
the class; and
3. Where no more than one nude or semi-nude model is on the premises at any one time.
M. NUDITY OR A STATE OF NUDITY means the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic
area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of; the
nipple, or the showing of the covered male genitals in a discernible turgid state.
N. PERSON means an individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association or other legal entity.
O. SEMI-NUDE OR IN A SEMI-NUDE CONDITION means the state of dress in which clothing partially or
non-opaquely covers specified anatomical areas.
4 OF 16
ORDINANCE NO. 233 OF 2004 LICENSING AND REGULATING SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
P. SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER means a business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its principal
business purposes, offers for any form of consideration:
1. Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite sex, or
2. Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex when one or more
of the persons is in a state of nudity or semi-nudity.
Q. SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS means and adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult novelty store, adult
video store, adult cabaret, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio
or sexual encounter center.
R. SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS means human genitals, pubic region, anus, buttocks, females breast(s)
below a point immediately above the top of the aureola, or human male genitals in a discernibly turgid
state, even if completely covered.
S. SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACTIVITY means any of the following offenses:
1. Prostitution or promotion of prostitution; dissemination of obscenity, sale, distribution or display of
harmful material to a minor; sexual performance by a child; possession or distribution of child
pornography public lewdness; indecent exposure; indecency with a child; engaging in organized
criminal activity; sexual assault; molestation of a child; gambling; or distribution of a controlled
substance; or any similar offenses to those described above under the criminal or penal code of
other states or countries;
2. For which:
(a) Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release
from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction
is of a misdemeanor offense;
(b) Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release
from confinement for the conviction; whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a
felony offense; or
(c) Less than five years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of
release from confinement for the last conviction, whichever is the later date, if the
conviction are of two or more misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor
offenses occurring within any twenty-four month period.
3. The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the disqualification of the
applicant or a person residing with the applicant.
T. SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES means any of the following:
1. The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female
breast(s);
2. Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulations,
masturbation or sodomy; or
3. Excretory functions as part of, or in connection with any of the activities set forth in (a) and
(b) above.
5 OF 16
ORDINANCE NO. 233 OF 2004 LICENSING AND REGULATING SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
U. TRANSFER OR OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL of a sexually oriented business means and includes any of
the following:
1. The sale, lease or sublease of the business;
2. The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale,
exchange or similar means; or
3. The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal device which transfer the ownership or
control of the business, except for transfer by bequest of other operation of law upon the death
of the person possessing the ownership control.
V. VIEWING BOOTHS means booths, stalls, partitioned portions of a room, rooms or other enclosures which
are available for viewing (1) films, movies, videos or visual reproductions of any kind depicting or
describing “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas,” or (2) persons who appear in a
state of nudity or semi-nudity or who offer performances or presentations characterized by the exposure
of “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
W. KNOWINGLY means having general knowledge of, or reason to know, or a belief or ground for belief,
which warrants further inspection or inquiry of both:
1. The character and content of any material or performance described herein which is reasonably
susceptible of examination by a license or person; and
2. The age of the minor, provided, however, that an honest mistake shall constitute an excuse from
liability hereunder if the licensee or person made a reasonable bona fide attempt to ascertain the
true age of such minor.
SECTION 3. LICENSE REQUIRED:
A. It is unlawful:
1. For any person to operate a sexually oriented business without a valid sexually oriented business
license issued by the Borough pursuant to this Ordinance.
2. For any person who operates a sexually oriented business to employ a person to work for the
sexually oriented business who is not licensed as a sexually oriented business employee by the
Borough pursuant to this Ordinance;
3. For any person to obtain employment with a sexually oriented business without having secured a
sexually oriented business employee license pursuant to this Ordinance.
4. Beginning on the sixtieth (60th) day after enactment of this Ordinance for any person to continue
to operate any sexually oriented business in operation at the time of enactment of this Ordinance
without a valid sexually oriented business license pursuant to this Ordinance.
5. Beginning on the sixtieth (60th) day after enactment of this Ordinance for any person who
operates a sexually oriented business in operation at the time of enactment of this Ordinance to
employ a person to work for the sexually oriented business who is not licensed as a sexually
oriented business employee by the Borough pursuant to this Ordinance;
6 OF 16
ORDINANCE NO. 233 OF 2004 LICENSING AND REGULATING SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
6. Beginning on the sixtieth (60th) day after enactment of this Ordinance for any person to obtain
employment with a sexually oriented business in operation at the time of enactment of this
Ordinance without having secured a sexually oriented business employee license pursuant to this
Ordinance.
B. An application for a license must be made on a form provided by the Borough.
C. All applicants must be qualified according to the provisions of this Ordinance. The application may request
and the applicant shall provide such information (including fingerprints) as to enable the Borough to
determine whether the applicant meets the qualifications established in the Ordinance.
D. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an individual, the person must sign
the application for a license as applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business
is other than an individual, each individual who has a twenty percent (20%) or greater interest in the
business must sign the application for a license as applicant. Each applicant must be qualified under the
following section and each applicant shall be considered a licensee if a license is granted.
E. The completed application for a sexually oriented business license shall contain the following information
and shall be accompanied by the following documents:
1. If the applicant is:
(a) An individual, the individual shall state his/her legal name and any aliases and submit
proof that he/she is at least eighteen years of age;
(b) A partnership, the partnership shall state its complete name, and the name of all partners,
whether the partnership is general or limited, and a copy of the partnership agreement, if
any;
(c) A corporation, the corporation shall state its complete name, the date of its incorporation,
evidence that the corporation is in good standing under the laws of its state or
incorporation and qualified and authorized to conduct business in Pennsylvania, the names
and capacity of all officers, directors and principal stockholders, and the names of the
registered corporate agent and the address of the registered office for service of process.
2. If the applicant intends to operate the sexually oriented business under a name other than that of
the applicant, he or she must state (a) sexually oriented business' fictitious name and (b)
submit the required registration documents.
3. Whether the applicant, or a person residing with the applicant, has been convicted of a specified
criminal activity as defined in this Ordinance, and, if so, the specified criminal activity involved,
the date, place and jurisdiction of each.
4. Whether the applicant, or a person residing with the applicant, has had a previous license under
the Ordinance or other similar sexually oriented business ordinance from another municipality, state
or county denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the sexually oriented
business for which the permit was denied, suspended or revoked, as well as the date of denial,
suspension or revocation, and whether the applicant or a person residing with the applicant has
7 OF 16
ORDINANCE NO. 233 OF 2004 LICENSING AND REGULATING SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
been a partner in a partnership or an officer, director or principal stockholder of a corporation that
is licensed under this Ordinance whose license has previously been denied, suspended or revoked,
including the name and location of the sexually oriented business for which the permit was
denied, suspended or revoked as well as the date of denial, suspension or revocation.
5. Whether the applicant or a person residing with the applicant holds any other licenses under this
Ordinance or other similar sexually oriented business ordinance from another municipality, state or
county and, if so, the names and locations of such other licensed businesses.
6. The specific classification of sexually oriented use for which the applicant is filing along with a
detailed description of each and every activity encompassed by the proposed sexually oriented
business, which description shall thoroughly demonstrate compliance and/or intended compliance
with all provisions of this Ordinance.
7. The location of the proposed sexually oriented business, including a legal description of the
property, street address and telephone number(s), if any.
8. The applicant's mailing address and residential address.
9. A recent photograph of the applicant(s).
10. The applicant's driver's permit number, social security number, and his/her state or federally
issued tax identification number.
11. A sketch or diagram showing; the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total
floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not to be professionally
prepared, but it must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the
interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six (6) inches.
12. A current certificate and straight-line drawing prepared within the thirty (30) days prior to
application by a registered land surveyor depicting the property lines, the property to be certified;
and
13. If an applicant wishes to operate a sexually oriented business, which includes viewing booths,
then the applicant shall also comply with the application requirements set forth in Section 11 and
shall separately apply for and obtain a building and occupancy permit for the installation of the
viewing booths.
14. The application form shall inform the applicant that (1) separate applications are required for any
necessary zoning permits, subdivision and land development approvals and buildings and occupancy
permits and that the applicant may apply for such permits by contacting the Borough Code Officer
and the Venango County Planning Commission and (2) the Department of Labor and Industry
approval is required.
8 OF 16
ORDINANCE NO. 233 OF 2004 LICENSING AND REGULATING SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
F. Before any applicant may be issued a sexually oriented business employee license, the applicant shall
submit on a form to be provided by the Borough the following information:
1. The applicant's name or any other name (including “stage” names) or aliases used by the
individual;
2. Age, date and place of birth;
3. Height, weight, hair and eye color;
4. Present residence address and telephone number;
5. Present business address and telephone number;
6. Date, issuing state and number or driver's license or other identification card information;
7. Social security number; and
8. Proof that the individual is at least eighteen (18) years of age.
G. Attached to the application form for a sexually oriented business employee license as provided above,
shall be the following:
1. A color photograph of the applicant clearly showing the applicant's face, and the applicant's
fingerprints on a form provided by any police department. Any fees for photographs and
fingerprints shall be paid by the applicant.
2. A statement detailing the license history of the applicant for the five (5) years immediately
preceding the date of the filing of the application, including whether such applicant previously
operated or is seeking to operate, in this or any other country, municipality, store or country any
business or has ever had a license, permit or authorization to do business denied, revoked or
suspended. In the event of any such denial, revocation or suspension, state the name, the name
of this issuing or denying jurisdiction and describe in full the reason for the denial, revocation or
suspension. A copy of any order of denial, revocation or suspension shall be attached to the
application.
3. A statement whether the applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal activity as defined in
the Ordinance and, if so, the specified criminal activity involved, the date, place and jurisdiction
of each.
SECTION 4. ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
A. Upon the filing of said application in a fully completed form for a sexually oriented business license or
for a sexually oriented business employee license, the application shall then be referred to the Borough
Code Officer for review and investigation. The Borough Code Officer shall utilize any available resources
through the Pennsylvania State Police, the Venango County Sheriff, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
and/or other law enforcement agencies as may be necessary to complete the review and investigation
9 OF 16
ORDINANCE NO. 233 OF 2004 LICENSING AND REGULATING SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
required by this Ordinance. Within thirty (30) days from the date the completed application is filed, the
Borough Code Officer shall issue a license, unless it is determined by the Borough Code Officer that one
or more of the following findings is true:
1. The applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary for issuance of the license or
has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form;
2. The applicant is under the age of eighteen (18) years;
3. The applicant has been convicted of a “specified criminal activity” as defined in this Ordinance;
4. The sexually oriented business employee license is to be used for employment in a business
prohibited by local or state law, statute, rule or regulation, or prohibited by a particular provision
of this Ordinance; or
5. The applicant has had a sexually oriented business employee license revoked by the Borough
within two (2) years of the date of the current application. If the sexually oriented business
employee license is denied, the temporary license previously issued is immediately deemed null
and void. Denial, suspension or revocation of a license issued pursuant to this subsection shall
be subject to appeal as set forth in Section 9.
6. The required application, investigation and license fees have not been paid.
7. An applicant's license to operate a sexually oriented business, issued by any jurisdiction, has
been revoked within the preceding twelve (12) months.
8. The proposed sexually oriented business is in violation of, or is not in compliance with, any of
the provisions of this Ordinance.
B. A license granted pursuant to this Section shall be subject to annual renewal upon the written application
of the applicant and a finding by the Borough that the applicant has not been convicted of any specified
criminal activity as defined in this Ordinance or committed any act during the existence of the previous
license, which would be grounds to deny the initial license application. The renewal of the license shall
be subject to the payment of the fee as set forth in Section 5.
C. The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is
granted, the expiration date, the address of the sexually oriented business and the specific classification
of sexually oriented use for which the license is issued. Licenses for sexually oriented businesses shall
state that the sexually oriented business shall not commence until all necessary zoning, subdivision and
land development, and/or building code approvals and Department of Labor and Industry approvals are
obtained. All licenses shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually
oriented business so that they may be easily read at any time.
D. Applications for buildings and occupancy permits shall be processed and either denied or approved within
thirty (30) days of a complete application by the Borough.
10 OF 16
ORDINANCE NO. 233 OF 2004 LICENSING AND REGULATING SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
E. A sexually oriented business license shall issue for the specific classification of sexually oriented use as
permitted by ordinance and applied for.
F. A license denial shall conform to the provisions of Section 9.D.
G. Any person aggrieved by the grant of a license may appeal, in writing, within ten (10) days from the
date of issuance of the license, to the Council. The Council shall then hold a local agency law hearing
within twenty (20) days from the date of filing of the appeal and render a decision within ten (10)
days from the end of the hearing. Appeals from a decision of the Council may be taken to court subject
to Section 9.E. of this Ordinance.
SECTION 5. FEES:
A. Every application for a sexually oriented business license (whether for a new license or for renewal of
an existing license) shall be accompanied by a non-refundable application and investigation fee in an
amount set by resolution of the Council.
B. In addition to the application and investigation fee required above, every sexually oriented business that is
granted a license (new or renewal) shall pay to the Borough an annual non-refundable license fee in
an amount set by resolution of the Council within thirty (30) days of license issuance or renewal.
C. Every application for a sexually oriented business employee license (whether for a new license or for
renewal of an existing license) shall be accompanied by an annual non-refundable application,
investigation and license fee in an amount set by resolution of the Council.
SECTION 6. INSPECTION:
A. An applicant or licensee shall permit authorized Borough officials and their agents or consultants to
inspect the premises of a sexually oriented business for the purpose of insuring compliance with the law,
at any time it is occupied or open for business.
B. A person who operates a sexually oriented business or his/her agent or employee commits a violation of
this Ordinance if he/she refuses to permit such lawful inspection of the premises at any time it is
occupied or open for business.
SECTION 7. EXPIRATION OF LICENSE:
A. Each license shall expire on hear from the date of issuance and may be renewed only by making
application as provided in Section 3. Application for renewal shall be made at least thirty (30) days
before the expiration date; the date of expiration of the license will not be extended.
B. When the Borough denies renewal of a license the applicant shall not be issued a license for one year
from the date of denial. If, subsequent to denial, the Borough finds that the basis for denial of the
renewal license has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at least ninety
(90) days have elapsed since the date denial became final.
SECTION 8. SUSPENSION:
The Borough Code Officer shall suspend a license for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days and a fine, maximum
allowed by law, if he determines that a license or an employee of a license has:
11 OF 16
ORDINANCE NO. 233 OF 2004 LICENSING AND REGULATING SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
1. Violated or is not in compliance with any provision of this Ordinance.
2. Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business premises as authorized by this
Ordinance; or
3. Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the sexually oriented business premises.
SECTION 9. REVOCATIONS AND APPEALS OF DENIALS, SUSPENSIONS OR REVOCATIONS:
A. The Borough Code Officer shall revoke a license if a cause of suspension in Section 8 occurs and the license
has been suspended within the preceding twelve (12) months.
B. The Borough Code Officer shall revoke a license if he determines that:
1. A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material submitted during the application process;
2. A licensee has knowingly allowed possession, use or sale of controlled substances on the premises.
3. A licensee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises;
4. A licensee knowingly operated the sexually oriented business during a period of time when the licensee's
license was suspended;
5. A licensee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation or
other sex act to occur in or on the license premises; or
6. A licensee is delinquent in payment to the Borough for any licensing fees past due.
C. When the Borough revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one (1) year, and the licensee shall not
be issued a sexually oriented business license for one (1) year from the date the revocation became effective.
If, subsequent to revocation, the Borough finds that the basis for the revocation has been corrected or abated,
the applicant may be granted a license if at least ninety (90) days have elapsed since the date the revocation
became effective.
D. All license application, renewal, suspension or revocation decisions shall be sent in writing to the applicant or
licensee. All such decisions, which deny, suspend or revoke a permit, shall state specifically the ordinance
requirement not met and any other basis for decision. After denial of an application, or denial of a renewal of
an application, or after suspension or revocation of any license, the applicant or licensee may appeal pursuant to
the local agency law to the Council. The Council will then hold a local agency law hearing within twenty (20)
days from the date the appeal is filed and will render a written decision within ten (10) days from the date
such hearing concludes. Any such appeal must be filed, in writing, with the Borough Secretary within ten (10)
days from the date of mailing of the decision appealed from. Failure to file said appeal with the Borough
Secretary within ten (10) days from the date of the mailing of the decision appealed from shall be deemed a
conclusive determination as to the issues or matters addressed by the written decision. In the case of a denial
of a license renewal, or in the case of a license suspension or revocation, the licensee may continue to operate
to the same extent as immediately prior to the suspension or revocation until the earlier of; (1) the expiration
of the ten day appeal period without filing of an appeal; or (2) the date of a decision dismissing any appeal.
12 OF 16
ORDINANCE NO. 233 OF 2004 LICENSING AND REGULATING SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
E. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Council may appeal to court of competent jurisdiction. The Borough
shall, upon filing of such appeal, consent to any request by a license applicant or licensee to the court to give
expedited review to such appeal. The Borough shall certify any record to the court to do so.
SECTION 10. TRANSFER OR LICENSE:
A licensee shall not transfer his/her license to another, nor shall a licensee operate a sexually oriented business under
the authority of a license at any place other than the address designated in the application.
SECTION 11. REGULATIONS PRETAINING TO EXHIBITION OF SEXUALLY EXPLICIT FILMS,
VIDEOS OR LIVE ENTERTAINMENT IN VIEWING ROOMS:
A. A person who operates viewing booths or causes them to be operated shall comply with the following
requirements:
1. Upon application for a sexually oriented license, the application shall be accompanied by a diagram of
the premises showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one or more manager's stations and the
location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the premises in which patrons will
not be permitted. A manager's station may not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet of floor area. The
diagram shall also designate the place at which the permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A
professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be
required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object
and should be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various
internal dimensions of all areas of interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six (6)
inches. The Borough may waive the foregoing diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the
configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared.
2. The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the applicant.
3. It is the duty of the licensee of the premises to ensure that at least one licensed employee is on duty
and situated in each manager's station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises.
4. The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view
from the manager's station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted to access for
any purpose excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the
premises has two or more manager's stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be
configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which
any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the manager's stations. The view
required in this subsection must be direct line of sight from the manager's station. In addition, all viewing
booths shall have at least one side fully open so that all of the area inside the booth is open to the
view of persons in the public area of the establishment.
5. It shall be the duty of the licensees to ensure that the view area specified in subsection (5) remains
unobstructed by any doors, curtains, partitions, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials and,
at all times, to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been
13 OF 16
ORDINANCE NO. 233 OF 2004 LICENSING AND REGULATING SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to
subsection (1) of this Section.
6. No viewing room may be occupied by more than one person at any time.
7. The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every
place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than five (5) foot candle, as
measured at floor level.
8. It shall be the duty of the licensees to ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at all
times that any patron is present in the premises.
9. No licensee shall allow openings of any kind to exist between viewing rooms or booths.
10. No person shall make or attempt to make an opening of any kind between viewing booths or rooms.
11. The licensee shall, during each business day, regularly inspect the walls between the booths to determine
if any openings or hole exist.
12. The licensee shall cause all floor coverings in viewing booths to be nonporous, easily cleanable surfaces,
with no rugs or carpeting.
13. The licensee shall cause all wall surfaces and ceiling surfaces in the viewing booths to be contructed of,
or permanently covered by, nonporous, easily cleanable material. No wood, plywood, composition board or
other porous material shall be used within forty-eight (48) inches of the floor.
B. A person having a duty under subsection 1 through 13 of subsection A above commits a violation of this
Ordinance if he/she knowingly fails to fulfill that duty.
SECTION 12. ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR AGENCIES OR NUDE MODEL STUDIOS:
A. A nude model studio shall not employ any person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
B. A person under the age of eighteen (18) years commits a violation of this Ordinance if the person appears
semi-nude or in a state of nudity in or on the premises of a nude model studio. It is a defense to prosecution
under this subsection if the person under eighteen (18) years was in a restroom not open the public viewing
or visible to any other person.
C. A person commits a violation of this Ordinance if the person appears in a state of nudity, or knowingly allows
another to appear in a state of nudity in an area of a nude model studio premises, which can be viewed, from
the public right-of-way.
D. A nude model studio shall not place or permit a bed, sofa or mattress in any room on the premises, except
that of a sofa may be placed in a recreation room open to the public.
14 OF 16
ORDINANCE NO. 233 OF 2004 LICENSING AND REGULATING SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
SECTION 13. ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS CONCERNING PUBLIC NUDITY:
A. It shall be a violation of this Ordinance for a person to knowingly and intentionally, in a public place:
1. Engage in sexual intercourse or to engage in deviate sexual intercourse as defined by the Pennsylvania
Crimes Code; or
2. Appear in a state of nudity; or
3. Fondle the genital of himself, herself or another person.
B. For the purpose of this Ordinance, “Public Place” includes all outdoor areas owned by or open to the general
public, and all buildings and enclosed placed owned by or open to the general public, including, but not limited
to, places of entertainment, taverns, restaurants, clubs, theaters, dance halls, banquet halls, party rooms or halls
limited to specific members, and party rooms or halls restricted to adults or to patrons invited to attend, whether
or not an admission charge is levied. This Section shall not apply to:
(a) Any child under ten (10) years of age; or
(b) Any individual exposing a breast in the process of breastfeeding an infant under two (2) years
of age; or
(c) The exercise of free speech or free expression in the form or artistic and theatrical performances.
It is the intention of the Borough that his Section be construed, enforced and interpreted in such
a manner as will cause the least possible infringement of the constitutional rights of free speech,
free expression, due process, equal protection or other fundamental rights.
It shall be a violation of this Ordinance for a person who knowingly or intentionally in a sexually oriented
business appears in a semi-nude condition unless the person is an employee who, while semi-nude, shall be at
least ten (10) feet from any patron or customer and on a stage at least two (2) feet from the floor.
It shall be a violation of this Ordinance for an employee, while semi-nude in a sexually oriented business, to
solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron or customer or for any patron or customer to pay or give any
gratuity to any employee, while said employee is semi-nude in a sexually oriented business.
SECTION 14. PROHIBITION AGAINST CHILDREN IN A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS:
A person commits a violation of this Ordinance if the person knowingly allows a person under the age of eighteen
(18) years on the premises of a sexually oriented business.
SECTION 15. HOURS OF OPERATION:
No sexually oriented business shall be open for business before 1 o'clock (1:00) P.M., Monday through Saturday, or
after ten o'clock (10:00) P.M., Monday through Saturday. Sexually oriented businesses shall be closed at all times on
Sundays and legal holidays.
15 OF 16
ORDINANCE NO. 233 OF 2004 LICENSING AND REGULATING SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
SECTION 16. EXEMPTIONS:
A. It is a defense to prosecution under Section 14 that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a
modeling class operated:
1. By a proprietary school, licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania a college, junior college or
university supported entirely or partly by taxation;
2. By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are
transferable to a college, junior college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or
3. In a structure:
(a) Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates
a nude person is available for viewing; and
(b) Where, in order to participate in a class, a student must enroll at least three (3) days in
advance of the class; and
(c) Where no more than one (1) nude model is on the premises at any one time.
SECTION 17. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person, firm or corporation who violates or permits the violation of any provisions of this Ordinance or the rules
and regulations approved and hereinafter adopted shall pay a fine not exceeding one thousand ($1,000.00) dollars for
each violation. Whenever such person shall have been officially notified by the Borough that he/she is committing a
violation of this Ordinance or the rules and regulations approved and hereinafter adopted, each day that he/she shall
continue such violation after such notification shall constitute a separate violation punishable by a like fine. Any person
who violates or permits the violation of this Ordinance shall pay, in addition to the fine set forth above, all court costs
and reasonable attorney's fees incurred by the Borough in connection with any civil enforcement proceedings brought to
enforce this Ordinance.
SECTION 18. SEVERABILITY:
The provisions of this Ordinance are severable and if any section, subsection, clause, sentence or part thereof shall be
held or declared illegal, invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, the decision shall not affect or
impair any of the remaining sections, subsection, clauses, sentences or parts thereof, of this Ordinance. It is hereby
declared to the be intent of the Council that this Ordinance would have been adopted if such illegal, invalid or
unconstitutional section, subsection, clause, sentence or part thereof had not been included herein.
SECTION 19. EFFECTIVE DATE:
This Ordinance shall become effective five (5) days after the date of enactment.
ORDAINED AND ENACTED INTO LAW THIS 5th DAY OF JANUARY 2004.
16 OF 16
ORDINANCE NO. 240 OF 2005 “PROHIBITING DISORDERLY CONDUCT”
ORDINANCE NO. 240 OF 2005
Borough of Sugarcreek
Franklin, Pennsylvania
AN ORDINANCE DEFINING AND PROHIBITING DISORDERLY CONDUCT IN THE BOROUGH OF SUGARCREEK,
VENANGO COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA.
WHEREAS, the Borough Council of the Borough of Sugarcreek, Venango County, Pennsylvania, (“the
Council”) deems it necessary amend Ordinance No. 36 relative to the crime of disorderly conduct.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED AND ENACTED by the Council of the Borough of Sugarcreek,
Venango County, Pennsylvania, and it is hereby enacted and ordained by the authority of the same:
SECTION ONE: Any person shall be guilty of disorderly conduct if, upon the streets, lanes, avenues, alleys,
parks, public places or private premise, in the Borough of Sugarcreek, Venango County, Pennsylvania, that person:
(a) is found drunk;
(b) engages in, aids or abets any riot, affray, unlawful assemblage or fight;
(c) uses loud, boisterous, profane, indecent or vulgar language;
(d) acts in a loud boisterous manner;
(e) makes or causes to be made any loud boisterous noise or disturbance;
(f) loafs or loiters upon the streets, lanes, avenues, alleys, parks, or public places of the Borough to the
annoyance of the public;
(g) obstructs the entrance to any public or private building'
(h) fires any gun, pistol or other firearm, including BB guns, within one hundred fifty (150) yards of any
building, except by the occupant on his or her own property so long as he or she is more than one
hundred fifty (150) yards from any occupied or unoccupied building not on his or her property, unless
such act is committed with the express written permission of the other property owner(s), which shall
be in the possession of the actor at the time the firearm is discharged;
(i) explodes any explosives or fireworks of any kind; however, this subsection shall not apply to any
person licensed to explode any explosives or fireworks so long as said person obtains the express
written permission of the Borough;
(j) willfully obstructs any public street, lane, avenue, alley, pavement, footwalk, or crossing;
(k) writes, posts, or exposes to view any lewd or indecent word, picture or device;
(l) indecently exposes his or her person;
(m) prowls or loiters around or upon any of the streets, lanes, avenues, alleys, parks, public places or
private premises for the purpose of inviting immoral or indecent conduct;
(n) establishes or carries on or upon the streets, lanes, avenues, alleys or public places any show, game
or other demonstration for the purpose of attracting a crowd without the permission of the Borough of
Sugarcreek Police Department;
(o) congregates with others or loafs or loiters in and around poolrooms, bowling alleys, taverns and other
public or private places to the annoyance of the public;
(p) fails to obey a lawful order of dispersal by a police officer where acts of disorderly conduct are being
committed in the immediate vicinity; or
(q) deliberately squeals a tire or tires on a motor vehicle, or burns rubber or other material out of which
ORDINANCE NO. 240 OF 2005 “PROHIBITING DISORDERLY CONDUCT”
a tire or tires on a motor vehicle are made, by spinning the tire or tires on the ground or on the improved or
unimproved portion of a public place or of a public or private road, street, lane, avenue, driveway or alley.
SECTION TWO: It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in disorderly conduct in the Borough of
Sugarcreek, Venango County, Pennsylvania.
SECTION THREE: Any person violating a provision of this ordinance, and any person aiding, abetting or assisting
in the violation or a provision of this ordinance, shall, upon conviction thereof before a magisterial district judge, be
subject to a fine of not more than three hundred ($300.00) dollars, and the costs of the prosecution for each
offense; and in default of the payment of fines and costs shall undergo imprisonment in the Venango County Jail for
a period not exceeding ninety (90) days for each violation.
SECTION FOUR: This ordinance shall be effective June 2, 2005.
SECTION FIVE: All ordinances or parts of ordinances conflicting with any of the provisions of this ordinance are
hereby repealed insofar as the same affect this ordinance.
APPROVED this 1st day of June, 2005.






ORDINANCE NO. 263 OF 2009
ORDINANCE NO. 263 OF 2009
Borough of Sugarcreek
Venango County, Pennsylvania
AN ORDINANCE AUTHORIZING THE ROCKY GROVE VOLUNTEER FIRE
DEPARTMENT AND THE RENO VOLUNTEER FIRE DEPARTMENT TO SEEK
REIMBURSEMENT FOR COSTS INCURRED IN RESPONDING TO FIRES,
FLOODS, ACCIDENTS, HAZARDOUS MATERIAL INCIDENTS AND OTHER CASULTIES.
WHEREAS, the Council of the Borough of Sugarcreek, Venango County, Pennsylvania, ("Borough Council") has recognized and designated the
Rocky Grove Volunteer Fire Department and the Reno Volunteer Fire Department (hereinafter "Fire Departments") as the designated fire companies for the
Borough of Sugarcreek; and
WHEREAS, said Fire Departments respond to fire, floods, accidents, hazardous material spills, and other casualties, as well as other emergency
and non-emergency incidents, all to the general benefit of the Borough of Sugarcreek and its residents; and
WHEREAS, as a result of said responses, the Fire Departments incur costs which, if not reimbursed, often must be borne by the taxpayers of
the Borough; and
WHEREAS, Council desires to establish specific authority for the Fire Departments to seek collection and reimbursement for those reasonable costs
incurred in responding to the above and other incidents.
NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the foregoing, the Borough Council does hereby ordain and enact the following:
Section 1. Reimbursement of Costs and Expenses:
A. Council has acknowledged the authority of the Fire Departments to act as the official emergency response force for the Borough.
B. In the course of performing services as the official emergency response force for the Borough, the Fire Departments have and will incure
certain costs for materials, equipment, and supplies.
C. To the extent permitted by law, all costs incurred by the Fire Departments in response to emergency and non-emergency incidents, shall
be recoverable by the Fire Departments.
D. To facilitate reimbursement, the Fire Departments may utilize any customary or accepted business procedure, including, but not limited to,
sending an invoice to any person, persons, corporations, or other legal entity, party or organization, which has received or benefited
from the response services of the Fire Departments. If permitted by law, the Fire Departments may send such invoices directly to the
affected party's insurance carrier. The Fire Departments shall have the authority to set forth on any such invoice, the terms and
conditions expected for reimbursement.
E. In the event that any claim for reimbursement is denied by any party or insurance carrier, the Fire Departments shall have the authority
to authorize such legal action, at their expense, as may be necessary to enforce the claim and this Ordinance or, in their discretion, to
withdraw or discontinue any claim for reimbursement.
F. In addition to the aforementioned costs, the Fire Departments are hereby authorized to collect any other additional fee or charge as may
be sanctioned by the Hazardous Material and Emergency Planning and Response Act, or as may be permitted by any other statute,
case law or common law.
Section 2: All other provisions of any previous ordinances which grant authority to the Borough, or any of its agencies, to collect monies for
reasonable costs, which are not specifically changed or inconsistent with this ordinance, are deemed to be continuing and shall remain in full force and
effect.
Section 3: If, for any reason, an portion of the within ordinance shall be declared illegal, invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such declaration shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof.
APPROVED by the Council of the Borough of Sugarcreek, Venango County, Pennsylvania, this 5th day of August 2009.
1 Of 1
Stormwater Management Ordinance, Ordinance 268 of 2011 Page | 1
BOROUGH OF SUGARCREEK
ORDINANCE NO. 268 OF 2011
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING THE STORMWATER MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE OF THE BOROUGH OF SUGARCREEK
WHEREAS, the purpose of this ordinance is to promote the general health, safety and welfare of the citizens of
the Borough of Sugarcreek, Pennsylvania, and to conform to the requirements of the Venango County
Stormwater Management Plan; and
BE IT ORDAINED AND ENACTED, by the Council of the Borough of Sugarcreek, Pennsylvania, and it is
hereby ordained and enacted by the authority of the same.
SECTION 1: The Stormwater Management Ordinance of the Borough of Sugarcreek is hereby adopted as follows:
(This part of the page intentionally left blank)
Stormwater Management Ordinance, Ordinance 268 of 2011 Page | 2
ARTICLE I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
A. SHORT TITLE: This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited at the Stormwater Management Ordinance of
the Borough of Sugarcreek
B. STATEMENT OF FINDINGS: The Council of the Borough of Sugarcreek finds that:
1. Inadequate management of accelerated stormwater runoff resulting from development throughout a
watershed increases flood flows and velocities, contributes to erosion and sedimentation, overtaxes the
carrying capacity of existing streams and storm sewers, greatly increase the cost of public facilities to
convey and manage stormwater, undermines floodplain management and flood reduction efforts in
upstream and downstream communities, reduces groundwater recharge, threatens public health and
safety, and increases non-point source pollution of water resources.
2. A comprehensive program of stormwater management, including reasonable regulation of
development and activities causing accelerated runoff; is fundamental to the public health, safety,
welfare and the protection of the people of the Borough of Sugarcreek and all the people of the
Commonwealth, their resources and the environment.
3. Inadequate planning and management of stormwater runoff resulting from land development and
redevelopment throughout a watershed can also harm surface water resources by changing the natural
hydro logic patterns; accelerating stream flows (which increase scour and erosion of streambeds and
stream banks thereby elevating sedimentation); destroying aquatic habitat; and elevating aquatic
pollution concentrations and loadings such as sediments, nutrients, heavy metals and pathogens.
Groundwater resources are also impacted through loss of recharge.
4. Stormwater is an important water resource which provides groundwater recharge for water supplies
and base flow of streams, which also protects and maintains surface water quality.
5. Public education on the control of pollution from stormwater is an essential component in
successfully addressing stormwater issues.
6. Federal and state regulations require certain municipalities to implement a program of stormwater
controls. These municipalities are required to obtain a permit for stormwater discharges from their
separate storm sewer systems under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES).
C. PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Ordinance is to promote health, safety and welfare within the Borough of Sugarcreek by
minimizing the harms and maximizing the benefits described in Article I(B) of this Ordinance through provisions
intended to:
1. Meet legal water quality requirements under state law, including regulations at 25 PA Code Chapter
93 to protect, maintain, reclaim and restore the existing and designated uses of the Waters of the
Commonwealth.
2. Manage accelerated runoff and erosion and sedimentation problems close to their source, by
regulating activities that cause these problems.
3. Preserve the natural drainage systems as much as possible.
Stormwater Management Ordinance, Ordinance 268 of 2011 Page | 3
4. Maintain groundwater recharge, to prevent degradation of surface and groundwater quality, and to
otherwise protect water resources.
5. Maintain existing flows and quality of steams and watercourses.
6. Preserve and restore the flood-carrying capacity of streams and prevent scour and erosion of stream
banks and streambeds.
7. Manage stormwater impacts close to the runoff source, with a minimum of structures and a
maximum use of natural processes.
8. Provide procedures, performance standards and design criteria for stormwater planning and
management.
9. Provide proper operations and maintenance of all temporary and permanent stormwater
management facilities and Best Management Practices (BMPs) that are constructed and implemented.
10. Provide standards to meet the NPDES permit requirements.
D. STATUTORY AUTHORITY:
1. Primary Authority: The Borough of Sugarcreek is empowered to regulate these activities by the authority
of the Act of October 4, 1978, 32 P.S., P.L. 864 (Act 167), 32 P.S. Section 680.1 et seq, as amended, the
Storm Water Management Act, and the Borough Code.
2. Secondary Authority: The Borough of Sugarcreek also is empowered to regulate land use activities that
affect runoff by the authority of the Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.
E. APPLICABILITY:
1. This Ordinance shall apply to all areas of the Borough of Sugarcreek any Regulated Activity within the
Borough of Sugarcreek, and all stormwater runoff entering into the Borough of Sugarcreek’s separate
storm sewer system or combined sewer system from lands within the boundaries of the Borough of
Sugarcreek.
2. Earth disturbance activities and associated stormwater management controls are also regulated under
existing state law and implementing regulations. This Ordinance shall operate in coordination with those
parallel requirements. The requirements of this Ordinance shall be no less restrictive in meeting the
purposes of this Ordinance than state law.
3. “Regulated Activities” are any earth disturbance or any activities that involve the alteration or
development of land in a manner that may affect stormwater runoff. “Regulated Activities” include, but
are not limited to, the following listed items.
a. Earth Disturbance Activities
b. Land Development
c. Subdivision
d. Construction of new or additional impervious or semi-pervious surfaces
e. Construction of new buildings or additions to existing buildings
f. Diversion or piping of any natural or man-made stream channel
g. Installation of stormwater management facilities or appurtenances thereto
h. Installation of stormwater BMP’s.
Stormwater Management Ordinance, Ordinance 268 of 2011 Page | 4
4. See article III(B) of this Ordinance for Exemption/Modification Criteria.
F. REPEALER:
Any ordinance, ordinance provision(s), or regulation of the Borough of Sugarcreek inconsistent with any of the
provision(s) of this Ordinance is hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only.
G. SEVERABILTY:
In the event that a court of competent jurisdiction declares any section(s) or provision(s) of this Ordinance
invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of any of the remaining section(s) or provision(s) of this
Ordinance.
H. COMPATIBILITY WITH OTHER ORDINANCE REQUIREMENTS:
Approvals issued or actions taken pursuant to this Ordinance do not relieve the Applicant of the responsibility to
comply with or to secure required permits or approvals for activities regulated by another other applicable
codes, laws, rules, statutes or ordinances. To the extent that this Ordinance imposes more rigorous or stringent
requirements for stormwater management, the specific requirements contained in this Ordinance shall be
followed.
I. DUTY OF PERSON ENGAGED IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF LAND:
Notwithstanding any provision(s) of this Ordinance, including exemptions, any landowner or any person
engaged in the alteration or development of land which may affect stormwater runoff characteristics shall
implement such measures as are reasonably necessary to prevent injury to health, safety or other property.
Such measures also shall include actions as are required to manage the rate, volume, direction and quality of
resulting stormwater runoff in a manner which otherwise adequately protects health, property and water
quality.
J. MUNICIPAL LIABILITY DISCLAIMER:
1. Neither the granting of any approval under this Ordinance, nor the compliance with the provisions of
this Ordinance, or with any condition imposed by a municipal official hereunder, shall relieve any person
from any responsibility for damage to persons or property resulting therefrom, or as otherwise imposed
by law nor impose any liability upon the Borough of Sugarcreek for damages to persons or property.
2. The granting of a permit which includes any stormwater management facilities shall not constitute a
representation, guarantee or warranty of any kind by the Borough of Sugarcreek, or by an official or
employee thereof, of the practicability or safety of any structure, use or other plan proposed, and shall
create no liability upon or cause of action against such public body, official or employee for any damage
that may result pursuant thereto.
Stormwater Management Ordinance, Ordinance 268 of 2011 Page | 5
ARTICLE II
DEFINITIONS
A. INTERPRETATIONS: For the purpose of this Ordinance, certain terms and words used herein shall be
interpreted as follows:
1. Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the singular number includes the plural;
and the plural number includes the singular; words of masculine gender include feminine gender; and
words of feminine gender include masculine gender.
2. The word “includes” or “including” shall not limit the term to the specific example, but is intended to
extend its meaning to all other instances of like kind and character.
3. The word “person” includes an individual, firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company,
corporation or any other similar entity.
4. The words “shall” and “must” are mandatory; the words “may” and “should” are permissive.
5. The words “uses or occupied” include the words “intended, designed, maintained, or arranged to be
used, occupied or maintained”.
B. SPECIFIC TERMS:
ACCELERATED EROSION: The removal of the surface of land through the combined action of human activity and
natural processes at a rate greater than would occur under natural processes.
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITIES: Activities associated with agriculture such as agricultural cultivation, agricultural
operation, and animal heavy use areas. This includes the work of producing crops, tillage, land clearing, plowing,
disking, harrowing, planting, harvesting crops, or pasturing and raising of livestock and installation of
conservation measures. Construction of new buildings or impervious areas is not considered an Agricultural
Activity.
ALTERATION: As applied to land, a change in topography as a result of the moving of soil and rock from one
location or position to another; changing of surface conditions by causing the surface to be more or less
impervious; land disturbance.
APPLICANT: A landowner, developer or other person who has filed an application for approval to engage in any
Regulated Activities at a project sit within the municipality.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs): Activities, facilities, designs, measures or procedures used to manage
stormwater impacts for Regulated Activities, to meet State Water Quality Requirements, to promote
groundwater recharge and to otherwise meet the purposes of this Ordinance. Stormwater BMP’s are commonly
grouped into one of two broad categories or measures: “non-structural” or “structural”. “Non-structural” BMPs
are measures referred to as operational and/or behavior-related practices that attempt to minimize the contact
of pollutants with stormwater runoff whereas “structural” BMPs are measures that consist of physical device or
practice that is installed to capture and treat stormwater runoff. “Structural” BMP’s include, but are not limited
to, w wide variety of practices and devices, from large-scale retention ponds and constructed wetlands, to smallscale
underground treatment systems, infiltration facilities, filter strips, low impact design, bioretention, wet
ponds, permeable pavement, grassed swales, riparian or forested buffers, sand filters, detention basins, and
manufactured devices. “Structural” stormwater BMPs are permanent appurtenances to the project site.
BMP MANUAL: Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, Bureau of Watershed Management.
Pennsylvania Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual, latest edition.
Stormwater Management Ordinance, Ordinance 268 of 2011 Page | 6
CHANNEL EROSION: The widening, deepening, and headward cutting of small channels and waterways, due to
erosion caused by moderate to large floods.
CISTERN: An underground reservoir or tank used for storing rainwater.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT: The Venango Conservation District. The Venango Conservation District has the
authority under a delegation agreement executed with the Department of Environmental Protection to
administer all or a portion of the regulations promulgated under 25 PA Code Chapter 102.
CULVERT: A structure with appurtenant works that carries a stream and/or stormwater runoff under a road or
through an embankment or fill.
DAM: An artificial barrier, together with it appurtenant works, constructed for the purpose of impounding or
storing water or another fluid or semifluid, or a refuse bank, fill or structure for highway, railroad or other
purposes which does or may impound water.
DESIGN STORM: The magnitude and temporal distribution of precipitation from a storm event measured in
probability of occurrence (e.g. a 25-year-storm) and duration (e.g. 24-hours), used in the design and evaluation
of stormwater management systems. Also see Return Period.
DESIGNEE: An agent of this municipality and/or agent of the governing body involved with the administration,
review or enforcement of any provisions of this Ordinance by contract or memorandum of understanding.
DETENTION BASIN: An impoundment structure designed to manage stormwater runoff by temporarily storing
runoff and released it as a predetermined rate.
DETENTION VOLUME: The volume of runoff that is captured and released into Waters of the Commonwealth at
a controlled rate.
DEVELOPER: A person, partnership, association, corporation or other entity, or any responsible person therein
or agent thereof, that undertakes any Regulated Activity of this Ordinance.
DEVELOPMENT SITE – (SITE): The specific parcel of land for which a Regulated Activity is proposed. Also see
Project Site.
DISTURBED AREA: An unstabilized land area where an Earth Disturbance Activity is occurring or has occurred.
DOWNSLOPE PROPERTY LINE: That portion of the property line of the land being developed toward which all or
a major portion of the overland or pipe flow from the site would be directed.
DRAINAGE CONVERYANCE FACILITY: A stormwater management facility designed to convey stormwater runoff
and including streams, channels, swales, pipes, conduits, culverts, storm sewers, etc.
DRAINAGE EASEMENT: A right granted by a landowner to a grantee, to allow the use of private land for
stormwater management, drainage, or conveyance purposes.
DRAINAGEWAY: Any natural or artificial watercourse, trench, ditch, pipe, swale, channel or similar depression
into which surface waters flow.
EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY: Construction or other human activity which disturbs the surface of the land,
including, but not limited to, clearing and grubbing, grading, excavations, embankments, land development,
agricultural plowing or tilling, timber harvesting, road maintenance, mineral extraction, and the moving
depositing, stockpiling, or storing of soil, rock or earth materials.
EROSION: The movement of soil particles by the action of water, wind, ice or other natural forces.
Stormwater Management Ordinance, Ordinance 268 of 2011 Page | 7
EROSION AND SEDIMENT POLLUTION CONTROL PLAN: A plan which is designed to minimize accelerated
erosion and sedimentation.
EXCEPTIONAL VALUE WATERS: Surface waters of high quality, which satisfy PA Code Title 25 Environmental
Protection, Chapter 93 Water Quality Standards 93.4b(b) relating to anti-degradation, as amended.
EXISTING CONDITIONS: The initial condition of a project site prior to proposed construction. If the initial
condition of the site is undeveloped and not forested, the land use shall be considered as “meadow” unless the
natural land cover is documented to generate lower Curve Numbers or Rational “C” Coefficient.
FEMA: The Federal Emergency Management Agency.
FLOOD: A general but temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the
overflow of streams, rivers and other Waters of the Commonwealth.
FLOOD FRINGE: The remaining portions of the 100-year floodplain outside of the floodway boundary.
FLOODPLAIN: Any land area susceptible to inundation by water from any natural source or delineated by
applicable Department of Housing and Urban Development, Federal Insurance Administration Flood Hazard
Boundary – mapped as being a special flood hazard area. Included are lands adjoining a river or stream that have
been or may by inundated by a 100-year flood. Also included are areas that comprise Group 13 Soils, as listed in
Appendix A of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (Pennsylvania DEP) Technical Manual
for Sewage Enforcement Officers (as amended or replaced from time to time by Pennsylvania DEP).
FLOODWAY: The channel of the watercourse and those portions of the adjoining floodplains that are reasonably
required to carry and discharge the 100-year frequency flood. Unless otherwise specified, the boundary of the
floodway is as indicated on maps and flood insurance studies provided by FEMA. In an area where no FEMA
maps or studies have defined the boundary of the 100-year frequency floodway, it is assumed – absent evidence
to the contrary – that the floodway extends from the stream to 50 feet from the top of the bank of the stream.
FOREST MANAGEMENT/TIMBER OPERATIONS: Planning and activities necessary for the management of
forestland. These include timber inventory and preparation of forest management plans, silvicultural treatment,
cutting budgets, logging road design and construction, timber harvesting, site preparation and reforestation.
FREEBOARD: Vertical distance between the elevation of the design high water and the top of a dam, levee, tank,
basin, or diversion ridge. The space is required as a safety margin against flow overtopping in a pond or basin.
GRADE: Slope of a road, channel or natural ground specified in percent.
(TO) GRADE: To finish the surface of a roadbed, top of embankment or bottom of excavation.
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE: Replenishment of existing natural underground water.
HEC-HMS MODEL CALIBRATED: (Hydrologic Engineering Center Hydrologic Modeling System) A computer-based
hydro logic modeling technique adapted to certain watersheds in Venango County for the Act 167 Plan. The
model has been calibrated by adjusting key model input parameters.
HIGH QUALITY WATERS: Surface water having quality, which exceeds criteria necessary to support propagation
of fish, shellfish, and wildlife and recreation in an on the water by satisfying PA Code Title 25 Environmental
Protection, Chapter 93 Water Quality Standards 93.4b(b), as amended.
Stormwater Management Ordinance, Ordinance 268 of 2011 Page | 8
HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP (HSG): Infiltration rates of soils vary widely and are affected by subsurface
permeability as well as surface intake rates. Soils are classified into one of four HSG (A, B, C and D) according to
their minimum infiltration rate, which is obtained for bare soil after prolonged wetting. The Natural Resource
Conservation Service (NRCS) of the US Department of Agriculture defines the four groups and provides a list of
most of the soils in the United States and their group classification. The soils in the area of interest may be
identified from a soil survey report from the local NRCS office or the County Conservation District.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE (IMPERVIOUS AREA): A surface that prevents the infiltration of water into the ground.
Impervious surface (or areas) include, but are not limited to: roofs, additional indoor living spaces, patios,
garages, storage sheds and similar structures, parking or driveway areas, streets and sidewalks. Any surface
areas proposed to initially be gravel or crushed stone shall be assumed to be impervious surfaces.
IMPOUNDMENT: A retention or detention basin designed to retain stormwater runoff and release it at a
controlled rate.
INFILTRATION STRUCTURES: A structure designed to direct runoff into the ground (e.g., french drains, seepage
pits, seepage trench, etc.).
INLET: A surface connection to a closed drain. A structure at the diversion end of a conduit. The upstream end of
any structure through which water may flow.
KARST: A type of topography or landscape characterized by surface depressions, sinkholes, rock
pinnacles/uneven bedrock surface, steep-sided hills, underground drainage and caves. Karst is formed on
carbonate rocks, such as limestone or dolomites and sometimes gypsum.
LAND DEVELOPMENT (DEVELOPMENT): (i) The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or
parcels of land for any purpose involving (a) a group of two or more buildings, or (b) the division or allocation of
land or space between or among two or more existing or prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose
of, streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups, or other features; (ii) Any subdivision of
land; (iii) Development in accordance with Section 503(1.1) of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as
amended.
MAIN STEM (MAIN CHANNEL): Any stream segment or other runoff conveyance facility used as a reach in the
Venango County Act 167 watershed hydrologic model(s).
MANNING EQUATION (MANNING FORMULA): An equation for calculation of velocity of flow in non-pressurized
conduits based upon conduit shape, roughness, depth of flow and slope.
MAXIMUM EXTENT PRACTICABLE: A level of implementing Best Management Practices in order to achieve a
performance standard specified taking into account the best available technology, cost effectiveness and other
competing issues such as public safety and welfare, natural resources, and geographic features.
MUNICPAL ENGINEER: A professional engineer licensed as such in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, duly
appointed as the engineer for a municipality, planning agency or joint planning commission.
MUNICIPALITY: The Borough of Sugarcreek, Venango County, Pennsylvania.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES). The federal government’s system for
issuance of permits under the Clean Water Act, which is delegated to Pennsylvania DEP in Pennsylvania.
NOAA ATLAS 14: Precipitation-Frequency Atlas of the United States, Atlas 14, Volume 2, US Department of
Commerce, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, National Weather Service, Hydrometeorological
Design Studies Center, Silver Spring, Maryland (most current).
Stormwater Management Ordinance, Ordinance 268 of 2011 Page | 9
NON-POINT SOURCE POLLUTION: Pollution that enters a water body from diffuse origins in the watershed and
does not result from discernible, confined, or discrete conveyances.
NRCS: Natural Resource Conservation Service (previously Soil Conservation Service (SCS)).
OPEN CHANNEL: A drainage element in which stormwater flows with an open surface. Open channels include,
but are not limited to, natural and manmade drainageways, swales, streams, ditches, canals, and pipes not
under pressure.
OUTFALL: (i) Point where water flows from a conduit, stream, or drain; (ii) “Point Source” as described in 40 CFR
§ 122.2 at the point where the Borough of Sugarcreek’s storm sewer system discharges to surface Waters of the
Commonwealth.
OUTLET: Points of water disposal from a stream, river, lake, tidewater, or artificial drain.
PENNSYLVANIA DEP: The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
PARKING LOT STORAGE: The use of impervious parking areas as temporary impoundments with controlled
release rates during rainstorms.
PEAK DISCHARGE: The maximum rate of stormwater runoff from a specific storm event.
PERSON: An individual, partnership, public or private association or corporation, or a governmental unit, public
utility or any other legal entity whatsoever which is recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
PERVIOUS AREA: Any area not defined as impervious.
PIPE: A culvert, closed conduit, or similar structure (including appurtenances) that conveys stormwater.
PLANNING COMMISSION: The Planning Commission of the Borough of Sugarcreek.
POINT SOURCE: Any discernible, confined, or discrete conveyance, including, but not limited to, any pipe, ditch,
channel, tunnel, or conduit from which stormwater is or may be discharged, as defined in state regulations at 25
Pennsylvania Code § 92.1, as amended.
PROBABLE MAXIMUM FLOOD (PMF): The flood that may be expected from the most sever combination of
critical meteorological and hydrologic conditions that are statistically possible in any area. The PMF is derived
from the probable maximum precipitation (PMP) as determined on the basis of data obtained from the National
Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA).
PROJECT SITE: The specific area of land where any Regulated Activities in the Municipality are planned,
conducted or maintained.
PROTECTED WATERSHED: Watershed tributary to Exceptional Value Waters or High Quality Waters.
QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL: Any person licensed by any applicable agency of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, or otherwise qualified by law to perform the work required by this Ordinance.
RATIONAL FORMULA: A rainfall-runoff relation used to estimate peak flow.
REDEVELOPMENT: Earth disturbance activities on land, which has previously been developed.
REGULATED ACTIVITIES: Any earth disturbance activities or any activities that involve the alteration or
development of land in a manner that may affect stormwater runoff.
Stormwater Management Ordinance, Ordinance 268 of 2011 Page | 10
REGULATED EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY: Activity involving earth disturbance subject to regulation under 25
PA Code Chapter 92, Chapter 102, or the Clean Streams Law, as amended.
RELEASE RATE: The percentage of pre-developed peak rate of runoff from a site or subwatershed area to which
the post-development peak rate runoff must be reduced to protect downstream areas.
RELEASE RATE DISTRICT: Those subwatershed areas in which post-development flows must be reduced to a
certain percentage of pre-development flows as required to meet the plan requirements and the goals of Act
167.
RETENTION BASIN: An impoundment in which stormwater is stored and not released during the storm event.
Stored water may be released from the basin at some time after the end of the storm.
RETENTION VOLUME/REMOVED RUNOFF: The volume of runoff that is captured and not released directly int
the surface Waters of the Commonwealth during or after a storm event.
RETURN PERIOD: The average interval, in years, within which a storm event of a given magnitude can be
expected to recur. For example, the 25-year return period rainfall would be expected to recur on the average
once every 25 years; or stated in another way, the probability of a 25-year storm occurring in any one given year
is 0.04 (i.e. a 4% chance).
RIPARIAN BUFFER: A vegetated area bordering perennial and intermittent streams and wetlands, that serves as
protective filter to help protect streams and wetlands from the impacts of adjacent land uses.
RISER: A vertical pipe extending from the bottom of a pond that is used to control the discharge rate from the
pond for a specified design storm.
ROAD MAINTENANCE: Earth disturbance activities within the existing road right-of-way, such as grading and
repairing existing unpaved road surfaces, cutting road banks, cleaning or clearing drainage ditches, and other
similar activities. Road maintenance activities that do not disturb the subbase of a paved road (such as milling
and overlays) are not considered earth disturbance activities.
ROOFTOP DETENTION: Temporary ponding and gradual release of stormwater falling directly onto flat roof
surfaces by incorporating controlled-flow roof drains into building designs.
RUNOFF: Any part of precipitation that flows over the land surface.
RUNOFF CAPTURE VOLUME: The volume of runoff that is captured (retained) and not released into surface
Waters of the Commonwealth during or after a storm event.
SEDIMENT: Soils or other materials transported by surface water as a result of erosion.
SEDIMENT BASIN: A barrier, dam, retention or detention basin located and designed to retain rock, sand, gravel,
silt or other material by stormwater runoff during earthmoving activities.
SEDIMENT POLLUTION: The placement, discharge, or any other introduction of sediment into Waters of the
Commonwealth occurring from the failure to property design, construct, implement or maintain control
measures and control facilities in accordance with the requirements of this Ordinance.
SEDIMENTATION: The process by which mineral or organic matter is accumulated or deposited by the
movement of water.
SEEPAGE PIT/SEEPAGE TRENCH: An area of excavated earth filled with loose stone or similar coarse material,
into which surface water is directed for infiltration into the ground.
Stormwater Management Ordinance, Ordinance 268 of 2011 Page | 11
SEMI-PERVIOUS SURFACE: Surfaces that consist of a variety of types of pavement, pavers and other devices that
provide infiltration while serving as a structural surface.
SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM: A conveyance or system of conveyances including roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels or storm drains primarily
used for collecting and conveying stormwater runoff.
SHEET FLOW: Runoff that flows over the ground surface as a thin, even layer, not concentrated in a channel.
SOIL COVER COMPLEX METHOD: A method of runoff computation developed by the NRCS that is based on
relating soil type and land use/cover to a runoff parameter called Curve Number (CN).
SPILLWAY (EMERGENCY): A depression in the embankment of a dam, pond or basin, or other detention
structure, that is used to pass peak discharges greater than the maximum design storm controlled by the pond
or basin.
STATE WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS: The regulatory requirements to protect, maintain, reclaim, and
restore water quality under Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code and the Clean Streams Law.
STORAGE INDICATION METHOD: A reservoir routing procedure based on solution of the continuity equation
(inflow minus outflow equals the change in storage) with outflow defined as a function of storage volume and
depth.
STORM FREQUENCY: The number of times that a given storm “event” occurs or is exceeded on the average in a
stated period of years. See also Return Period.
STORM SEWER: A system of pipes and/or open channels that convey intercepted runoff and stormwater from
other sources, but excluded domestic sewage and industrial wastes.
STORMWATER: Drainage runoff from the surface of the land resulting from precipitation, snow or ice melt.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITIES: Any structure, natural or manmade, that, due to it condition, design
or construction, conveys, stores, or otherwise affects stormwater runoff. Typical stormwater management
facilities include, but are not limited to, detention and retention basins, open channels, storm sewers, pipes and
infiltration facilities.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN: The Venango County Stormwater Management Plan for managing
stormwater runoff in Venango County as required by the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864, (Act 167) and known
as the “Storm Water Management Act”.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SITE PLAN (SWM SITE PLAN): The plan prepared by the Applicant of his
representative indicating how stormwater runoff will be managed at the project site in accordance with this
Ordinance.
STREAM ENCLOSURE: A bridge, culvert, or other structure in excess of 100 feet in length upstream to
downstream which encloses Waters of the Commonwealth.
SUBWATERSHED AREA: The smallest drainage unit of a watershed for which stormwater management criteria
have been established in the Stormwater Management Plan.
SUBDIVISION: The division or re-division of a lot, tract, or parcel or land by any means, into two or more lots,
tracts, parcels or other divisions of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, transfer of ownership, or building or lot development; provided, however, that
the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more than ten acres, not involving any
Stormwater Management Ordinance, Ordinance 268 of 2011 Page | 12
new street or easement of access or any residential dwellings, shall be exempt (Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247).
SWALE: A low-lying stretch of land that gathers or carries surface water runoff.
TIMBER OPERATIONS: See “Forest Management”
TIME OF CONCENTRATION: The time for surface runoff to travel from the hydraulically most distant point of the
watershed to a point of interest within the watershed. This time is the combined total of overland flow time and
flow time in pipes or channels, if any.
USDA: The United States Department of Agriculture.
WATERCOURSE: A channel or conveyance of surface water, such as a stream or creek, having defined bed and
banks, whether natural or artificial, with perennial or intermittent flow.
WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH: Rivers, streams, creeks, rivulets, impoundments, ditches, watercourses,
storm sewers, lakes, dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs and other bodies or channels of conveyance of
the surface and underground water, or parts thereof, whether natural or artificial, within or on the boundaries
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
WATERSHED: Area drained by a river, watercourse or other surface water, whether natural or artificial.
WETLANDS: Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration
sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically
adapted for the life in saturated soil conditions, including swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas. (The term
includes but it not limited to wetland areas listed in the State Water Plan, the United States Forest Service
Wetlands inventory of Pennsylvania, the Pennsylvania Coastal Zone Management Plan and a wetland area
designated by a river basin commission. This definition is used by the United States Environmental Protection
Agency and the United States Corps of Engineers.)
Stormwater Management Ordinance, Ordinance 268 of 2011 Page | 13
ARTICLE III
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT STANDARDS
A. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
1. For all Regulated Activities, unless specifically exempted in Article III(B):
(a) Preparation and implementation of an approved SWM Site Plan is required.
(b) No Regulated Activities shall commence until the Borough of Sugarcreek issues written approval
of a SWM Site Plan, which demonstrates compliance with the requirements of this Ordinance.
(c) The SWM Site Plan shall demonstrate that adequate capacity will be provided to meet the
Volume and Rate Control Requirements, as described under Articles III(D) and III(E) of this
Ordinance.
(d) The SWM Site Plan approved by the Borough of Sugarcreek, shall be on-site throughout the
duration of the Regulated Activities.
2. For all Regulated Earth Disturbance Activities, erosion and sediment control BMPs shall be designed,
implemented, operated, and maintained during the Regulated Earth Disturbance Activities (e.g. during
construction) to meet the purposes and requirements of this Ordinance and to meet all requirements
under Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code (including, but not limited to Chapter 102 Erosion and Sediment
Control) and the Clean Streams Law. Various BMPs and their design standards are listed in the Erosion
and Sediment Pollution Control Program Manual (E&S Manual), No. 363-2134-008 (April 15, 2000), as
amended and updated.
3. For all Regulated Activities, stormwater BMPs shall be designed, installed, implemented, operated, and
maintained to meet the purposes and requirements of this Ordinance and to meet all requirements
under Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code and the Clean Streams Law, conform to the State Water Quality
Requirements, meet all requirements under the Storm Water Management Act and any more stringent
requirements as determined by the municipality.
4. The municipality may, after consultation with Pennsylvania DEP, approve measures for meeting the
State Water Quality Requirements other than those in this Ordinance, provided that they meet the
minimum requirements of, and do not conflict with state law, including, but not limited to, the Clean
Streams Law.
5. All Regulated Activities shall include, to the maximum extent practicable, measures to:
(a) Protect health, safety, and property.
(b) Meet the water quality goals of this Ordinance by implementing measures to:
1. Minimize disturbance to floodplains, wetlands, natural slopes, existing native vegetation
and woodlands.
2. Create, maintain, or extend riparian buffers and protect existing forested buffers.
3. Provide trees and woodlands adjacent to impervious areas whenever feasible.
4. Minimize the creation of impervious surfaces and the degradation of Waters of the
Commonwealth and promote groundwater recharge.
5. Protect natural systems and processes (drainageways, vegetation, soils, and sensitive
areas) and maintain, as much as possible, the natural hydrologic regime.
Stormwater Management Ordinance, Ordinance 268 of 2011 Page | 14
6. Incorporate natural site elements (wetlands, stream corridors, mature forests) as design
elements.
7. Avoid erosive flow conditions in natural flow pathways.
8. Minimize soil disturbance and soil compaction.
9. Minimize thermal impacts to Waters of the Commonwealth.
10. Disconnect impervious surfaces by directing runoff to pervious areas, wherever possible
and decentralize and manage stormwater at its source.
6. Impervious Areas:
(a) The measurement of impervious areas shall include all of the impervious areas in the total
proposed development, even if development is to take place in stages.
(b) For developments taking place in stages, the entire development plan must be used in
determining conformance with this Ordinance.
(c) For projects that add impervious area to a developed parcel, to the maximum extent practicable
and at the discretion of the Municipal Engineer, the total impervious area on the parcel may be
subject to the requirements of this Ordinance.
7. If diffused flow is proposed to be concentrated and discharged onto adjacent property, the Applicant
must document that adequate downstream conveyance facilities exist to safely transport the
concentrated discharge, or otherwise prove that no erosion, sedimentation, flooding or other harm will
result from the concentrated discharge.
(a) Applicant must provide an executed easement for proposed concentrated flow across adjacent
properties to a drainage way or public right-of-way.
(b) Such stormwater flows shall be subject to the requirements of this Ordinance.
8. Stormwater drainage systems shall be provided in order to permit unimpeded flow along natural
watercourses, except as modified by stormwater management facilities or open channels consistent
with this Ordinance.
9. Where watercourses traverse a development site, drainage easements (with a minimum total width of
20 feet) shall be provided conforming to the line of such watercourses. The terms of the easement shall
prohibit excavation, the placing fill or structures, and any alterations that may adversely affect the flow
of stormwater within any portion of the easement. Also, maintenance, including mowing of vegetation
within the easement may be required, except as approved by the appropriate governing authority.
10. When it can be shown that, due to topographic conditions, natural drainageways on the site cannot
adequately provide for drainage, open channels may be constructed conforming substantially to the line
and grade of such natural drainageways. Work within natural drainageways shall be subject to approval
by Pennsylvania DEP under regulations at 25 PA Code Chapter 105 through the Joint Permit Application
process, or, where deemed appropriate by Pennsylvania DEP, through the General Permit process.
11. Any stormwater management facilities or any facilities that constitute water obstructions (e.g., culvert,
bridges, outfalls, or stream enclosures, etc.) that are regulated by this Ordinance, that will be located in
or adjacent to Waters of the Commonwealth (including wetlands), shall be subject to approval by
Pennsylvania DEP under regulations at 25 PA Code Chapter 105 through the Joint Permit Applications
Stormwater Management Ordinance, Ordinance 268 of 2011 Page | 15
process, or where deemed appropriate by Pennsylvania DEP, the General Permit process. When there is
a question whether wetlands may be involved, it is the responsibility of the Applicant or his agent to
show that the land in question cannot be classified as wetlands; otherwise, approval to work in the area
must be obtained from Pennsylvania DEP.
12. Should any stormwater management facility require a dam safety permit under Pennsylvania DEP
Chapter 105, the facility shall be designed in accordance with Chapter 105 and meet the regulations of
Chapter 105 concerning dam safety.
13. Any stormwater management facilities regulated by this Ordinance that will be located on, or
discharged onto, State highway rights-of-ways shall be subject to approval by the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation (PENNDOT).
14. Minimization of impervious surfaces and infiltration of runoff through seepage beds, infiltration
trenches, etc., are encouraged, where soil conditions and geology permit, to reduce the size or eliminate
the need for detention facilities.
15. Infiltration BMPs should be dispersed throughout the site, made as shallow as practicable, and located
to maximize use of natural on-site infiltration features while still meeting the other requirements of this
Ordinance.
16. Roof drains shall not be connected to streets, sanitary or storm sewers, or roadside ditches in order to
promote overland flow and infiltration/percolation of stormwater where it is advantageous to do so.
When it is more advantageous to connect directly to streets or storm sewers, then the Borough of
Sugarcreek shall permit it on a case-by-case basis.
17. Applicants are encouraged to use Low Impact Development Practices to reduce the costs of complying
with the requirements of this Ordinance and the State Water Quality Requirements.
18. When stormwater management facilities are proposed within 1,000 feet of a downstream municipality,
the Developer shall notify the downstream municipality and provide a copy of the SWM Plan, upon
request, for review and comment.
B. EXEMPTIONS/MODIFICATIONS
1. Under no circumstance shall the Applicant be exempt from implementing such measures as necessary
to:
(a) Meet State Water Quality Standards and Requirements.
(b) Protect health, safety, and property.
(c) Meet special requirements for High Quality (HQ) and Exceptional Value (EV) watersheds.
2. The Applicant must utilize the following BMPs to the maximum extent practicable to receive
consideration for the exemptions:
(a) Design around and limit disturbance of floodplains, wetlands, natural slopes over 15%, existing
native vegetation, and other sensitive and special value features.
(b) Maintain riparian and forested buffers.
(c) Limit grading and maintain non-erosive flow conditions in natural flow paths.
Stormwater Management Ordinance, Ordinance 268 of 2011 Page | 16
(d) Maintain existing tree canopies near impervious areas.
(e) Minimize soil disturbance and reclaim disturbed areas with topsoil and vegetation.
(f) Direct runoff to pervious areas.
3. The Applicant’s proposed development/additional impervious area may not adversely impact the
following:
(a) Capacities of existing drainageways and storm sewer systems.
(b) Velocities and erosion.
(c) Quality of runoff if direct discharge is proposed.
(d) Existing known problem areas.
(e) Safe conveyance of the additional runoff.
(f) Downstream property owners.
4. An Applicant proposing Regulated Activities, after demonstrating compliance with Sections III(B)(1)
through (3), may be exempted from various requirements of this Ordinance according to the following
table:
New Impervious Area 1,2
(square footage)
Applicant Must Provide
0 – 1,000 ----
1,000 – 2,500 Documentation of Impervious Area 3
2,500 – 5,000 Volume Controls
>5,000 Rate Controls, Volume Controls & SWM Site Plan
NOTES:
1. New Impervious Area since the date of adoption of this Ordinance.
2. Gravel in existing condition shall be considered pervious and gravel in proposed condition shall be
considered impervious.
3. The Small Project Stormwater Management Application may be used to projects under 5,000 square feet of
proposed impervious surface. The Small Project SWM application allows documentation of new impervious
surface, credits through disconnection of impervious surfaces and tree planting, and sizing of Volume Control
BMPs that may be required.
5. Single family residential activities are exempt from these requirements provided the construction:
(a) Complies with Articles III(A)(7), III(B)(2), III(B)(3), and
(b) Having building setback 75 feet from downstream property lines, and
(c) Driveways:
1 Runoff must discharge onto pervious surface with a gravel strip or other spreading
device or provide other sheet flow to pervious areas.
2 No more than 1,000 square feet of pervious surface may discharge to any one point.
3 The length of flow on the pervious must exceed the length of paved surface flow.
Stormwater Management Ordinance, Ordinance 268 of 2011 Page | 17
(d) The first page of the Small Project Stormwater Management Application must be provided to
document the proposed impervious area.
(e) The municipality can require more information or require mitigation of certain impacts through
installation of stormwater management BMPs if there is a threat to property, health or safety.
6. An applicant proposing Regulated Activities, after demonstrating compliance with Articles III(B)(1)
through (3), may be exempted from various requirements of this Ordinance if documentation can be
provided that a downstream manmade water body (i.e., reservoir, lake or manmade wetlands) or SWM
BMP have been designed or modified to address the potential stormwater flooding impacts of the
proposed development.
7. The purpose of this section is to ensure consistency of stormwater management planning between local
ordinances and NPDES permitting (when required) and to ensure that the Applicant has a single and
clear set of stormwater management standards to which the Applicant is subject. The Borough of
Sugarcreek may accept alternative stormwater management controls under this section provided that:
(a) The alternative controls are documented to be acceptable to Pennsylvania DEP, for NPDES
requirements pertaining to post construction stormwater management requirements.
(b) The alternative controls are in compliance with all other section of this ordinance, including, but
not limited to, Articles III(A)(4) and III(B)(1) through (3).
8. Agricultural activities are exempt from requirements of this Ordinance provided the activities are
performed according to the requirements of 25 PA Code Chapter 102.
9. Forest management and timber operations are exempt from the Rate and Volume Control requirement
and SWM Site Plan preparation requirement of this Ordinance provided the activities are performed
according to the requirements of 25 PA Code Chapter 102.
C. VOLUME CONTROLS:
1. The Low Impact Development Practices provided in the BMP Manual shall be utilized for all Regulated
Activities to the maximum extent practicable.
2. Stormwater runoff Volume Controls shall be implemented using the Design Storm Method or the
Simplified Method as defined below. For Regulated Activities areas greater than one (1) acre, or which
require detailed design of stormwater management facilities, the Design Storm Method shall be
followed. For Regulated Activity areas equal or less than one (1) acres that do not require hydrologic
routing to design the stormwater facilities, this Ordinance established no preference for either method;
therefore, the Applicant may select either method on the basis of economic considerations, the intrinsic
limitations on applicability of the analytical procedures associated with each methodology, and other
factors.
(a) The Design Storm Method (CG-1 in the BMP Manual) is applicable to any sized Regulated
Activity. This method requires detailed modeling based on site conditions and shall be
completed by a Qualified Professional to include the following elements:
1. Do not increase the post-development total runoff volume when compared to the predevelopment
total runoff volume for the 2-year/24-hour storm event.
2. For hydrologic modeling purposes:
Stormwater Management Ordinance, Ordinance 268 of 2011 Page | 18
(i) Existing non-forested pervious areas must be considered meadow (good
condition) for pre-development hydrologic calculations.
(ii) Twenty (20) percent of existing impervious area, when present within the
proposed project site, shall be considered meadow (good condition) for predevelopment
hydrologic calculations for re-development.
(b) The Simplified Method (CG-2 in the BMP Manual) is independent of site conditions and should
be used if the Design Storm Method is not followed. This method is no applicable to Regulated
Activities greater than one (1) acre or for projects that require detailed design of stormwater
storage facilities. For proposed impervious surfaces:
1. Stormwater facilities shall capture at least the first two (2) inches of runoff from all new
impervious surfaces.
2. At least the first one (1) inch of runoff from proposed impervious surfaces shall be
permanently removed from the runoff flow, i.e. it shall not be released into surface
Waters of the Commonwealth. Removal options include reuse, evaporations,
transpiration, and infiltration.
3. Wherever possible, infiltration facilities should be designed to accommodate infiltration
of the entire permanently removed runoff; however, in all cases at least the first onehalf
(0.5) inch of the permanently removed runoff should be infiltrated.
4. Actual field infiltration tests at the location of the proposed elevation of the stormwater
BMPs are required. Infiltration test shall be conducted in accordance with the BMP
Manual. A minimum 48-hour notification to the Borough of Sugarcreek shall be provided
to allow witnessing of the testing.
(c) In cases where it is not possible or desirable to use the infiltration-based best management
practices to partially fulfill the requirements in either Article III(C)(2)(A) or Article III(C)(2)(B), the
following procedure shall be performed and documented by a Qualified Professional:
1. At a minimum, the following documentation shall be provided to justify the decision to
not use infiltration BMPs:
(i) Description of and justification for field infiltration/permeability testing with
respect to the type of test and test locations.
(ii) An interpretive narrative describing existing site soils and their structure as
these relate to the interaction between soils and water occurring on the site. In
addition to providing soil and soil profile descriptions, this narrative shall
identify depth to seasonal high water tables and depth to bedrock, and provide
a description of all subsurface elements (fragipans and other restrictive layers,
geology, etc.) that influence the direction and rater of subsurface water
movement.
(iii) A qualitative assessment of the site’s contribution to annual aquifer recharge
shall be made, along with identification of any restrictions or limitations
associated with the use of engineered infiltration facilities.
(iv) The provided documentation must be signed and sealed by the Qualified
Professional.
Stormwater Management Ordinance, Ordinance 268 of 2011 Page | 19
2. The following water quality pollutant load reductions will be required for all disturbed areas
within the proposed development:
Pollutant Load Units Required reduction (%)
Total Suspended Soils
(TSS)
Pounds 85
Total Phosphorous (TP) Pounds 85
Total Nitrate (NO3) Pounds 50
3. The performance criteria for water quality best management practices shall be determined
from the BMP Manual.
3. The applicable worksheets from the BMP Manual must be used in calculations to establish Volume
Control.
D. RATE CONTROLS:
1. For lands contained within Venango County that have not had release rates established under an
approved Act 167 Stormwater Management Plan:
(a) Post-development discharge rates shall not exceed the pre-development discharge rates for the
1-year, 2-year, 10-year, 25-year, 50-year, and 100-year storms.
2. For lands contained within Venango County that have had release rates established under an approved
Act 167 Stormwater Management Plan:
(a) The post-development peak discharge rates shall be in accordance with the approved release
rate map for the individual watershed.
Stormwater Management Ordinance, Ordinance 268 of 2011 Page | 20
ARTICLE IV
EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION STANDARDS
A. EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION REQUIREMENTS DURING EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITIES:
1. The applicant shall meet requirements as contained in 25 PA Code, Chapters 92 and 102 as required and
applicable as follows:
(a) The implementation and maintenance of erosion and sediment control BMPs.
(b) Development of written plans.
(c) Submission of plans for approval.
(d) Obtaining Erosion and Sediment Control and NPDES permits.
(e) Maintaining plans and permits on site.
2. Evidence of any necessary plan or permit approval for Earth Disturbance activities from Pennsylvania
DEP or the Venango Conservation District must be provided to the Borough of Sugarcreek.
3. A copy of the approved Erosion and Sediment Control Plan and any other permit, as required by
Pennsylvania DEP or the Venango Conservation District, shall be available at the project site at all times
if required under PA 25 Code, Chapter 102.
4. Construction of temporary roadways (e.g., for utility construction, timber harvesting, etc.) shall comply
with all applicable standards for erosion and sedimentation control and stream crossing regulations
under 25 PA Code, Chapters 102 and 105. The Erosion and Sediment Control Plan shall be designed,
implemented, and maintained, and shall address the following, as applicable:
(a) Design of the roadway system, including haul roads, skid roads, landing areas, trails, and storage
and staging areas.
(b) Runoff control structures (e.g., diversions, culverts, detention ponds, etc.).
(c) Stream crossings for both perennial and intermittent streams.
(d) Access to public roadways, including design of rock construction entrance for mud and debris
control.
(e) A remediation plan for restoring the disturbed area through re-grading, topsoil placement,
reseeding, and other stabilization techniques, as required.
5. Additional erosion and sedimentation control design standards and criteria that must be applied where
infiltration BMPs are proposed include the following:
(a) Areas proposed for infiltration BMPs shall be protected from sedimentation and compaction
during the constructions phase, as to maintain their maximum infiltration capacity.
(b) Infiltration BMPs shall be protected from receiving sediment-laden runoff.
(c) The source of protection for infiltration BMPs shall be identified (i.e., orange construction fence
surrounding the perimeter of the BMP).
Stormwater Management Ordinance, Ordinance 268 of 2011 Page | 21
ARTICLE V
PROTECTED WATERSHED STANDARDS
A. PROTECTED WATERSHED STANDARDS:
1. For any Regulated Activity other than one (1) single family residence within a protected watershed (High
Quality or Exceptional Value), the applicant shall meet requirements as contained in 25 PA Code,
Chapter 93 as required and applicable. It is noted that special protections watersheds are areas where
Pennsylvania DEP reviews PCSM plans for NPDES permitting.
2. Existing Resources and Site Analysis Plan. A written and graphic plan shall be prepared to provide the
developer and the Borough of Sugarcreek with a comprehensive analysis of existing conditions, both on
the proposed development site and within five hundred (500) feet of the site. Conditions beyond the
parcel boundaries may be described on the basis of existing published data available from governmental
agencies and from aerial photographs. The Borough of Sugarcreek shall review the plan to assess its
accuracy, conformance with borough ordinances, and likely impact upon the natural and cultural
resources on the property. The following information shall be required:
(a) Complete current perimeter boundary survey of the property to be subdivided or developed
prepared by a registered surveyor, showing all courses, distances and area and tie-ins to all
adjacent intersections.
(b) A vertical aerial photograph enlarged to a scale not less detailed than one (1) inch equals 400
feet, with the site boundaries clearly marked.
(c) Natural features, including:
(1) Contour lines at intervals of not more than two (2) feet. (Ten-foot intervals are
permissible beyond the parcel boundaries, interpolated for USGS published maps).
Contour lines shall be based on information derived from a topographic survey for the
property, evidence of which shall be submitted, including that date and source of the
contours. Data to which contour elevations shall be included on the plan.
(2) Steep slopes in the following ranges: 15% to 25%, 25% and greater. The location of
these slopes shall be graphically depicted by category on the plan. Slope shall be
measured over three or more two-foot contour intervals.
(3) Areas within the floodway, flood fringe, and approximated floodplain.
(4) Watercourses, either continuous or intermittent and named or unnamed, and lakes,
ponds or other water features as depicted on the USGS Quadrangle Maps, most current
edition.
(5) Wetlands and wetland margins.
(6) Riparian buffers.
(7) Soil types and their boundaries, as mapped by the USDA Natural Resource Conservation
Service, including a table listing the soil characteristics pertaining to suitability for
construction and, in unsewered areas, for septic suitability. Alluvial and hydric soils shall
specifically be depicted on the plan.
(8) Existing vegetation, denoted by type, including woodlands, hedgerows, tree masses,
tree lines, individual freestanding trees over six (6) inches diameter at breast height,
Stormwater Management Ordinance, Ordinance 268 of 2011 Page | 22
wetland vegetation, pasture or croplands, orchards, permanent grass land, old fields,
and any other notable vegetative features on the site. Vegetative types shall be
described by plant community, relative age, and condition.
(9) Any identified Pennsylvania Natural Diversity Inventory (PNDI) site conflicts.
(10) Geologic formations on the tract, including rock outcroppings, cliffs, sinkholes, and fault
lines based on available published information or more detailed data obtained by the
applicant.
(d) Existing man-made features, including:
(1) Location, dimensions, and use of existing buildings and driveways.
(2) Location, names, widths, center line courses, paving widths, identification numbers, and
rights-of-way, of existing streets and alleys.
(3) Location of trails that have been in public use (pedestrian, equestrian, bicycle, etc.)
(4) Location and size of existing sanitary sewage facilities.
(5) Location and size of drainage facilities.
(6) Location of water supply facilities, including wellhead protection areas.
(7) Any easement, deed restrictions, rights-of-way, or any other encumbrances upon the
land, including location, size and ownership.
(8) Site features or conditions such as hazardous waste, dumps, underground tanks, active
and abandoned wells, quarries, landfills, sand mounds, and artificial land conditions.
(e) Total acreage of the tract, the adjusted tract area, where applicable, and the constrained land
area with detailed supporting calculations.
3. Stormwater Management System Concept Plan. A written and graphic concept plan of the proposed
post-development stormwater management system shall be prepare and include:
(a) Preliminary selection and location of proposed structural stormwater controls;
(b) Location of existing and proposed conveyance systems such as grass channels, swales, and
storm drains;
(c) Location of floodplain/floodway limits;
(d) Relationship of site to upstream and downstream properties and drainages;
(e) Preliminary location of proposed stream channel modifications, such as bridge or culver
crossings.
4. Consultation Meeting. Prior to any stormwater management permit application submission, the
landowner or developer shall meet with the Borough of Sugarcreek for a consultation meeting on a
concept plan for the post-development stormwater management system to be utilized in the
preliminary plan or other early step in the development process. The purpose of this meeting is to
discuss the post-development stormwater management measures necessary for the proposed project,
as well as to discuss and assess constraints, opportunities and potential ideas for stormwater
management designs before the formal site design engineering is commenced.
Stormwater Management Ordinance, Ordinance 268 of 2011 Page | 23
5. All proposed Regulated Activities within a protected watershed shall utilize, to the maximum extent possible,
Low Impact Development Practices.
6. The SWM Plan and Report shall address the following:
(a) Design using nonstructural BMPs
(1) Lot configuration and clustering.
(i) Reduced individual lot impacts by concentrated/clustered uses and lots
(ii) Lots/development configured to avoid critical natural areas
(iii) Lots/development configured to take advantage of effective mitigative
stormwater practices
(iv) Lots/development configured to fit natural topography
(2) Minimum disturbance
(i) Define disturbance zones (excavation/grading) for the site and individual lots to
protect maximum total site area from disturbance
(ii) Barriers/flagging proposed to protect designated non-disturbance areas
(iii) Considered mitigative practices for minimal disturbance areas (e.g., Soil
Restoration)
(iv) Considered re-forestation and re-vegetation opportunities
(3) Reduce Impervious coverage
(i) Reduced road width
(ii) Reduced driveway lengths and widths
(iii) Reduced parking ratios and sizes
(iv) Utilized porous surfaces for applicable features
(4) Stormwater disconnected from impervious area
(i) Disconnected drives/walkways/small impervious areas to natural areas
(ii) Use rain barrels and/or cisterns for lot irrigation
(5) Apply structural BMP selection process that meets runoff quantity and quality needs.
(i) Manage close to source with collection with conveyance minimized
(ii) Consistent with site factors (e.g., soils, slope, available space, amount of
sensitive areas, pollutant removal needs)
(iii) Minimize footprint and integrate into already disturbed areas/other buildings
program components (e.g., recharge beneath parking areas, vegetated roofs)
(iv) Consider other benefits such as aesthetic, habitat, recreational and educations
benefits
(v) BMP selected based on maintenance needs that fit owner/users
(6) BMP sustainable using a long-term maintenance plan.
Stormwater Management Ordinance, Ordinance 268 of 2011 Page | 24
ARTICLE VI
RIPARIAN BUFFER STANDARDS
A. RIPARIAN BUFFER REQUIREMENTS:
Riparian buffers are required for Regulated Activity and shall be established as follows:
1. The buffer shall be measured perpendicularly from the top of the stream bank landward:
(a) High Quality or Exceptional Value Watersheds – a minimum of 150 feet;
(b) Impaired Watersheds – a minimum of 150 feet;
(c) All other watersheds – a minimum of 50 feet; or
(d) As determined by a stream corridor study approved by Pennsylvania DEP and the
Borough of Sugarcreek.
2. The riparian buffer shall be located on both sides of all perennial and intermittent streams. The
perennial and intermittent streams and the riparian buffer boundaries shall be shown on all applications
for building permits, subdivision, or land development. Existing uses within the buffer are permitted to
continue, but not be expanded. Placement of new buildings or roadways within the riparian buffer shall
be prohibited, unless specifically permitted by Pennsylvania DEP. Where a wetland exists within the
buffer area, the buffer shall be extended landward to provide a minimum buffer of 25-foot, as measured
perpendicularly from the wetland boundary.
3. The buffer shall be undisturbed forest consisting of appropriate native species.
4. Where wetlands are located partially or entirely within a buffer, the buffer shall be extended to
encompass the wetland and shall be widened by a distance sufficient to provide a 25-foot forested
buffer measured perpendicularly from the wetland boundary.
5. The following uses shall be permitted in the buffer:
(a) Footpaths, trails and bike patch provided that:
(1) Width is limited to five (5) feet;
(2) Width may be increased provided a corresponding increase in the buffer is provided;
(3) Construction shall have minimal impact to the buffer.
(b) Stream crossings, provided the crossing is designed and constructed in such a manner as
to minimize the impact to the buffer. The riparian buffer shall be restored to its original
condition, to the maximum extent practical, upon completion of construction.
(c) Utility lines, provided that the crossing is designed and constructed in such a manner as
to minimize the impact to the inner buffer and provided that there is no practical
alternative to locating the utility line within the buffer. The riparian buffer shall be
restored to its original condition, to the maximum extent practical, upon completion of
construction.
(d) Maintenance and restoration of the riparian buffer.
Stormwater Management Ordinance, Ordinance 268 of 2011 Page | 25
(e) Projects conducted with the objective of improvement, stabilization, restoration, or
enhancement of the stream bank, stream channel, floodplain, watershed, hydrology,
riparian buffers, or aquatic habitat and maintenance activities associated with such
projects. These projects include, but are not limited to, agricultural and stormwater
management BMPs. Such projects must receive appropriate permits and approvals from
Pennsylvania DEP prior to starting the project.
(f) Minor private recreational uses for the property owner. Such uses include benches, fire
rings and similar uses. Such uses do not include structures such as cabins, sheds,
pavilions, garages, dwellings or similar structures.
6. Disturbance of the riparian buffer shall be limited to the area necessary to perform an allowable use.
7. Where possible and practical, disturbances shall be phased with each phase restored prior to beginning
the next phase.
8. Allowable activities shall not cause stormwater flow to concentrate.
9. Any vegetation removed for an allowable activity shall be replaced immediately upon completion of the
activity. Where mature trees are removed, such trees shall be replaced with the largest practical tree of
acceptable native species.
10. Erosion and sediment pollution control shall be installed and maintained during construction. Evidence
of an approved Erosion and Sediment Control Plan and/or NPDES Permit, if required, shall be submitted
prior to issuance of local permits.
11. If a permit from Pennsylvania DEP is required for the activity, evidence of an approved permit shall be
submitted prior to issuance of local permits.
12. Riparian buffers shall be maintained in a manner consistent with sound forest management practices. In
the absence of a site management plan, the following maintenance guidelines apply:
(a) Buffers shall in inspected periodically for evidence of excessive sediment deposition, erosion or
concentrated flow channels. Prompt action shall be taken to correct these problems and
prevent future occurrence.
(b) Trees presenting an unusual hazard of creating downstream obstructions shall be removed.
Such material shall be removed from the floodplain or the riparian buffer (whichever is widest),
or cut into sections small enough so as to prevent the possibility of creating obstructions
downstream. Wherever possible, large stable debris should be conserved.
(c) Vegetation should be inspected periodically to ensure diverse vegetative cover and vigorous
plant growth consistent with buffering objectives.
(1) Invasive plant species that may threaten the integrity of the buffer shall be removed.
(2) Periodic cutting of trees may be necessary to promote vigorous growth and encourage
regeneration.
(d) Excessive use of fertilizers, pesticides, herbicides, and other chemicals shall be avoided. These
products should be used only when absolutely necessary to maintain buffer vegetation.
Stormwater Management Ordinance, Ordinance 268 of 2011 Page | 26
B. RIPARIAN BUFFER EASEMENT:
For all riparian buffers, an easement shall be provided:
1. Easements shall be in accordance with Article IX(A) and recorded in accordance with Section XIII(C) of
this Ordinance.
ARTICLE VII
DESIGN CRITERIA
A. DESIGN CRITERIA FOR STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITIES; CALCULATION METHODOLOGY:
General design guidelines for all stormwater management, drainage, stormwater carrying and swale conveyance
facilities, as well as the calculation methodology for such facilities, shall comply with the BMP Manual most
current edition, and the Venango County Stormwater Management Plan.
Stormwater Management Ordinance, Ordinance 268 of 2011 Page | 27
ARTICLE VIII
SWM SITE PLAN AND REPORT REQUIREMENTS
A. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
For any activities regulated by this Ordinance and not eligible for exemptions provided in Article III, the final
approval of subdivision and/or land development plans, the issuance of any building or occupancy permit, or the
commencement of any land disturbance activity, may not proceed until the Applicant has received written
approval of a SWM Site Plan for the Borough of Sugarcreek.
B. SWM SITE PLAN AND REPORT CONTENTS:
The SWM Site Plan and SWM Site Report shall consist of all applicable calculations, maps, and plans. All SWM
Site Plan materials shall be submitted to the Borough of Sugarcreek in a format that is clear, concise, legible,
neat and well organized; otherwise, the SWM Site Plan shall be rejected. Appropriate sections from the Borough
of Sugarcreek Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, and other applicable local ordinances, shall be
followed in preparing the SWM Site Plan.
1. SWM Site Plan shall include, but not be limited to:
(a) Plans shall be one (1) size and in a size that meets the requirements for recording in the Office
of the Recorder of Deeds of Venango County.
(1) Plans for tracts of less than 20 acres shall be drawn at a scale of one (1) inch equals no
more than 50 feet;
(2) Plans for tracts of 20 acres or more shall be drawn at a scale of one (1) inch equals no
more than 100 feet; and
(3) All lettering shall be drawn to a size to be legible if the plans are reduced to half size.
(b) The name of the development; name and location address of the property site; name, and
telephone number of the Applicant and Owner of the property; and name, address, telephone
number, email address, and seal and signature of the individual preparing the SWM Site Plan.
(c) The date of submission and dates of all revisions.
(d) A graphical and written scale on all drawings and maps.
(e) A north arrow on all drawings and maps.
(f) A location map at a minimum scale of one (1) inch equals 1,000 feet and illustrates the project
relative to highways, municipalities or other identifiable landmarks.
(g) Metes and bounds description of the entire tract perimeter.
(h) Existing and final contours at intervals:
(1) Slopes less than 5%: no greater than one (1) foot;
(2) Slopes between 5 and 15%: no greater than two (2) feet;
(3) Steep slopes (greater than 15%), 5-foot contour intervals may be used.
(i) Perimeters of existing waterbodies within the project area including stream banks, lakes, ponds,
springs, field delineated wetlands or other bodies of water, sinkholes, flood hazard boundaries
Stormwater Management Ordinance, Ordinance 268 of 2011 Page | 28
(FEMA delineated floodplains and floodways), areas of natural vegetation to be preserved, the
total extent of the upstream area draining through the site, and overland drainage paths. Any
areas necessary to determine downstream impacts, where required for proposed stormwater
management facilities, must be shown.
(j) The location of all existing and proposed utilities, on-lot wastewater facilities, water supply
wells, sanitary sewers, and water lines on and within fifty (50) feet of property line including
inlets, manholes, valves, meters, poles, chambers, junction boxes, and other utility system
components.
(k) A key map showing all existing manmade features beyond the property boundary that may be
affected by the project.
(l) Soil names and boundaries with identification of the Hydraulic Soil Group classification including
rock outcroppings.
(m) Proposed impervious surfaces (structures, roads, paved areas, and buildings), including plans
and profiles of roads and paves areas and floor evaluations of buildings.
(n) Existing and proposed land use(s).
(o) Horizontal alignment, vertical profiles, and cross sections of all open channels, pipes, swales and
other BMPs.
(p) The location and clear identification of the nature of permanent stormwater BMPs.
(q) The location of all erosion and sedimentation control facilities, shown on a separate E&S Plan.
(r) A minimum twenty (20) foot wide access easement around all stormwater management
facilities that would provide ingress to and egress from a public right-of-way. In lieu of providing
an easement to the public right-of-way, a note may be added to the plan granting the Borough
of Sugarcreek or their designees access to all easements via the nearest public right-of-way.
(s) Construction details for all drainage and stormwater BMPs.
(t) Identification of short-term and long-term ownership, operations and maintenance
responsibilities.
(u) Notes and Statements:
(1) A statement, signed by the landowner, acknowledging that the stormwater BMPs are
fixtures that cannot be altered or removed without prior approval by the Borough of
Sugarcreek.
(2) A statement referencing the Operation of Maintenance (O&M) Agreement and stating
that the O&M Agreement is part of the SWM Site Plan.
(3) A not indicating that Record Drawings will be provided for all stormwater facilities prior
to occupancy, or the release of the surety bond.
(4) The following signature block for the Qualified Professional preparing the Stormwater
Management Plan:
Stormwater Management Ordinance, Ordinance 268 of 2011 Page | 29
“I, ____________________________, hereby certify that the Stormwater Management
Plan meets all design standards and criteria of the Stormwater Management Ordinance
of the Borough of Sugarcreek.”
(5) The following signature block for the Municipal Engineer reviewing the Stormwater
Management Plan:
“I, ____________________________, have reviewed this Stormwater Management Plan
in accordance with the Design Standards and Criteria of the Stormwater Management
Ordinance of the Borough of Sugarcreek.”
2. SWM Site Report shall include (but not be limited to):
(a) General data including:
(1) Project name;
(2) Project location – address of the property site;
(3) Name, address, and telephone number of the Applicant and Owner of the property;
(4) Name, address, telephone number, email address, and seal and signature of the
individual preparing the SWM Site Report;
(5) Date of submission and revisions.
(b) Project description narrative that clearly discusses the project and provides the following
information:
(1) Narrative
- Statement of the regulated activity describing what is being proposed. Overall
stormwater management concept with description of permanent stormwater
management techniques, including construction specifications and materials to be used
for stormwater management facilities
- Expected project schedule
- Location map showing the project site and its location relative to release rate districts
- Detailed description of the existing site conditions including a site evaluation
completed for projects proposed in areas of carbonate geology or karst topography, and
other environmentally sensitive areas such as brownfields
- Total size area – pre and post, which must be equal or have an explanation as to why it
is not
- Total site impervious area
- Total off-site areas
- Number and description of stormwater management facilities
- Type of development
- Pre-development land use
Stormwater Management Ordinance, Ordinance 268 of 2011 Page | 30
- Whether site is a water quality sensitive (WQS) development
- Whether site is in a defined sensitive area
- Types of water quality and recharge systems used, if applicable
- Complete hydrologic, hydraulic, and structural computations for all stormwater
management facilities
- A written maintenance plan for all stormwater features including detention facilities
and other stormwater management elements.
- Identification of ownership and maintenance responsibility for all permanent
stormwater management facilities
- Other pertinent information, as required
(2) Summary Tables
- Pre-development Hydrologic Soil Group (HGS) assumptions, curve numbers (CN),
Computation of average slope, hydraulic length, computed time of concentration
- Existing conditions runoff volume and peak rate of runoff
- Post-development runoff volume and peak rate of runoff
- Undetained areas, areas to ponds
- Land use for each subarea
- Hydrologic soil group (HSG) assumptions, curve numbers (CN)
- Time of concentration computed for each subarea
- Post-development peak of runoff routed into and out of ponds
- Pond maximum return period design data including: maximum water surface
elevation, berm elevation, and emergency spillway elevation
- Water quality depth and volume requirements
(3) Calculations
- Complete hydrologic, hydraulic and structural computations, calculations,
assumptions, and criteria for the design of all stormwater BMPs.
-Details of the berm embankment and outlet structure indicating the embankment top
elevation, embankment side slopes, top width of embankment, emergency spillway
elevation, perforated riser dimensions, pipe barrel dimensions and dimensions and
spacing of antiseep collars.
- Design computations for the control structures (pipe barrel and riser, etc)
- A plot or table of the stage-storage (volumes vs elevation) and all supporting
computations.
- Routing computations.
Stormwater Management Ordinance, Ordinance 268 of 2011 Page | 31
(4) Drawings
- Drainage area maps for all watersheds and inlets depicting the time of concentration
path for both existing conditions and post-developed condition.
- All stormwater management facilities must be located on a plan and described in detail
including easements and buffer boundaries.
(c) Reports that do not clearly indicate the above information may be rejected for review by the
Municipal Engineer and will be returned to the Applicant.
(d) Description of, justification, and actual field results for infiltration testing with respect to the
type of test and test location for the design of infiltration BMPs.
(e) The effect of the project (in terms of runoff volumes, water quality, and peak flows) on
surrounding properties and aquatic features and on any existing municipal stormwater
collection system that may receive runoff from the project site.
(f) Description of the proposed changes to the land surface and vegetative cover including the type
and amount of impervious area to be added.
(g) Identification of short-term and long-term ownership, operation, and maintenance
responsibilities as well as schedules and costs for inspection and maintenance activities for each
permanent stormwater or drainage BMP, including provisions for permanent access or
maintenance easements.
3. Supplemental information to be provided prior to recording of the SWM Site Plan, as applicable:
(a) Signed and executed Operations and Maintenance Agreement.
(b) Signed and executed easements, as required for all on-site and off-site work.
(c) An Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan and approval letter from the Venango Conservation
District.
(d) A NPDES Permit.
(e) Permits from Pennsylvania DEP and U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.
(f) Geologic assessment.
(g) Geotechnical or soils investigation report, including boring logs, compaction requirements, and
recommendations for construction of detention basins.
(h) A Highway Occupancy Permit for PENNDOT when utilization of a PENNDOT storm drainage
system is proposed or when proposed facilities would encroach onto a PENNDOT right-of-way.
C. SWM SITE PLAN AND REPORT SUBMISSION:
1. The Applicant shall submit the SWM Site Plan and Report for the Regulated Activity.
2. Five (5) copies of the SWM Site Plan and Report shall be submitted and be distributed as follows:
(a) Two (2) copies to the Borough of Sugarcreek accompanied by the requisite executed Review Fee
Reimbursement Agreement, as specified in this Ordinance.
Stormwater Management Ordinance, Ordinance 268 of 2011 Page | 32
(b) One (1) copy to the Municipal Engineer
(c) One (1) copy to the Venango County Planning Commission
(d) One (1) copy to the Venango County Conservation District
3. Additional copies shall be submitted as requested by the Borough of Sugarcreek of Pennsylvania DEP.
D. SWM SITE PLAN AND REPORT REVIEW:
1. The Borough of Sugarcreek shall require receipt of a complete SWM Site Plan and Report as specified in
this Ordinance. The Borough of Sugarcreek shall review the SWM Site Plan and Report for consistency
with the purposes, requirements, and intent of this Ordinance.
2. The Borough of Sugarcreek shall not approve any SWM Site Plan and Report that is deficient in meeting
the requirements of this Ordinance. At is sole discretion and in accordance with this Article, when a
SWM Site Plan and Report is found to be deficient, the Borough of Sugarcreek may disapprove the
submission and require a resubmission.
3. The Borough of Sugarcreek shall notify the Applicant in writing within forty-five (45) calendar days
whether the SWM Site Plan and Report is approved or disapproved if the SWM Site Plan and Report is
not part of a Subdivision or Land Development Plan. If the SWM Site Plan and Report involves a
Subdivision or Land Development Plan, the timing shall following the subdivision and land development
process according to the Municipalities Planning Code and the Borough of Sugarcreek Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance.
4. The Borough of Sugarcreek shall not issue a building permit for any Regulated Activity if the SWM Site
Plan and Report has been found the be inconsistent with this Ordinance, as determined by the Borough
of Sugarcreek. All required permits from Pennsylvania DEP must be obtained prior to issuance of a
building permit.
E. MODIFICATION OF PLANS:
A modification to a submitted SWM Site Plan and Report for a development site that involves a change in
stormwater management facilities or techniques, or that involves the relocation or re-design of stormwater
management facilities, or that is necessary because soil or other conditions are not as stated on the SWM Site
Plan as determined by the Borough of Sugarcreek, shall require a resubmission of the modified SWM Site Plan in
accordance with this Ordinance.
F. RESUBMISSION OF DISAPPROVED SWM SITE PLAN AND REPORT:
A disapproved SWM Site Plan and Report may be resubmitted with the revisions addressing the Borough of
Sugarcreek’s concerns documented in writing, to the Borough of Sugarcreek in accordance with this Ordinance.
The applicable fee must accompany a resubmission of a disapproved SWM Site Plan and Report.
G. AUTHORIZATION TO CONSTRUCT AND TERM OF VALIDITY:
Stormwater Management Ordinance, Ordinance 268 of 2011 Page | 33
The Borough of Sugarcreek’s approval of a SWM Site Plan and Report authorizes the Regulated Activities
contained in the SWM Site Plan for a maximum term validity of five (5) years following the date of approval. The
Borough of Sugarcreek may specify a term of validity shorter than five (5) years in the approval for any specific
SWM Site Plan. Terms of validity shall commence on the date the Borough of Sugarcreek signs the approval for a
SWM Site Plan. If stormwater management facilities included in the approved SWM Site Plan have not been
constructed, or if a Record Drawing of these facilities has not been approved, within this time, then the Borough
of Sugarcreek may consider the SWM Site Plan disapproved and may revoke any and all permits or approvals.
H. RECORD DRAWINGS, COMPLETION CERTIFICATE AND FINAL INSPECTION:
1. The Applicant shall be responsible for providing Record Drawings of all stormwater BMPs included in the
approved SWM Site Plan. The Record Drawing and an explanation of any discrepancies with the
approved SWM Site Plan shall be submitted to the Borough of Sugarcreek as a prerequisite for the
release of the guarantee or issuance of an occupancy permit.
2. The Record Drawing shall include a certification of completion signed by a Qualified Professional
verifying that all permanent stormwater BMPs have been constructed according to the approved SMW
Site Plan and Report.
(a) Drawings shall show all approved revisions and elevations and inverts to all manholes, inlets,
pipe, and stormwater control facilities.
3. After receipt of the Record Drawing, the Borough of Sugarcreek may conduct a final inspection prior to
certification of completion by the Borough of Sugarcreek.
Stormwater Management Ordinance, Ordinance 268 of 2011 Page | 34
ARTICLE IX
EASEMENTS
A. EASEMENTS:
1. Easements shall be established to accommodate drainageways.
2. Where a tract is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way, channel or stream, there shall be provided
an easement paralleling the line of such watercourse, drainage way, channel or stream with a width
adequate to preserve the unimpeded flow of natural drainage in the 100-year floodplain.
3. Easements shall be established for all on-site stormwater management or drainage facilities, including,
but not limited to, detention facilities (above or below ground), infiltration facilities, all stormwater
BMPs, drainage swales, and drainage facilities (inlets, manholes, pipes, etc.).
4. Easements are required for all areas used for off-site stormwater control.
5. All easements shall be a minimum of 20 feet wide and shall encompass the 100-year surface elevation of
the proposed stormwater facility.
6. Easements shall provide ingress and egress to a public right-of-way. In lieu of providing an easement to
the public right-of-way, a note may be added to the plan granting the Borough of Sugarcreek or its
designees access to all easements via the nearest public right-of-way able for vehicle ingress and egress
on grades of less than 10% for carrying out inspection or maintenance activities.
7. Where possible, easements shall be centered on side and/or rear lot lines.
8. Nothing shall be planted or placed within the easement which would adversely affect the function of the
easement, or conflict with any conditions associated with such easement.
9. All easement agreements shall be recorded and references on the site plan. The format and content of
the easement agreement shall be reviewed and approved by the Municipal Engineer and Solicitor.
Stormwater Management Ordinance, Ordinance 268 of 2011 Page | 35
ARTICLE X
MAINTENANCE RESPONSIBILITIES
A. FINANCIAL GUARANTEE:
1. The Applicant shall provide a Financial Guarantee to the Borough of Sugarcreek for the timely
installation and proper construction of all stormwater management controls as required by the
approved SWM Site Plan and this Ordinance, equal to 110% of the full construction cost of the required
controls in accordance with the Municipalities Planning Code.
2. At the completion of the project and as a prerequisite for the release of the Financial Guarantee, the
Applicant shall:
(a) Provide a certification of completion from an engineer, architect, surveyor or other Qualified
Professional, verifying that all permanent facilities have been constructed according to the SWM
Site Plan and Report and approved revisions thereto/
(b) Provide a set of Record Drawings.
(c) Request a final inspection from the Borough of Sugarcreek to certify compliance with this
Ordinance, after receipt of the certification of completion and Record Drawings by the Borough
of Sugarcreek.
B. MAINTENANCE RESPONSIBILITIES:
1. The SWM Site Plan and Report for the project site shall describe the future operation and maintenance
responsibilities. The description shall outline required routine maintenance actions and schedules
necessary to ensure proper operation of the stormwater control facilities.
2. The SWM Site Plan and Report for the project site shall establish responsibilities for the continuing
operating and maintenance of all proposed stormwater control facilities, consistent with the following
principals:
(a) If a development consists of structures or lots that are to be separately owned and in which
streets, sewers, and other public improvements are to be dedicated to the Borough of
Sugarcreek, stormwater control facilities/BMPs may also be dedicated to and maintained by the
Borough of Sugarcreek.
(b) If a development site is to be maintained in a single ownership or if sewers and other public
improvements are to be privately owned and maintained, then the ownership and maintenance
of stormwater control facilities/BMPs shall be the responsibility of the owner or private
management entity.
(c) Facilities, areas, or structures used as stormwater BMPs shall be enumerated as permanent real
estate appurtenances and recorded as deed restrictions or easements that run with the land.
(d) The SWM Site Plan and Report shall be recorded as a restrictive deed covenant that runs with
the land.
(e) The Borough of Sugarcreek may take enforcement actions against an Applicant for failure to
satisfy any provision of this Ordinance.
Stormwater Management Ordinance, Ordinance 268 of 2011 Page | 36
3. The Borough of Sugarcreek, upon recommendation of the Municipal Engineer, shall make the final
determination of the continuing maintenance responsibilities prior to final approval of the SWM Site
Plan and Report. The Borough of Sugarcreek may require a dedication of such facilities as part of the
requirements for approval of the SWM Site Plan. Such a requirement is not an indication that the
Borough of Sugarcreek will accept the facilities. The Borough of Sugarcreek reserves the right to accept
or reject the ownership and operating responsibilities for any portion of the stormwater management
controls.
4. If the Borough of Sugarcreek accepts ownership of stormwater BMPs, the Borough of Sugarcreek may,
at its discretion, require a fee from the Applicant to the Borough of Sugarcreek to offset the future cost
of inspections, operations, and maintenance.
5. It shall be unlawful to alter or remove any permanent stormwater BMP required by an approved SWM
Site Plan, or to allow the property to remain in a condition, which does not conform to an approved
SWM Site Plan, unless the Borough of Sugarcreek grants an exception in writing.
C. MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT FOR PRIVATELY OWNED STORMWATER FACILITIES:
1. Prior to final approval of the SWM Site Plan and Report, the Applicant shall sign the Operation and
Maintenance (O&M) Agreement covering all stormwater control facilities that are to be privately
owned. The Operation and Maintenance (O&M) Agreement shall be recorded with the SWM Site Plan
and made a part thereof.
(a) Municipalities are exempt from the requirement to sign and record an Operation and
Maintenance (O&M) Agreement.
2. Other items may be included in the Operation and Maintenance (O&M) Agreement where determined
necessary to guarantee the satisfactory operation and maintenance of all BMP facilities. The Operation
and Maintenance (O&M) Agreement shall be subject to the review and approval of the Municipal
Engineer and the Solicitor.
3. The owner is responsible for operation and maintenance of the stormwater BMPs. If the owner fails to
adhere to the Operation and Maintenance (O&M) Agreement, the Borough of Sugarcreek may perform
the services required and charge the owner appropriate fees. Non-payment of fees may result in a lien
against the property.
Stormwater Management Ordinance, Ordinance 268 of 2011 Page | 37
ARTICLE XI
INSPECTIONS
A. SCHEDULE OF INSPECTIONS:
1. Pennsylvania DEP or its designees inspect for compliances with NPDES permits on sites where
applicable. In addition to Pennsylvania DEP compliance programs, the Borough of Sugarcreek or its
designee may inspect all phases of the installation of temporary or permanent stormwater management
facilities.
2. During any state of Earth Disturbance Activities, if the Borough of Sugarcreek determines that the
stormwater management facilities are not being installed in accordance with the approved SWM Site
Plan, the Borough of Sugarcreek shall revoke any existing permits or approvals until a revised SWM Site
Plan is submitted and approved as specified in this Ordinance.
3. Stormwater BMPs shall be inspected by the landowner, or the landowner’s designee, according to the
inspection schedule described on the SWM Site Plan for each BMP.
(a) The Borough of Sugarcreek may require copies of the inspection reports, in a form as stipulated
by the Borough of Sugarcreek.
(b) If inspections are not conducted or inspection reports are not submitted as scheduled, the
Borough of Sugarcreek or its designee may conduct such inspections and charge the owner
appropriate fees. Non-payment of fees may result in a lien against the property.
(1) Prior to conducting inspections, the Borough of Sugarcreek shall inform the owner of its
intent to conduct an inspection. The owner shall be given thirty (30) days to make the
required inspections and submit inspection reports to the Borough of Sugarcreek.
B. RIGHT-OF-ENTRY:
1. Duly authorized representatives of the Borough of Sugarcreek may enter at reasonable times, upon any
property within the Borough of Sugarcreek, to inspect the implementation, condition, or operations and
maintenance of the stormwater BMPs in regard to any aspect governed by this Ordinance.
2. Stormwater BMP owners and operators shall allow persons working on behalf of the Borough of
Sugarcreek ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of determining compliance with
this Ordinance.
3. Persons working on behalf of the Borough of Sugarcreek shall have the right to temporarily locate on
any stormwater BMP in the Borough of Sugarcreek such devices, as are necessary, to conduct
monitoring and/or sampling of the discharges from such stormwater BMP.
4. Unreasonable delay in allowing the Borough of Sugarcreek access to a stormwater BMP is a violation of
this Ordinance.
Stormwater Management Ordinance, Ordinance 268 of 2011 Page | 38
ARTICLE XII
PROHIBITIONS
A. PROHIBITED DISCHARGES AND CONNECTIONS:
1. Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or underground, that allows any non-stormwater
discharge, including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water, to enter the Borough of Sugarcreek’s
separate storm sewer system or Waters of the Commonwealth is prohibited.
2. Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the Borough of
Sugarcreek’s separate storm sewer system, which has not been documented in plans, maps, or
equivalent records, and approved by the Borough of Sugarcreek is prohibited.
3. No person shall allow, or cause to allow, discharges into the Borough of Sugarcreek’s separate storm
sewer system or into surface Waters of the Commonwealth, which are not compose entirely of
stormwater, except those in Article XII(A)(4) below, and discharge allowed under a state or federal
permit.
4. The following discharges are authorized unless they are determined to be significant contributors to
pollution to the Waters of the Commonwealth:
(a) Potable water sources including dechlorinated water line and fire hydrant flushings
(b) Irrigation drainage
(c) Air conditioning condensate
(d) Springs
(e) Water from crawl space pumps
(f) Pavement wash waters where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous materials have not occurred
(unless all spill material has been removed) and where detergents are not used
(g) Discharges from firefighting activities
(h) Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands
(i) Uncontaminated water from foundations or from footing drains
(j) Lawn watering
(k) Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges
(l) Uncontaminated groundwater
(m) Water from individual residential car washing
(n) Routine external building washdown (which does not use detergents or other compounds)
5. In the event that the Borough of Sugarcreek or Pennsylvania DEP determines that any of the discharges
identified in Article XII(A)(4) is a significant contributor to pollution to the Waters of the Commonwealth,
the responsible person(s) shall be notified to cease the discharge. Upon notice provided by the Borough
of Sugarcreek or Pennsylvania DEP, the discharger will have a reasonable time, as determined by the
Borough of Sugarcreek or Pennsylvania DEP, to cease the discharge, consistent with the degree of
pollution caused by the discharge.
Stormwater Management Ordinance, Ordinance 268 of 2011 Page | 39
6. Nothing in this Section shall affect a discharger’s responsibilities under the laws of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania.
B. ROOF DRAINS:
Roof drains and sump pumps shall discharge to infiltration areas, vegetative BMPs, or pervious areas to the
maximum extent practicable.
C. ALTERATION OF BMPS:
1. No person shall modify, remove, fill, landscape, or alter any existing stormwater BMP, facilities, areas, or
structures unless it is part of an approved maintenance program, without the written approval of the
Borough of Sugarcreek.
2. No person shall place any structure, fill, landscaping, or vegetation into a stormwater BMP, facilities,
areas, structures, or within a drainage easement which would limit or alter the functioning of the BMP without
the written approval of the Borough of Sugarcreek.
Stormwater Management Ordinance, Ordinance 268 of 2011 Page | 40
ARTICLE XIII
FEES AND EXPENSES
A. GENERAL:
1. The fee required by this Ordinance is the Municipal Review Fee. The Municipal Review Fee shall be
established by the Borough Council on a case-by-case basis to defray review costs incurred by the
Borough of Sugarcreek. The Applicant shall pay all fees.
B. EXPENSES COVERED BY FEES:
1. The fees required by this Ordinance shall, at a minimum, cover:
(a) Administrative and clerical costs.
(b) Review of the SWM Site Plan and Report by the Borough of Sugarcreek.
(c) Pre-construction meetings.
(d) Inspection of stormwater management facilities/BMPs and drainage improvements during
construction.
(e) Final inspection upon completion of the stormwater management facilities/BMPs and drainage
improvements presented in the SWM Site Plan.
(f) Any additional work required to enforce any permit provisions regulated by this Ordinance,
correct violations, and assure proper completion of stipulated remedial actions.
C. RECORDING OF APPROVED SWM SITE PLAN AND RELATED AGREEMENTS:
1. The owner of any land upon which permanent BMPs will be placed, constructed, or implemented, as
described in the SWM Site Plan, shall record the following documents in the Office of the Recorder of
Deeds of Venango County, within ten (10) days of approval of the SWM Site Plan by the Borough of
Sugarcreek:
(a) The SWM Site Plan
(b) Operations and Maintenance (O&M) Agreement.
(c) Easements under Section IX.
(d) Riparian buffers under Section VI.
2. The Borough of Sugarcreek may suspend or revoke any approvals granted for the project site upon
discovery of the failure of the owner to comply with this Section.
Stormwater Management Ordinance, Ordinance 268 of 2011 Page | 41
ARTICLE XIV
ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
A. NOTIFICATION:
1. In the event that a person fails to comply with the requirements of this Ordinance, an approved SWM
Site Plan, or fails to conform to the requirements of any permit or approval issued hereunder, the
Borough of Sugarcreek shall provide written notification of the violation. Such notification shall set forth
the nature of the violation(s) and establish a time limit for correction of these violation(s).
2. Failure to comply within the time specified shall subject such person to the penalties provisions of this
Ordinance. All such penalties shall be deemed cumulative and shall not prevent the Borough of
Sugarcreek from pursuing any and all other remedies. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the
real property on which any Regulated Activity is proposed to occur, is occurring, or has occurred, to
comply with the terms and conditions of this Ordinance.
B. ENFORCEMENT:
1. The Zoning Officer or his designee is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all of the provisions of
this Ordinance. The approved SWM Site Plan shall be on file at the project site throughout the duration
of the construction activity. The Borough of Sugarcreek or its designee may make periodic inspections
during construction.
2. Adherence to approved SWM Site Plan
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to undertake any Regulated Activity on any property except
as provided for by an approved SWM Site Plan and pursuant to the requirements of this
Ordinance.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to alter or remove any control structure required by the SWM
Site Plan pursuant to this Ordinance.
(c) It shall be unlawful for any person to allow a property to remain in a condition that does not
conform to an approved SWM Site Plan.
C. PUBLIC NUISANCE:
1. A violation of any provision of this Ordinance is hereby deemed a public nuisance.
2. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
D. SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION:
1. Any approval or permit issued by the Borough of Sugarcreek may be suspended or revoked for:
(a) Non-compliance with or failure to implement any provision of the approved SWM Site Plan or
Operation & Maintenance (O&M) Agreement.
(b) A violation of any provision of this Ordinance or any other applicable law, ordinance, rule or
regulation relating to the Regulated Activity.
Stormwater Management Ordinance, Ordinance 268 of 2011 Page | 42
(c) The creation of any condition or the commission of any act, during the Regulated Activity which
constitutes or creates a hazard or nuisance, pollution, or which endangers the life or property of
others.
2. A suspended approval or permit may be reinstated by the Borough of Sugarcreek when:
(a) The Borough of Sugarcreek or their designee has inspected and approved the corrections to the
violation(s) that caused the suspension.
(b) The Borough of Sugarcreek is satisfied that the violation(s) has been corrected.
3. An approval that has been revoked by the Borough of Sugarcreek cannot be reinstated. The Applicant
may apply for a new approval under the provisions of this Ordinance.
E. PENALITIES:
1. Any person who violates the provisions of this Ordinance shall be guilty of a summary offense and upon
conviction, shall be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000.00 for each violation, recoverable with
costs. Each day that the violation continues shall be a separate offense and penalties shall be
cumulative.
2. In addition, the Borough of Sugarcreek, through the Borough Solicitor, may institute injunctive,
mandamus, or any other appropriate action or proceeding at law or in equity for the enforcement of this
Ordinance. Any court of competent jurisdiction shall have the right to issue restraining orders,
temporary or permanent injunctions, mandamus, or other appropriate forms of remedy or relief.
F. APPEALS:
1. Any person aggrieved by any action of the Borough of Sugarcreek or its designee relevant to the
provisions of this Ordinance, may appeal to the Council of the Borough of Sugarcreek within thirty (30)
days of that action.
2. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Council of the Borough of Sugarcreek, relevant to the
provisions of this Ordinance, may appeal to the Venango County Court of Common Please within thirty
(30) days of the Borough of Sugarcreek’s decision.
SECTION TWO: All other ordinances or parts of ordinances conflicting with any of the provisions of this
Ordinance are hereby repealed insofar as the same affect this Ordinance.
SECTION THREE: This Ordinance shall become effective April 10, 2011.
ENACTED AND ORDAINED into law by the Council of the Borough of Sugarcreek, Venango County, Pennsylvania,
in lawful session assembled this 6th day of April, 2011.
Stormwater Management Ordinance, Ordinance 268 of 2011 Page | 43








































Ordinance No. 289 of 2018 – Regulating Outside Burning
1
AN ORDINANCE OF THE BOROUGH OF SUGARCREEK REGULATING OUTSIDE BURNING WITHIN
THE BOROUGH; TYPES OF MATERIAL TO BE BURNED; AND CONDITIONS UNDER WHICH
BURNING MAY BE PERMITTED.
WHEREAS, the purpose of this ordinance is to promote the general health, safety, and welfare of
the citizens of the Borough of Sugarcreek, Venango County, Pennsylvania, while allowing the freedom to
burn pursuant to the regulations set forth in this Ordinance.
WHEREAS, the Council of the Borough of Sugarcreek, Venango County, Pennsylvania, desires to
amend Ordinance No. 247 of 2006 in order to expand the times when burning is allowed in certain
months as set forth in Section 7 of this Ordinance.
BE IT ORDAINED AND ENACTED, by the Council of the Borough of Sugarcreek, Venango County,
Pennsylvania, and it is hereby ordained and enacted by the authority of the same:
Section One – Definitions
(a) Burning – As used within this Ordinance, “burning” shall have the following meaning:
“The igniting of any material to cause flame, smoke, embers, hot ash or residue, in
combination or individually.”
(b) Burnable Materials. Burnable materials shall include the following:
(1) Paper, which includes newsprints, wrapping paper, paper products or sheet
paper items. Paper used to absorb oil or other noxious or toxic materials, plastic
coated paper, paper attached to other non-burnable materials, or any other
paper product that is wet shall not be included as burnable paper products, and
are hereby prohibited from burning.
(2) Cardboard and chipboard, which includes cardboard and chipboard boxes,
sheets, packing materials, etc. Excluded and not permitted to be burned are
materials used to absorb all oil or other noxious or toxic materials, and
cardboard or chipboard in combination with any other non-burnable materials.
(3) Wood, which includes any unpainted wood or wood product, wood pellets and
flammable wood logs or fire logs. Excluded and not permitted to be burned is
any wood that has been chemically treated to prevent rot or moisture damage,
or other similar treatment, wood products that have high glue content, such as
flakeboard or composition board, and wood products in combination with any
non-burnable materials.
(4) Grasses, brush, twigs or leaves.
(5) Agriculture materials such as bailer twine.
(c) Non-Burnable Materials. The following is a partial list of those materials that are
classified as non-burnable under the guidelines of this Ordinance.
(1) Plastic;
(2) Rubber and rubber products;
(3) Leather and leather products;
(4) Furniture;
(5) Oil and petroleum products;
(6) Oil filters;
Ordinance No. 289 of 2018 – Regulating Outside Burning
2
(7) Paint and paint cans;
(8) Mineral products;
(9) Pressurized containers;
(10) Asbestos;
(11) Composition boards;
(12) Insulation of all types;
(13) Shingles and felt paper;
(14) Canvas;
(15) Fiberglass;
(16) Vinyl;
(17) Styrofoam materials;
(18) Houses and other dwelling units;
(19) Human or animal waste;
(20) Vegetable waste and food solids;
(21) Residential and commercial waste, garbage or trash;
(22) Sanitary napkins and diapers;
(23) Animal remains;
(24) Any combination of the above with any other materials; and
(25) Any other materials individually or in combination, that emit heavy or dark
smoke, or acrid, obnoxious or toxic odors.
The above is a partial list of those items and materials prohibited under the guidelines of
this Ordinance. Any other materials that do not comply fully with the intent of this
Ordinance, or otherwise create a nuisance to people or animals, or create malodorous
air contaminants such as toxic chemicals, carcinogens or dioxins are strictly prohibited.
(d) Person, individual, a corporation, partnership or any other group acting as a unit, or an
executor, administrator, trustee, receiver, or other representative appointed according
to law. Whenever the word “person” is used in any section of this code prescribing a
penalty or fine, as to partnerships or associations, the word shall include the partners or
members thereof, and as to corporations, shall include the officers, agents, members,
affiliates, representatives or contracted persons thereof who are responsible for any
violations.
Section Two – No person shall cause to be burned any of the above non-burnable materials, or
any like or similar materials not in compliance, or inconsistent with, this Ordinance.
Section Three – No person shall start a fire with flammable liquid or accelerant, with the
exception of charcoal lighter fluid used to light a charcoal fire for the purpose of food preparation.
Section Four – No person shall allow a fire to smolder.
Section Five – Burning, in compliance with this Ordinance, shall be attended at all times by an
individual fourteen (14) years or older until such time as the flame has subsided completely, and
adequate means shall be available to extinguish a fire.
Section Six – No burning shall occur within ten (10) feet of any building or structure, wood or
lumber pile (except a temporary wood or lumber pile for use in a fire pit or ring), combustible material,
Ordinance No. 289 of 2018 – Regulating Outside Burning
3
wood fence or trees or shrubs. No burn barrel or container shall be used or stored within twenty (20)
feet of any property line or public sidewalk area. No burn barrel or container shall be used for any other
purpose. Fire pits or rings for recreational fire purposes are exempted from these regulations.
Section Seven – Burning within the Villages of Reno, Rocky Grove and Sugarcreek shall only
occur on Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., prevailing
time, except during the months of April, May, September and October, when no such restrictions shall
exist. Any pile of burnable materials shall not exceed four (4) feet wide and three (3) feet high. Fire pits
or rings for recreational fire purposes are exempted from these regulations.
Section Eight – No burning shall occur when natural or environmental circumstances exist that
make it unreasonable to burn.
Section Nine – No burning is allowed on the pavement of any public street or public right-ofway.
Section Ten – The provisions of the Ordinance shall not apply to:
(a) Portable outdoor grills, fired by propane or charcoal, and designated for food
preparation;
(b) Outdoor wood stoves designated for the heating of a structure; and
(c) The burning of buildings, structures or other materials for firefighter training
purposes; provided however, that notice is provided to the Borough of
Sugarcreek Police Department and proper applications are completed and
submitted to all local and state agencies.
Section Eleven – Burning shall cease immediately upon the order of the Borough of Sugarcreek
Zoning Officer, the Borough of Sugarcreek Police Department, the Chief of the Rocky Grove Volunteer
Fire Dept, or the Chief of the Reno Volunteer Fire Department. In the event a burning ban is issued by
any federal, state, county or local law enforcement authority, including without limitation, the
Commissioners of Venango County, Pennsylvania, or the Council of the Borough of Sugarcreek, it shall
be a violation of this Ordinance for a person to burn any and all materials.
Section Twelve – The Borough of Sugarcreek Zoning Officer and the Borough of Sugarcreek
Police Department are hereby granted the authority and responsibility to ensure enforcement and
compliance with this Ordinance, and are hereby charged with the responsibility of issuing warnings or
citations, as merited, for all violation of the Ordinance.
Section Thirteen – Any person who shall violate a provision of this Ordinance, or fail to comply
herewith, or with any of the requirements hereof, and any person aiding, abetting or assisting in any
such violation, shall be guilty of a summary offense, punishable by a fine of not less than $100.00, or by
imprisonment not less than twenty-four (24) hours or more than thirty (30) days, or both such fine and
imprisonment, together with the costs of prosecution for each offense, including reasonable attorney
fees incurred by the Borough of Sugarcreek. Each day that a violation continues after service of verbal or
written notice of said violation, or after service of a summons, or after receipt of actual notice of
violation otherwise proved, whichever first occurs, shall be deemed a separate offense. All fines and
penalties received by the Borough of Sugarcreek of this code shall be paid to the Treasurer of the
Ordinance No. 289 of 2018 – Regulating Outside Burning
4
Borough of Sugarcreek and deposited into the general unappropriated funds of the Borough of
Sugarcreek.
Section Fourteen – In the event any provision, section, sentence, clause, or part of this
Ordinance shall be held to be invalid, illegal or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction,
such invalidity, illegality or unconstitutional shall not affect or impair the remaining provisions, section,
sentences, clauses, or parts of this Ordinance, it being the intent of the Council of the Borough of
Sugarcreek that the remainder of this Ordinance shall be and shall remain in full force and effect.
Section Fifteen – All ordinances or parts of ordinances conflicting with any of the provisions of
this Ordinance are hereby repealed insofar as the same affect this Ordinance.
Section Sixteen – This Ordinance shall become effective immediately.
APPROVED this 4th day of April, 2018.




APPENDIX A: STREET NAMING AND ADDRESSING POLICY
Table of Contents
SECTION ONE – INTRODUCTION AND PURPOSE.............................................................. 3
A. PURPOSE......................................................................................................... 3
B. GOALS............................................................................................................. 3
C. OBJECTIVES...................................................................................................... 3
D. LEGAL AUTHORITY............................................................................................. 3
SECTION TWO – STREET NAMING POLICY..................................................................... 4
A. STREET REQUIRING NAMES................................................................................ 4
B. STREET NAME SELECTION.................................................................................. 4
C. PREFIXES......................................................................................................... 5
D. SUFFIXES......................................................................................................... 5
E. DUPLICATION OF STREET NAMES........................................................................ 5
F. MULTI-MUNICIPAL ROADS....................................................................................5
G. MUNICIPAL ANNEXATION OF STREETS................................................................. 6
H. NAMING NEW ROADS........................................................................................ 6
I. RESERVING NEW STREET NAMES FOR NEW DEVELOPMENT.................................. 6
J. LENGTH OF NAME............................................................................................ 6
K. RENAMING EXISTING STREETS............................................................................ 6
1. Eliminating Conflicting Street Names.................................................................... 6
2. Notification of Conflict..................................................................................... 7
3. Evaluating Conflicting Street Names.................................................................... 7
4. Alternate Street Name..................................................................................... 8
5. Alternate Street Name Review........................................................................... 8
6. Ordinance and Signs...................................................................................... 8
7. Mediation...................................................................................................... 8
8. Notification of Name Change............................................................................ 8
L. STREET NAME CHANGE...................................................................................... 8
M. EFFECTIVE DATE OF CHANGE............................................................................ 8
N. ADJACENT COUNTY COORDINATION..................................................................... 9
O. TOWNSHIP ROUTE NUMBERS.............................................................................. 9
P. PRIVATE LANES................................................................................................. 9
SECTION THREE – STREET NAME SIGNS....................................................................... 9
A. INTRODUCTION.................................................................................................. 9
B. DESCRIPTION OF SIGNS..................................................................................... 9
1. Sign Color.................................................................................................... 9
2. Sign Height.................................................................................................. 9
3. Sign Placement.............................................................................................. 9
4. Sign Posts................................................................................................... 9
5. Sign Letters.................................................................................................. 10
6. Sign Size..................................................................................................... 10
7. In Lieu of Signs............................................................................................ 10
C. RESPONSIBILITY OF SIGNS................................................................................. 10
1. Existing Public Roads...................................................................................... 10
2. Existing Private Roads.................................................................................... 10
3. New Public and Private Roads......................................................................... 10
SECTION FOUR – ADDRESSING POLICY......................................................................... 10
A. ADDRESSING AGENCY........................................................................................ 10
1 Of 17
APPENDIX A: STREET NAMING AND ADDRESSING POLICY
B. ADDRESSING METHODOLOGY...............................................................................10
1. The Frontal Interval......................................................................................... 11
2. Odd/Even Number Location............................................................................. 11
3. Beginning Point.............................................................................................. 11
4. Fractional, Alphanumeric, Hyphenated Addresses................................................... 11
5. Diagonal Streets............................................................................................. 11
6. Circular Streets.............................................................................................. 11
7. Cul-de-sac.................................................................................................. 11
8. Corner Lots.................................................................................................. 12
9. Crossing County Lines.................................................................................... 12
10. Stacked Addresses........................................................................................ 12
11. Apartments and Duplexes................................................................................ 12
12. Businesses.................................................................................................. 12
13. Interfacing With Existing Systems...................................................................... 12
14. Mobile Home Parks....................................................................................... 12
15. Highways.................................................................................................... 12
16. Structures.................................................................................................... 13
17. Preplanning Subdivisions................................................................................. 13
C. EXEMPT BUILDINGS AND USES........................................................................... 13
D. CHANGING ADDRESS NUMBERS........................................................................... 13
E. ADDRESSING NEW CONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT......................................... 13
1. Building Permit Requirements............................................................................. 13
2. Subdivision Requirements................................................................................. 14
F. RESPONSIBILITY FOR DISPLAY OF ADDRESS NUMBERS.......................................... 14
G. SIZE AND LOCATION OF STREET ADDRESS NUMBERS........................................... 14
1. Residences, Townhouses and “In-Town” Businesses.............................................. 14
2. Private Lane and Long Driveway....................................................................... 14
3. Industrial and Commercial Structures in Low Density Area...................................... 14
4. Apartment Buildings and High-rises.................................................................... 15
H. NOTICE TO COMPLY.......................................................................................... 15
SECTION FIVE – ENFORCEMENT.................................................................................... 15
SECTION SIX – EXECUTIVE SUMMARY OF RESPONSIBILITIES............................................ 15
A. BOROUGH OFFICIALS..........................................................................................15
B. VENANGO COUNTY GOVERNMENT........................................................................ 16
C. UNITED STATES POSTAL SERVICE....................................................................... 16
D. PROPERTY OWNERS AND RESIDENTS.................................................................. 17
E. DEVELOPERS..................................................................................................... 17
SECTION SEVEN – SOURCE GUIDES.............................................................................. 17
2 Of 17
APPENDIX A: STREET NAMING AND ADDRESSING POLICY
SECTION ONE – INTRODUCTION AND PURPOSE
A. PURPOSE
The purpose of this Borough Street Naming and Addressing Policy is to establish standards for naming
roadways, posting street signs and assigning numbers to all dwelling, principal buildings, businesses and
industries; and to assist emergency service agencies, the United States Postal Service and the public in
the timely and efficient provision of services and businesses of the Borough of Sugarcreek.
B. GOALS
The primary goal of this policy is to provide service agencies with a complete set of addresses so that
emergency victims can be located with greatest efficiency.
Secondary goals include:
1. to improve the quality of life for residents of the Borough of Sugarcreek through easier delivery of
mail and services.
2. to project a positive and progressive image to residents, prospective residents and developers, and
3. to promote the local tourist industry by making it easier for visitors to locate the attractions of
Venango County.
C. OBJECTIVES
Project objectives include:
1. conversion of rural route numbers to street addresses
2. ongoing assigning of addresses to new development
3. installation of road signs
4. maintenance of countywide street name and address database
D. LEGAL AUTHORITY
Legal Authority to name street and address buildings is granted to boroughs in Section 1202 paragraph
25 of the Borough Code.
Based on this authority, the Borough of Sugarcreek shall have the right and responsibility to assign names
to all roadways and addresses to all addressable buildings, as set forth herein.
The Pennsylvania County Code, Article XIX (9), Section 1997, as amended, grants counties the
responsibility for the health and safety of County residents. It is the opinion of the Venango County Board
of County Commissioners that a complete and systematic house numbering system will promote the general
welfare of County residents.
3 Of 17
APPENDIX A: STREET NAMING AND ADDRESSING POLICY
SECTION TWO – STREET NAMING POLICY
A. STREET REQUIRING NAMES
A roadway shall be named if it meets at least one of the following conditions:
1. If two or more dwelling units or business related buildings exist or are proposed to be contructed
along the roadway or are served by the roadway.
2. If the roadway is maintained by a municipality or Commonwealth.
B. STREET NAME SELECTION
The following standards will be used:
1. A street name should be appropriate, easy to read (so that children can use the name in an
emergency situation), and should add to community pride by promoting local heritage, history and
traditions and reflect local geography and character.
2. Names with the same theme (i.e., flowers, states) are suggested for naming streets in an entire
subdivision, as a means of general identification.
3. Historically used road names should be retained where possible.
4. Names tending to be confused as homonyms, having the same or similar pronunciation but with
different spellings, are discouraged within a municipality, zip code, or emergency service zone area
(e.g., Smith, Smyth; Ellis or Alice or Alan).
5. Names which may be offensive (slang, double meanings, etc.) shall be avoided.
6. Use of frivolous or complicated words, or unconventional spellings in road names is discouraged.
7. If the road is continuous, the name should not change at an intersection or a curve or some
other point.
8. Avoid sound-alike names (e.g. Bay View Dr., Bayview Dr. or Brainard Ln, Barnard Ln).
9. Do not use special characters in road names such as hyphens, apostrophes or dashes.
10. Avoid the use of standard suffixes or directional suffixes or directional suffixes or prefixes as
road/street names (e.g. North Blvd., Court St., Avenue of Pines).
11. Avoid family names or individuals names, especially living persons and politicians.
4 Of 17
APPENDIX A: STREET NAMING AND ADDRESSING POLICY
C. PREFIXES
Directional prefixes will be used only when necessary, such as for distinguishing regions of a continuous
road traversing several municipalities. A street may have no more than one directional prefix as follows:
North, East, South, West. (North East Baker Street, for example, is discouraged.)
D. SUFFIXES
The following suffixes are suggested for naming a type of roadway. Other suffixes not listed below may
be considered at the discretion of the County providing they meet valid street suffix abbreviations, as
defined by the United States Postal Service (USPS) official suffix guidelines (USPS, Postal Addressing
Standards, August 1995, Publication 28)
Alley (ALY) – A narrow lane between or behind a row of buildings
Avenue (AVE) – A roadway or thoroughfare in a densely populated area
Boulevard (BLVD) – A street with a median reflecting the boulevard character
Circle (CIR) – A cul de sac or looped street that begins and circles back to terminate on the same
road.
Court (CT) – A permanently closed street, not exceeding 1,000 ft, such as a cul-de-sac
Drive (DR) – A curvilinear street
Highway (HWY) – A primary state or federal route, suitable for heavy traffic volume
Lane (LN) – A minor dead-end street or private lane
Parkway (PKWY) – A road with a median reflecting the parkway character
Pike (PIKE) – A primary state or federal route, suitable for heavy traffic volume
Road (RD) – A common roadway, usually in less densely populated areas
Street (ST) – A common roadway, usually in more densely populated areas
Way (WAY) – A minor roadway
E. DUPLICATION OF STREET NAMES
When naming new streets, duplication of names must be avoided within a municipality, postal code and
emergency service zone area. Venango County Government will keep an updated list of the street names
in the County to help prevent reuse of existing names.
If two or more streets in the same municipality, zip code or emergency service zone area have duplicate
or otherwise confusing names, the policy for Renaming Existing Streets must be considered. See SECTION
TWO. K.
A street name combination (prefix, primary name and suffix) should be used only once, and may not be
used in any other alignment, within a municipality, zip code, or emergency service zone area (e.g. Jones
Drive and Jone Circle; or West Jones Street and Jones Street West).
F. MULTI-MUNICIPAL ROADS
When the municipality annexes and existing roadway and there is a street name conflict, the municipality
will change the name of the annexed roadway to conform with the guidelines outlined herein. See
SECTION TWO. L.
5 Of 17
APPENDIX A: STREET NAMING AND ADDRESSING POLICY
G. MUNICIPAL ANNEXATION OF STREETS
When the Borough Annexes an existing roadway and there is a street name conflict, the municipality will
change the name of the annexed roadway to conform with the guidelines outlined herein. See SECTION
TWO. L.
H. NAMING NEW ROADS
New streets shall be named during the subdivision process. In case the requirements of a municipal
subdivision ordinance contradict this policy, the more restrictive requirements will apply.
I. RESERVING NEW STREET NAMES FOR NEW DEVELOPMENT
At the time of filing an application for subdivision, the developers or property owners shall submit to
Venango County Government a written request to reserve new street names so that the names can be
reviewed and approved to avoid possible duplication. Failure to do so will result in disapproval of the final
map by the affected municipality.
Street name(s) become final upon recording of the final subdivision plan.
Street name(s) may be reserved for three years. If final recording of the preliminary subdivision plan
does not occur within three years, a written request for a two-year extension of the street name
reservation may be submitted to Venango County Government. If such is not received, the name(s) will
no longer be reserved.
Venango County Government will review all subdivisions for conformance with this street naming policy at
the time of preliminary plan review.
J. LENGTH OF NAME
The following is the recommended character format for road/street names.
Prefix Directional 2 characters
Street Name 28 characters
Street Suffix 4 characters
Post Directiona l 2 characters
K. RENAMING EXISTING STREETS
If an existing street needs to be renamed because of a duplicate name, or because of non-compliance
with any other portion of this street naming policy, then the following procedures will be followed:
1. Eliminating Conflicting Street Names
In the case of two or more conflicting street names, Venango County Government shall use the
following point system to recommend which street name should be changed. The street awarded
fewer points should be changed.
6 Of 17
APPENDIX A: STREET NAMING AND ADDRESSING POLICY
POINT SYSTEM FOR RESOLVING STREET NAME CONFLICTS
Condition Points
Older recognized name (if known) 1
Great number of addresses 1
Arterial street 1
Historical relevance 1
Existing street signs 1
Relatedness of town/subdivision names 1
2. Notification of Conflict
Venango County Government shall notify the municipality(ies) of a street name conflict. County
Government will also provide an evaluation based on the point system listed above. Based on this
evaluation, the County will recommend which street name should be changed. In the even of a
tie, the municipality(ies) shall determine the street name to be used.
3. Evaluating Conflicting Street Names
a. Minor Street s – having 10 or less property owner s
1. Upon receiving the notification of conflict, the officials of the affected
municipality(ies) shall determine which street is to be renamed.
2. The name changing municipality shall inform the property owners along the affected
street of the need to change the street name and that the property owners may
request an alternate name(s).
3. Property owners have 30 days following the date of notification to provide street
name requests to the municipality.
4. The municipality shall select an alternate name for the street, and a second choice,
at the monthly meeting following this thirty (30) day period, giving preference to
those names requested by the property owners, which meet standards established
herein.
b. Major Street s – having 11 or more property owner s
1. Upon receiving the notification of conflict, the officials of the affected
municipality(ies) shall determine which street is to be renamed.
2. The name changing municipality shall announce the need to change a street name
at a monthly meeting within thirty (30) days of receiving the notification of
conflict, and that the property owners may request an alternate name(s).
3. Property owners shall then have thirty (30) days following the date of
announcement to provide street name requests to the municipality.
7 Of 17
APPENDIX A: STREET NAMING AND ADDRESSING POLICY
4. The municipality shall select an alternate name for the street, and a second choice,
at the next monthly meeting, sixty (60) days from receiving the notification of
conflict, giving preference to names requested by affected property owners, which
meet standards established herein.
4. Alternate Street Name
The municipality shall report the selected alternate street name and a second choice name to
Venango County Government.
5. Alternate Street Name Review
Venango County Government shall review the name for compliance with the street name policy,
and for duplication, and report acceptability to the municipality within thirty (30) days of receipt of
the request for name change. Second choice street names will be assigned if the first choice is
not usable.
6. Ordinance and Signs
The Municipality shall pass an ordinance adopting the new street name and the appropriate
signing, in accordance with the policies established herein. See SECTION THREE. The posting
shall take place within sixty (60) days or ordinance passage.
7. Mediation
If the municipality does not request a street name change within above listed timetables, the
decision is referred to Venango County Government.
Venango County Government shall arrange a meeting with affected property owners before the
office makes its decision and forwards its recommendation to the municipality involved.
8. Notification of Name Change
Venango County Government will notify the United States Postal Service (USPS), Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation (PADOT), and emergency services of street name changes. The
municipality shall notify the affected property owners.
L. STREET NAME CHANGE
If the Borough desires to have an existing street or private road renamed the Borough shall submit the
proposed name change to Venango County Government. The County shall review the proposed name for
compliance with this street naming policy. Once the change is accepted by the County, the Borough shall
be notified. The Borough shall notify the affected property owners and the County shall notify USPS,
PADOT, and emergency services.
M. EFFECTIVE DATE OF CHANGE
Any street name change shall become effective following expiration of a thirty (30) day period
commencing from the date said change was authorized by the Borough of Sugarcreek, or earlier at the
discretion of the Borough.
8 Of 17
APPENDIX A: STREET NAMING AND ADDRESSING POLICY
N. ADJACENT COUNTY COORDINATION
Any street name change shall become effective following expiration of a thirty (30) day period
commencing from the date said change was authorized by the municipality, or earlier at the discretion of
the municipality.
O. TOWNSHIP ROUTE NUMBERS
A road with one township route number may have more than one road name if there are logical breaks
in the road at which it is logical for the name to change.
P. PRIVATE LANES
Private lanes shall be named when there is more than one addressable building located on the road. See
SECTION TWO. A., THREE. C. 3., FOUR. G. 2.
SECTION THREE – STREET NAME SIGNS
A. INTRODUCTION
All public and private roads in Venango County shall be identified by a sign and shall display the proper
street name.
B. DESCRIPTION OF SIGNS
Street name signs shall be installed at all intersections; and shall comply in design, installation and
maintenance, with requirements set forth in PA TITLE 67, PADOT REGULATIONS and PA TITLE 75, of
PA VEHICLE CODE as outlined below.
1. Sign Color
The street name should be reflective or illuminated and should have a white legend on a blue or
green background or blue legend on a gold background.
2. Sign Height
Signs should be not less than seven feet above the top of the curb in business and suburban
areas and not less than five feet above the ground in rural areas. The height from the ground to
the bottom of a secondary sign mounted below another sign may be one foot less than noted
herein.
3. Sign Placement
Signs should be placed with their faces parallel to the streets they name, as close to the
intersection corner as practicable with the nearest part of each sign not less than one foot, and
preferably two feet, back from both curb lines.
4. Sign Posts
Sign posts of signs erected inside a curb are not regulated. Signs that are not posted behind a
curb shall be of breakaway construction. Sign post material is not regulated.
9 Of 17
APPENDIX A: STREET NAMING AND ADDRESSING POLICY
5. Sign Letters
The street name shall appear in capital lettering at least four inches high. Supplementary lettering
to indicate the type of street such as ST, AVE, RD or directional information, such as N, S,
NW, may be in smaller lettering, at least two inches high.
6. Sign Size
The overall dimensions of the sign shall not exceed 36-inches in length and 8 inches in width.
7. In Lieu of Signs
The street name may also be placed in a vertical position on concrete or wood posts.
C. RESPONSIBILITY FOR STREET SIGNS
1. Existing Public Roads
The Borough is responsible for fabricating and installing street name signs at the intersections of
all existing public roads, within its boundaries, in compliance with PA TITLE 67, PADOT
REGULATIONS and PA TITLE 5, of PA VEHICLE CODE as outlined above.
2. Existing Private Roads
The Borough is responsible for fabricating and installing street signs at the intersections of all
private and public streets in compliance with PA TITLE 67, PADOT REGULATIONS and PA TITLE
75, of PA VEHICLE CODE as outlined above.
3. New Public and Private Roads
The subdivision developer shall be responsible for fabricating and erecting street name signs at the
intersections of all new public and private roads in compliance with PA TITLE 67, PADOT
REGULATIONS and PA TITLE 75, of PA VEHICLE CODE as outlined above. The Borough shall
thereafter maintain street name signs at the intersections of all new streets. In new subdivisions,
all street names must be approved prior to final subdivision approval. See SECTIONS TWO. A.2.,
TWO. H., TWO. I., FOUR. E.2.
SECTION FOUR – ADDRESSING POLICY
A. ADDRESSING AGENCY
The County shall establish and assign street address numbers in accordance with the guidelines set forth
herein. All buildings used for residential, commercial, institutional or governmental purposes shall be
provided with an address identifying the building. The property owner shall be responsible for assigning
apartment numbers or suites not assigned by the County.
B. ADDRESSING METHODOLOGY
Frontage Interval Addressing System
The Frontage Interval Addressing System is based on the measurement of the intervals between and
beginning of a road and structures along the road. The frontage interval system will follow an interval
guideline or measurement increments, which will yield approximately 400 possible address numbers per
mile.
10 Of 17
APPENDIX A: STREET NAMING AND ADDRESSING POLICY
The frontage interval system includes rules for the point of beginning of the road, the location of odd and
even numbers along a road, the “take-off” point for semi-circular roads and numbering cul-de-sacs,
numbering of diagonal roads, numbering of apartments and duplexes, numbering of businesses, trailer
parks and stacked addresses.
The following list is a description of the generally acceptable numbering standards.
1. The Frontage Interval
Assign numbers every 26.4 feet or approximately each 1/100 mile. This will yield approximately
400 numbers per mile, 200 odd on one side and 200 even on the other side.
2. Odd/Even Number Location
Assign even numbers on the right side, from the point of beginning, and odd numbers on the left
side, from the point of beginning.
3. Beginning Point
Numbering should begin at the West beginning point and proceed eastward or at the South
beginning point and proceed northward. In the case of a dead-end road, the beginning point will
be at the point of departure from the main road, regardless of direction. See SECTION FOUR. B.
8.
4. Fractional, Alphanumeric, Hyphenated Addresses
There should be no use of fractional addresses, alphanumeric address numbers, nor hyphenated
address number (e.g. 34 ½ Ash Street, 123 A Main St., 41-656 Bell St.).
Rules one through four shall apply unless you are continuing a city numbering scheme, as in
leaving a city or subdivision where other numbers are used. In this case, the existing system in
place will dictate the beginning, odd/even number. See SECTION FOUR. B. 10., FOUR. B. 14.)
5. Diagonal Streets
Diagonal streets should be treated as either north-south or east-west streets. Arbitrary decisions
on the direction are acceptable, but the primary direction should be chosen.
6. Circular Streets
Circular streets and roads begin at the low numbered intersection and are numbered with the even
numbers on the inside of the circle. The outside of the circle is numbered first and consecutively.
The inside is then numbered to match and mix with the outside. This will result, in some cases,
fewer numbers on the inside of the circle, and also with spaces between the numbers.
7. Cul-de-sacs
Cul-de-sacs often require applying the rules for both dead-end streets and circular streets. Those
without buildings in the center portion should be numbered as if the center line of the street
bisects the cul-de-sac. The numbering begins from the intersection of the main road and ascends
toward the cul-de-sac. Once in the cul-de-sac the numbers proceed odd around the left side of
the circle and even around the right side of the circle progressing in the direction that the
numbers increase. Odd and even numbers meet at mid-point or the back of the cul-de-sac.
11 Of 17
APPENDIX A: STREET NAMING AND ADDRESSING POLICY
On rare occasions there may be structures inside the cul-de-sac. When this occurs, number the
structure or structures in the way that will fit best. Generally there are no houses in the middle
ground.
8. Corner Lots
When assigning numbers to corner lots, use the front door. When the front door is obscured or if
the structure is best reached for emergency purposes by the driveway, assign the property number
based on where the driveway falls on the road.
9. Crossing County Lines
When crossing county lines, consideration will be given to an existing numbering system in that
county. If no system exists, the numbering will stop at the county line. If a system does exist in
that county, those numbers may continue, following the rules for distance and direction.
10. Stacked Addresses
Houses or trailers behind other houses or trailers facing the road, sharing a common driveway,
should be numbered following the rules for distance and direction herein. Use of a hyphenated,
alphanumeric or fractional number is discouraged.
11. Apartments and Duplexes
Apartments and other multi-tenant structures should be numbered with the main building and then
assigned apartment numbers as secondary location indicators (e.g. 202 Main St, Apt 303). If
possible, use apartment numbers to indicate the floor location (e.g. Apt 303 is the third
apartment on the third floor.)
12. Businesses
Businesses and business districts should be numbered just as apartments, with the middle of the
building determining the number and the offices or businesses in the building being numbered as
suites (e.g. 225 Oak Dr, Suite 34). This rule may also be applied to “office parks” where
each business has its own small building.
13. Interfacing With Existing Systems
When interfacing with existing numbering systems, care should be taken in locating the last
assigned number of the existing system. All possible sources should be checked to determine the
last number.
14. Mobile Home Parks
Mobile home parks should be numbered just like apartments unless already marked. The difference
would be that individual mobile homes will be designated as lots instead of apartments (e.g. 334
Elm St, Lot 23). An alternative is to name the road(s) in the park and number the homes as
single family dwellings following the rules for distance and direction herein (e.g. 45 Forest Ln).
15. Highways
Highways with no numbering system in place or where the system is to change shall be
numbered from county line to county line, following the rules for distance and direction herein.
12 Of 17
APPENDIX A: STREET NAMING AND ADDRESSING POLICY
16. Structures
When assigning numbers, the middle of the structure should determine the address assigned.
Structures should always be numbered according to the road they face, not where the driveway
enters the road or where the mailbox is. An exception to this is when the structure is obscured
or if the structure is best reached for emeregency purposes by the driveway. In such cases, the
address should be assigned where the driveway falls on the road.
17. Preplanning Subdivisions
New subdivisions will require street naming and address assignments to the lots prior to final
approval. Venango County Government must review the plan for compliance with the various
sections of this policy, as they relate to street naming and the assignment of address numbers.
Venango County Government must sign-off on this portion of the subdivision plan. See SECTION
TWO. A., THREE. C., FOUR. E. 2. Pre-planning requires that corner lots be numbered in two
directions, since it is unknown which way the house might face on the lot. See SECTION FOUR.
B. 9.
C. EXEMPT BUILDINGS AND USES
The following buildings and uses will be exempt from the addressing system, but may be addressed at
the request of the property owner.
1. Farm buildings, which are not residential or commercial.
2. Accessory buildings, which have uses that are accessory to the primary use of a residential,
commercial, industrial, institutional, or governmental buildings.
3. Unoccupied farm land or lots containing no dwelling(s) or businesses.
D. CHANGING ADDRESS NUMBERS
If an address number is changed for any reason, the Borough shall be responsible for changing the
address number.
When such a change is made, the Borough shall notify the building owner to make the change, and the
County will notify the United States Postal Service (USPS), Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
(PADOT), and emergency services.
The Borough shall notify the building owner by first class mail, or by personal service (date, time, and
party served) to be recorded. The owner of the building shall cause the posted address numbers to be
changed within thirty (30) days of receipt of such notice. The resident of the building will be responsible
for notifying all suppliers and others of the address change.
E. ADDRESSING NEW CONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
1. Building Permit Requirements
Prior to beginning new construction, property owners shall submit an application for a building
permit. Borough building permit ordinances shall require that an address be assigned by the
County Assessment Office to the new building(s) before a building permit is awarded.
13 Of 17
APPENDIX A: STREET NAMING AND ADDRESSING POLICY
2. Subdivision Requirements
No residential, commercial or industrial subdivision or land development shall be approved or
recorded unless it has been assigned address numbers and a street name. The Borough requires
that street names and address numbers be assigned to proposed development before a subdivision
receives final approval or recording.
F. RESPONSIBILITY FOR DISPLAY OF ADDRESS NUMBERS
It shall be the responsibility of each and every property owner, trustee, lessee, agent and occupant of
each residence, apartment building, business or industry to obtain, post and maintain address numbers as
required under this policy at all times.
It shall be the duty of the above mentioned, upon affixing a new address number, to remove any
conflicting numbers.
It shall be unlawful to cover any address number with a sign, drapery, or other obstruction tending to
conceal such number.
G. SIZE AND LOCATION OF STREET ADDRESS NUMBERS
1. Residences, Townhouses and “In-Town” Businesses
It shall be the duty of each and every property owner, trustee, lessee, agent and occupant of
each residence, apartment building or “In Town” business to display the assigned address number
according to the guidelines set forth herein. The address number shall be made up of numbers
and/or letters which are not less than three inches in height, contrasting in color with a reflective
background on which they are affixed, as near to the front entrance as possible and practical, so
that the number is legible from the sidewalk (if any), the road and the opposite side of the
street day or night.
2. Private Lane and Long Driveway
If any residence, apartment building or business (except malls or shopping centers) is located so
that the address number is not clearly visible from the street, or is more than 30 feet from the
edge of the road, an additional address number shall be posted at the intersection of the driveway
with the public or private road or street. The additional address number shall be made up of
numbers and/or letters which are not less than three inches in height, contrasting in color with
the background on which they are affixed, visible day or night, and placed upon a post or other
structure which displays the number at least forty-two inches above the ground. The property
owner is responsible for the installation and maintenance of these additional sets of address
identifiers.
3. Industrial and Commercial Structures in Low Density Areas
All industrial and commercial structures located in low-density development areas, (areas in which
small residential style address numbers are not visible from the road), shall display address
numbers of not less than ten inches in height. The number shall contrast in color with the
background on which it is affixed and shall be visible day or night, from the street. When
possible, the number shall be displayed beside or over the main entrance of the structure.
14 Of 17
APPENDIX A: STREET NAMING AND ADDRESSING POLICY
4. Apartment Buildings and High-rises
All apartment buildings and high-rises shall display address numbers above or to the side of the
primary entrance to the building. Address numbers shall contrast with the color of the background
to which they are affixed, and shall be at least six inches in height to be visible day or night
from the opposite side of the street facing the main entrance.
Apartment numbers for individual units within the complex shall be displayed on, above, or to the
side of the doorway of each unit. Apartment numbers shall contrast with the color of the
background to which they are affixed, and shall be at least three inches in height to be visible
day or night from the opposite side of the street facing the street or main entrance of the
structure.
H. NOTICE TO COMPLY
Borough officials and County employees shall be authorized to enter upon private property for the purpose
of inspection and to give notice by personal service or be certified mail to person in violation of this
policy directing them to abate the situation within thirty (30) days after issuance of such notice.
SECTION FIVE – ENFORCEMENT
Whenever the County has reason to believe that there has been a violation of any provision of this policy, the
County, or its designee, will notify the Borough of the Sugarcreek Borough Police Department, in writing to have
notice provided to the person or party failing to comply and order said person or party to take corrective action
or measures within thirty (30) days from the date of notification.
If such person or party fails to comply with the duly issued order, the County, the Borough or the designee,
should initiate necessary actions to terminate the violation through criminal and/or civil measures.
Any violation or any provision of this policy shall constitute a summary offense, punishable by a maximum fine of
$300.00 per offense. Subsequent to the thirty (30) day period following a notification of violation, each day of
violation shall constitute a separate violation.
SECTION SIX – EXECUTIVE SUMMARY OF RESPONSIBILITIES
A. BOROUGH OFFICIALS
Borough Officials are responsible for:
1. assigning names to all public roads in compliance with the guidelines established herein
2. resolving road name duplications within a municipality, zip code or emergency service zone area
3. having a building permit ordinance requiring that the applicant have an address assigned prior to
receiving a building permit and to enforce this ordinance.
4. passing ordinances to adopt names for all roads within the municipality
5. in the case that a street name must be changed, the municipal officials will inform property
owners along the street, as described in Section TWO. K. 3. a. and TWO. K. 3. b.
15 Of 17
APPENDIX A: STREET NAMING AND ADDRESSING POLICY
6. fabricating and installing street name signs at the intersections of all existing public roads.
7. maintaining street name signs at the intersections of all private roads and public roads listed in
the Borough ordinances
8. passing ordinance to require posting of address numbers in compliance with guidelines set forth
herein
Municipal officials will have the responsibility for entering onto private property for the purpose of notifying
persons who are in violation of this policy.
B. VENANGO COUNTY GOVERNMENT
Venango County Government shall be responsible for:
1. administering this policy
2. maintaining a countywide database of street names
3. reviewing subdivision requests for conformance with this policy
4. reviewing requests for street name changes for compliance with this policy
5. resolving a street name conflict if the Borough does not do so
6. reserving names for proposed development as set forth herein
7. notifying the Borough of street name conflicts
8. notifying the United States Postal Service (USPS), Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
(PADOT) and emergency services of street name changes.
9. coordinating street name and address ranges with adjacent counties
10. establishing, assigning and when necessary, changing address numbers in accordance with this
policy in all municipalities which so desire
C. UNITED STATES POSTAL SERVICE
The United States Postal Service (USPS) is responsible for:
1. maintaining a dual addressing system, delivering mail addressed to either address for a period of
twelve months.
2. maintaining a database of addresses as notification of address changes are received from the
County.
16 Of 17
APPENDIX A: STREET NAMING AND ADDRESSING POLICY
D. PROPERTY OWNERS AND RESIDENTS
Each and every property owner, trustee, lessee, agent and occupant of each residence, apartment
building, business, industry or institution are responsible for:
1. obtaining, posting and maintaining assigned address numbers in conformance with the guidelines set
forth herein or within thirty (30) days of completion of new construction.
2. removing old address numbers when new numbers are posted
3. obtaining an address before receiving a building permit or approval of a subdivision application
E. DEVELOPERS
Developers shall be responsible for:
1. obtaining approval for street names prior to receiving final approval of subdivision applications
2. purchasing and installing road name signs for all new roads
SECTION SEVEN – SOURCE GUIDES
A. The National Emergency Number Association's book Addressing System: A Training Guide for 9-1-1,
1995, ISBN 1-88319-18-9.
B. The United States Postal Service publication: Addressing Conventions, July 1989, filing number DM-940-
89-03.
C. The United States Postal Service publication: Postal Addressing Standards, August 1995, Publication 28.
D. PA TITLE 67, PADOT REGULATIONS
E. PA TITLE 75, PA VEHICLE CODE.
Any addressing issues not addressed in this policy will be resolved using the standard recommended in the above referenced publications.
17 Of 17