Part I, Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 7-8-2014 by Ord. No. 19251]
§ 1-1. Approval, adoption and enactment of Code.
Pursuant to Section 1502(1)(b) of the First Class Township Code, 53 P.S.
§ 56502 I(b), the codification of a complete body of legislation for the
Township of Shaler, County of Allegheny, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
as revised, codified and consolidated into chapters, articles and sections
by General Code Publishers Corp., and consisting of Chapters 1 through
225, together with an Appendix, are hereby approved, adopted, ordained
and enacted as a single ordinance of the Township of Shaler, which shall be
known and is hereby designated as the "Code of the Township of Shaler,"
hereinafter referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Effect of Code on previous provisions.
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantively the same
as those of ordinances and resolutions in force immediately prior to the
enactment of this ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such
ordinances and resolutions and not as new enactments, and the
effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the date of adoption of the
prior ordinance or resolution. All such provisions are hereby continued in
full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their adoption by the
Board of Commissioners of the Township of Shaler, and it is the intention
of said Board of Commissioners that each such provision contained within
the Code is hereby reenacted and reaffirmed as it appears in said Code.
Only such provisions of former ordinances as are omitted from this Code
shall be deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-3 below, and
only changed provisions, as described in § 1-6 below, shall be deemed to be
enacted from the effective date of this Code, as provided in § 1-15 below.
§ 1-3. Repeal of ordinances not contained in Code.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature
adopted by the Township and in force on the date of the adoption of this
Code and not contained in the Code are hereby repealed as of the effective
date given in § 1-15 below, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 1-4. Ordinances saved from repeal; matters not affected by repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-3 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights
and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal; provided,
however, that the repeal of ordinances pursuant to § 1-3 or the saving from
repeal of ordinances pursuant to this section shall not be construed so as to
1. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed original Ch. 1, General Provisions: Art. I,
Adoption of Code, adopted 5-14-1996 by Ord. No. 1739.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:3
revive any ordinance previously repealed, superseded or no longer of any
effect:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to the enactment date of this
ordinance.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the Township prior to the effective date of this
ordinance or any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of
such right or liability or any cause of action acquired or existing.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision of the Township or any
penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the Township.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the Township or any lawful contract, obligation or
agreement.
F. Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or
guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and
delivery of any bond of the Township or other instruments or evidence
of the Township's indebtedness.
G. Any ordinance adopting an annual budget or establishing an annual tax
rate.
H. Any ordinance providing for the levy, imposition or collection of special
taxes, assessments or charges.
I. Any ordinance authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property or acquiring property by acceptance of deed, condemnation or
exercise of eminent domain.
J. Any ordinance annexing land to the Township.
K. Any ordinance providing for or requiring the construction or
reconstruction or opening of sidewalks, curbs and gutters.
L. Any ordinance or part of an ordinance providing for laying out, opening,
altering, widening, relocating, straightening, establishing grade,
changing name, improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-ofway,
easement, street, road, highway, sidewalk, park or other public
place or property or designating various streets as public highways.
M. Any ordinance establishing water, sewer or other special purpose
districts and designating the boundaries thereof; providing for a system
of sewers or water supply lines; or providing for the construction,
§ 1-4 SHALER CODE § 1-4
1:4
§ 1-5. Inclusion of new legislation prior to adoption of Code.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted subsequent
to the date given in § 1-4A and/or prior to the date of adoption of this
ordinance are hereby deemed to be a part of the Code and shall, upon being
printed, be included therein. Attested copies of all such ordinances shall be
temporarily placed in the Code until printed supplements are included.
§ 1-6. Changes and revisions in previously adopted ordinances.
extension, dedication, acceptance or abandonment of any part of a
system of sewers or water supply lines.
N. Any ordinance providing for the making of public improvements.
O. Any ordinance establishing or amending an intergovernmental
cooperation agreement between the Township and any other political
subdivision or entity.
P. Any ordinance providing for the salaries and compensation of officers
and employees of the Township or setting the bond of any officer or
employee; any ordinance establishing positions of employment within
the Township; and any ordinance establishing personnel policies for
Township employees.
Q. Any ordinance or portion of an ordinance establishing a specific fee
amount for any license, permit or service obtained from the Township,
unless said fees are to be set by resolution of the Board of
Commissioners.
R. Any ordinance concerning changes and amendments to the Zoning
Map.
S. Any ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension fund
for municipal employees.
T. All specific vehicles and traffic ordinances regarding parking, speed
limits etc.
U. Any ordinance concerning building construction.
V. Any ordinance regarding police pensions.
W. Any ordinance regulating water rents and charges.
A. Nonsubstantive grammatical changes. In compiling and preparing the
ordinances and resolutions of the Township for adoption and revision as
part of the Code, certain nonsubstantive grammatical and style changes
were made in one or more of said ordinances. It is the intention of the
Board of Commissioners that all such changes be adopted as part of the
Code as if the ordinances and resolutions so changed had been
previously formally amended to read as such.
§ 1-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-6
1:5
§ 1-7. Interpretation of provisions.
§ 1-8. Titles and headings; editor's notes.
§ 1-9. Filing of copy of Code.
A copy of the Code in a post-bound volume shall be filed with the Ordinance
Book in the office of the Township Secretary and shall remain there for use
and examination by the public. Upon adoption, such copy shall be certified
to by the Township Secretary, as provided by law, and such certified copy
shall remain on file in the office of the Township Secretary, available to
persons desiring to examine the same during all times while said Code is in
effect.
B. Substantive changes and revisions. In addition to the changes and
revisions described above, changes and revisions of a substantive
nature made are hereby made to various ordinances and resolutions
included in the Code. These changes are enacted to bring provisions
into conformity with the desired policies of the Board of
Commissioners, and it is the intent of the Commissioners that all such
changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances and
resolutions so changed have been previously formally amended to read
as such. All such changes and revisions shall be deemed to be in effect
as of the effective date of the Code specified in § 1-15.
A. In interpreting and applying the provisions of the Code, they shall be
held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public
health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare.
B. Where the provisions of the Code impose greater restrictions or
requirements than those of any statute, other ordinance, resolution or
regulation, the provisions of the Code shall control. Where the
provisions of any statute, other ordinance, resolution or regulation
impose greater restrictions or requirements, the provisions of such
statute, other ordinance, resolution or regulation shall control.
C. Where the provisions of any section of the Code conflict with any other
section of the Code, the stricter regulations shall govern.
A. Chapter and article titles, headings and titles of sections and other
divisions in the Code or in supplements made to the Code are inserted
in the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
B. Editor's notes indicating sources of sections, giving other information
or referring to the statutes or to other parts of the Code are inserted in
the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
§ 1-6 SHALER CODE § 1-10
1:6
§ 1-10. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code,
when passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of
the Board of Commissioners to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to
be incorporated into such Code so that reference to the Code shall be
understood and intended to include such changes. Whenever such
additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall be
adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder,
inserted in the post-bound book containing said Code as amendments and
supplements thereto.
§ 1-11. Code books to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Township Secretary or someone authorized and
directed by him or her to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book
containing the Code required to be filed in the office of the Township
Secretary for the use of the public. All changes in said Code and all
ordinances and resolutions adopted by the Board of Commissioners
subsequent to the effective date of this codification which the Board of
Commissioners shall adopt specifically as part of the Code shall, when
finally adopted, be included therein by reference until such changes or new
ordinances or resolutions are printed as supplements to said Code book, at
which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-12. Publication of notices.
The Township Secretary, pursuant to law, shall cause to be published in the
manner required a notice of the introduction and of the adoption of the
Code in a newspaper of general circulation in the Township. The enactment
and application of this ordinance, coupled with the publication of the
notices of introduction and adoption, as required by law, and the availability
of a copy of the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and
considered to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for
all purposes.
§ 1-13. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, or to alter or tamper with the Code or any part or portion
thereof, in any manner whatsoever, which will cause the law of the Township
to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section of this
ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not
exceeding $600, plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment
thereof, to imprisonment to the extent permitted by law for the punishment
of summary offenses.
§ 1-14. Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance and of the Code adopted hereby are
severable, and if any clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter
§ 1-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-14
1:7
or part thereof shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to
be illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, such judgment or decision shall not
affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in
its operation and application to the clause, sentence, subsection, section,
article, chapter or part thereof rendered illegal, invalid or unconstitutional.
It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Board of Commissioners that
this ordinance and the Code would have been adopted if such illegal, invalid
or unconstitutional clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter or
part thereof had not been included therein.
§ 1-15. Effective date.
All provisions of this ordinance and of the Code shall become effective
immediately upon publication of the notice of final enactment as required
by Section 1502(1)(b) of the First Class Township Code, 53 P.S. § 56502 I(b).
§ 1-14 SHALER CODE § 1-15
1:8
Chapter 3
AUDITOR, INDEPENDENT
§ 3-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Township of Shaler Appointed Auditor
Ordinance."
§ 3-2. Purpose; intent.
It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to abolish the office of the three
elected auditors in Shaler Township and to provide by ordinance for the
audit of the Township's accounts by an independent auditor, who shall be a
certified public accountant, registered in Pennsylvania, or a firm of certified
public accountants.
§ 3-3. Word usage.
In the construction of this chapter, the rules and definitions contained in
this section shall be observed and applied, except when the context clearly
indicates otherwise:
§ 3-4. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPOINTED AUDITOR — An independent auditor, who shall be a certified
public accountant, registered in Pennsylvania, or a firm of certified public
accountants so registered.
ELECTED AUDITORS — Those persons elected at each municipal election,
for a term of six years, who possess all the powers and perform all the duties
provided in the First Class Township Code for elected auditors.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Shaler.
§ 3-5. Appointment of independent auditor.
The Township shall provide for the audit of its accounts by an independent
auditor, who shall be a certified public accountant, registered in
Pennsylvania, or a firm of certified public accountants so registered.
A. Words used in the singular shall include the plural, and the plural the
singular.
B. Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense.
C. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary.
D. The word "may" is permissive.
§ 1-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-6
1:9
§ 3-6. Annual appointment by resolution.
The Township shall appoint annually, by resolution before the close of the
fiscal year, an independent auditor to make an independent examination of
all the accounts and accounting records of the Township for the fiscal year
then closing, which appointment shall be made at least 30 days prior to the
close of the fiscal year.
§ 3-7. Powers and duties.
The appointed auditor shall have and possess all the powers and perform all
the duties provided in the First Class Township Code for elected auditors.
§ 3-8. Compensation.
The compensation of the independent appointed auditor shall be fixed by
the Board of Commissioners.
§ 3-9. Abolition of office of elected auditor.
When an independent auditor is appointed as herein provided, the office of
auditor is hereby abolished.
Chapter 5
AUTHORITIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Flood damage prevention in Girty's
Run — See Ch. 130, Art. I.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 181.
Water — See Ch. 218.
§ 3-6 SHALER CODE § 3-9
1:10
ARTICLE I
Girty's Run Joint Sewer Authority
[Adopted 7-10-1984 by Ord. No. 1561]
§ 5-1. Intent.
It is the desire of the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Shaler
in the County of Allegheny, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and the Board
of Commissioners hereby signifies its intention to participate in the
organization of a joint sewer authority under the Municipality Authorities
Act of 1945, P.L. 382, as amended (53 P.S. § 301 et seq.).2
§ 5-2. Duty of Authority.
The project to be undertaken by the Authority is the acquisition, operation
and maintenance of all the sewer systems within that portion of the Girty's
Run watershed situate within the boundaries of the participating
municipalities.
§ 5-3. Organization.
The proper officers of the Township of Shaler are hereby authorized and
directed to participate in the organization of the said Joint Sewer Authority
and execute Articles of Incorporation, which shall be filed with the
Secretary of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania as provided by law.
§ 5-4. Name.
The Joint Sewer Authority shall be known as the "Girty's Run Joint Sewer
Authority."
§ 5-5. Articles of Incorporation.
In pursuance of said desire and intention and in conformity with the
provisions of said Municipality Authorities Act and its amendments, the
proposed Articles of Incorporation are hereby set forth in full as follows:
ARTICLES OF INCORPORATION
OF THE
GIRTY'S RUN JOINT SEWER AUTHORITY
TO: The Secretary of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Harrisburg,
Pennsylvania
2. Editor's Note: See now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
§ 5-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-5
1:11
In compliance with the requirements of the Municipality Authorities Act
of 1945, approved the second day of May 1945, P.L. 382, as amended,3
and pursuant to ordinances enacted by the Council of the Borough of
Millvale, the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Ross, the Board of
Commissioners of the Township of Shaler and the Board of Commissioners
of the Township of Reserve, that a joint municipal authority be established
under the provision of the aforementioned Act, that said municipalities
desire that a joint municipal authority be established and that a certificate
of incorporation be issued to said Authority, the Borough of Millvale and
the Townships of Ross, Reserve and Shaler do hereby certify:
A. The name of the Authority shall be the "Girty's Run Joint Sewer
Authority."
B. The Authority is formed under the Municipality Authorities Act of 1945,
P.L. 382, as amended.
C. No other authority has been organized under the provisions of said Act
or the Municipalities Authorities Act of 1945 and is in existence within
the Borough of Millvale and the Townships of Ross, Reserve and Shaler,
with the exception of the following:
(1) Reserve Township School Authority, Allegheny County,
Pennsylvania.
(2) Reserve Township Sewer Authority, Allegheny County,
Pennsylvania.
(3) Reserve Township Emergency Medical Services Authority,
Allegheny County, Pennsylvania.
(4) Ross Township Authority, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania.
(5) Shaler Township Water Authority, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania.
(6) Ross/West View Emergency Medical Services Authority, Allegheny
County, Pennsylvania.
(7) Millvale Ambulance Authority, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania.
D. The purpose of the Authority is the planning, designing, financing,
construction, reconstruction, replacement, rehabilitation and
maintenance of the sewer system within the Girty's Run watershed so
as to eliminate any existing hydraulic overload, prevent future
hydraulic overload and to provide the required capacities within the
sewer system to meet the demands and anticipated demands of the
Girty's Run watershed. The Authority shall not have the power to
extend the service area of the sewer system when such an extension
would require the Authority to either construct the same or require the
Authority to incur a financial obligation as a result thereof.
3. Editor's Note: See now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
§ 5-5 SHALER CODE § 5-5
1:12
E. The term of the Authority's existence shall be 50 years from the
effective date of this amendment. [Amended 4-14-2009 by Ord. No.
1876]
F. The names of the incorporating municipalities and their addresses are
as follows:
(1) Borough of Millvale, 501 Lincoln Avenue, Millvale, Pennsylvania
15209.
(2) Township of Ross, Perry Highway and Center Highway, Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania 15229.
(3) Township of Reserve, 33 Longdale Street, Reserve, Pennsylvania
15219.
(4) Township of Shaler, 300 Wetzel Road, Glenshaw, Pennsylvania
15116.
G. The names and addresses of the members of the councils of the said
boroughs and the boards of commissioners of said townships are as
follows:
(1) Borough of Millvale:
Albert P. Nicholson
501 Mary Street
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
15209
John Cavanaugh
11 Reserve Street
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15209
James Beran
853 Reserve Street
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
15209
Robert Eberle
901 Long Street
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15209
Albert Mueser
217 Dickey Street
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
15209
Robert Dettlinger
657 Evergreen Avenue
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15209
Donald Andrezjwski
109 Sherman Street
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
15229
(2) Township of Ross:
§ 5-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-5
1:13
Robert C. Raida
103 Rock Ridge Road
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
15209
Mark A. Purcell
9 Mcllrath Drive
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15229
J. Robert McAfee
419 Wimer Drive
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
15237
Charles F. Earnest
127 Jacks Run Road
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15214
Thomas G. Lawler
150 Hillendale Road
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
15237
William L. Connelly, Jr.
151 Linden Court
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15237
Arthur F. White
133 Timberlane Drive
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
15229
Molly Daly
218 Dombey Drive
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15237
Dr. Donald J. Wesse
716 Perry Highway
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
15229
(3) Township of Reserve:
Eugene D. Seeno
110 Ramage Road
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
15214
Alan L. Schuler
1948 West Berkirt Avenue
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15212
Timothy R. Delaney
218 Karen Drive
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
15209
Edward H. Wittig
420 Kinkura Drive
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15212
Richard F. Kennedy
3544 Faber Terrace
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
15214
(4) Township of Shaler:
§ 5-5 SHALER CODE § 5-5
1:14
Henry R. Janckowsk
705 Flint Road
Allison Park, Pennsylvania
15101
A. John Koehler
1495 Green Avenue
Glenshaw, Pennsylvania 15116
Joe Gally
804 Greenhill Road
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
15209
Bill Greene
104 Calmwood Drive
Glenshaw, Pennsylvania 15116
William J. Neely
195 Alma Street
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
15223
Frank D. Orga
106 Canby Drive
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15209
Calvin N. Walker
483 Glenhaven Drive
Glenshaw, Pennsylvania 15116
H. The Board of the Authority to be formed pursuant to these Articles shall
consist of eight members, two of whom shall be appointed by each
municipality. Except for those who shall be members of the first Board
of the Authority, no elected official of any participating municipality
shall serve as a member of the Authority Board; members shall be
appointed for terms of five years each.
I. The names and addresses and the terms of office of the first members of
said Authority's Board are as follows:
(1) Frank C. Brace, 1914 Woodside Road, Glenshaw, Pennsylvania
15116, for a term of four years.
(2) Charles H. Perry, 98 West Pennview Street, Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania 15223, for a term of two years.
J. Adoption of bylaws; amendment to the bylaws; establishment of rates.
[Amended 4-14-2009 by Ord. No. 1876]
(1) The initial adoption of the bylaws of the Authority shall require the
unanimous vote of all of the members of the total Board. The
bylaws of the Authority shall be amended by the Board by
resolution adopted by a vote of 2/3 of the Board members
appointed to the Authority Board, provided the Board members
voting in favor of the proposed resolution shall include at least one
Board member of the Authority Board representing each of the four
member boroughs or townships.
§ 5-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-5
1:15
§ 5-6. Execution of Articles.
The Articles of Incorporation of the proposed Authority, in substantially the
same form as set forth in § 5-5 of this article, shall be executed on behalf
of the Township of Shaler by the President of its Board of Commissioners,
under the Municipal Seal and attested by the Township's Secretary, and
such officers are hereby authorized, empowered and directed to do all
things necessary and appropriate to affect and establish said Authority
in conformity with the aforesaid Municipality Authorities Act of 1945, its
supplements and amendments.
(2) In order for the Board to fix, alter or change the rates, charges and/
or fees charged by the Authority, a resolution shall be adopted by
the unanimous vote of all Board members appointed to the
Authority Board.
§ 5-5 SHALER CODE § 5-6
1:16
ARTICLE II
Joint Water Authority with Township of Hampton
[Adopted 4-26-2011 by Ord. No. 1894]
§ 5-7. Intent.
The Board of Commissioners hereby signifies its intention and desire to
organize an Authority jointly with the Township of Hampton under the
provisions of the Municipality Authorities Act, as amended.4
§ 5-8. Execution of Articles of Incorporation.
The President and Secretary of the Board of Commissioners are hereby
authorized and directed to execute on behalf of the Township of Shaler
Articles of Incorporation incorporating said Authority in substantially the
form attached hereto as "Exhibit A."5
§ 5-9. Publication of notice.
The Secretary of the Board of Commissioners, acting with the appropriate
officers of Shaler Township, is further directed to cause a notice of the
substance of this article, including the substance of the attached Articles
of Incorporation and of the proposed filing of the Articles, to be published
once in a newspaper published and of general circulation in the County
of Allegheny and once in the Pittsburgh Legal Journal, as required by the
Municipality Authorities Act, as amended.
§ 5-10. Filing of Articles; payment of filing fees.
The Secretary of the Board of Commissioners, acting with the appropriate
officers of Shaler Township, is directed to file said Articles of Incorporation,
together with necessary proofs of publication, with the Secretary of the
Commonwealth, and to do all other acts and things necessary or
appropriate to effect the incorporation of the Authority, including payment
of any filing fees in connection therewith.
§ 5-11. Duty of Authority.
The Authority organized hereby shall provide water service, supply and
distribution to users located within Shaler Township and Hampton
Township. The Joint Authority may, at its discretion, provide water service,
supply and distribution to areas not located within the Hampton Township
and Shaler Township service area.
4. Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
5. Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Township offices.
§ 5-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-11
1:17
Chapter 8
BILLS, PAYMENT OF
§ 8-1. Method of approval for payment.
Receipts for items of revenues and other payments to the Township and
authorizations for the payment of bills for Township indebtedness shall be
approved in the following manner:
§ 8-2. Records.
The lists of receipts and authorizations shall be available for inspection at
the monthly meeting of the Board, and the lists shall be included in the
minutes of the meeting. It shall not be necessary to read the individual
items of receipts and authorizations subject to approval by the Board at the
monthly meeting.
§ 8-3. Warrants.
Warrants for authorization of payment of indebtedness shall be signed by
the President or Vice President of the Board and attested by the Secretary
or Assistant Secretary.
§ 8-4. Disbursements.
Disbursements in discharge of Township indebtedness duly incurred shall
be made by the Township Treasurer or Deputy by virtue of the warrants
drawn on him by order of the Board.
A. In preparation for and prior to each regularly scheduled monthly
meeting (hereinafter "the monthly meeting") of the Township Board of
Commissioners (hereinafter "the Board"), the Manager or Assistant
Manager shall compile and approve lists of receipts and authorizations.
Upon approval of such receipts and authorizations, the Manager or
Assistant Manager shall forward such lists to the Township Finance
Committee.
B. The Township Finance Committee shall review the lists of receipts and
authorizations approved by the Manager or Assistant Manager. Upon
approval of the lists by a majority of the Finance Committee, the lists
shall be delivered to the members of the Board no later than four days
before the monthly meeting.
C. At the monthly meeting of the Board, the lists of receipts and
authorizations shall be approved by order of the Board and warrants
shall be drawn for authorization of payment of indebtedness.
§ 5-11 SHALER CODE § 8-4
1:18
Chapter 10
BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Residency requirements — See Ch. 44. Rules of order — See Ch. 51.
§ 8-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-4
1:19

ARTICLE I
Salary, Compensation or Emoluments
[Adopted 12-10-2002 by Ord. No. 1805]
§ 10-1. When effective.
This article shall take effect immediately upon its enactment, but any
change in the salary, compensation or emolument of any Township
Commissioner shall only become effective at the beginning of the next term
of the elected officer.
§ 10-2. Compensation.
§ 10-3. Insurance.
A. Each Township Commissioner shall receive a salary of $4,375 annually,
which salary is authorized by the First Class Township Code, Act of
October 31, 1995, P.L. 345, No. 57, § 1.6
B. Such salaries shall be payable quarterly for the duties imposed by the
provisions of the First Class Township Code.
C. A Township Commissioner must be in office for the entire quarterly
period to be entitled to a quarterly salary.
A. The Township is authorized to make contracts of insurance with any
insurance company authorized to transact business within the
Commonwealth, insuring its employees or Commissioners, or any class
or classes thereof, or their dependents, under a policy or policies of
group insurance covering life, health, hospitalization, medical and
surgical service, or accident insurance.
B. Such insurance shall be uniformly applicable to those covered and shall
not give eligibility preference to or improperly discriminate in favor of
Commissioners.
6. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 55703.
§ 10-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-3
1:21
Chapter 13
EDUCATIONAL SERVICE AGENCY
§ 13-1. Establishment.
By authority vested in townships by the Act of 1979, P.L. 503, No. 108,7 the
Township of Shaler establishes an educational service agency.
§ 13-2. Membership; appointments; terms; qualifications;
vacancies.
§ 13-3. Compensation.
Members of the Educational Service Agency shall receive such
compensation as shall be fixed from time to time by the Board of
Commissioners.
§ 13-4. Bonds.
Each member of the Educational Service Agency may, at the discretion of
the Board of Commissioners, be required to furnish a bond in the amount
and with the surety specified by the Township for the faithful performance
of his or her duties as a member of the Educational Service Agency.
§ 13-5. Powers and duties.
A. The Educational Service Agency shall be composed of three members,
each of whom shall be a resident of the Township at least 18 years of
age, who shall be appointed by the Board of Commissioners for threeyear
overlapping terms, coinciding with the calendar year, provided
that in the case of the three individuals appointed at the time of
establishment of the Educational Service Agency, the term of one shall
expire on the first day of January 1981, the term of one shall expire on
the first day of January 1982, and the term of any third member shall
expire on the first day of January 1983.
B. No elected Township or School District official shall be eligible for
appointment to or membership on the Educational Service Agency. A
vacancy shall occur in the Educational Service Agency in the case of
any member who ceases to be a resident of the Township or who resigns
or otherwise becomes disqualified for appointment or membership.
C. Vacancies in the Educational Service Agency occurring for any reason
shall be filled by appointment by the Board of Commissioners of a
successor to serve for the remainder of the term of the individual being
replaced.
7. Editor's Note: See 43 P.S. § 802.1.
§ 10-3 SHALER CODE § 13-5
1:22
A. The function of the Educational Service Agency shall be to employ and
supervise school crossing guards, also referred to as "special school
police," to direct traffic at or near schools. In order to enable the
Educational Service Agency to perform that function, the Township
delegates to the Educational Service Agency the authority to appoint
and supervise crossing guards or special school police in accordance
with the First Class Township Code.8
B. The Educational Service Agency shall have the following authority and
it shall be its duty to:
(1) Prepare annually and, on or before the first day of October of each
year, submit to the Board of Commissioners for approval a budget
showing its contemplated income and its proposed expenditures for
the succeeding year.
(2) Annually adopt the budget as submitted under Subsection B(1) of
this section, as modified by the Township.
(3) From time to time employ and/or discharge and fix the
compensation of crossing guards or special school police to serve in
the Township.
(4) Exercise supervision and control over the crossing guards or
special school police by:
(a) Establishing, administering and enforcing such rules and
regulations for the work and conduct of the crossing guards or
special school police as may be deemed necessary.
(b) Establishing work schedules.
(c) Providing for supervision as necessary.
(d) Exercising such other prerogatives as are normally associated
with personnel management.
(5) From moneys budgeted and available, make all payments for the
services of crossing guards or special school police and make all
other expenditures as prescribed by law or superior body or
agency.
(6) Receive, in addition to payments by the Township, any payments by
the School District or any other gift, grant, devise or bequest.
(7) Establish a system of accounts for all moneys under its control and
establish one or more separate bank accounts into which all income
shall be deposited and from which all expenditures shall be made.
8. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 56416.
§ 13-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-6
1:23
§ 13-6. Finances.
The Township shall transfer and pay over to the Educational Service Agency
the moneys that the Township is required to pay as compensation to special
school police under the First Class Township Code or other agreement
executed with the School District as provided in the First Class Township
Code, as well as other moneys as necessary to cover expenditures budgeted
for the Educational Service Agency as provided in § 13-5 of this chapter.
§ 13-7. Termination.
The Educational Service Agency hereby recognized and formally
established shall continue until changed or abolished by action of the
Township or until the suspension of Act 108 of 1979 as adopted by the
Legislature of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,9 in accord with the
terms thereof.
Chapter 15
ELECTION DISTRICTS
§ 15-1. Wards established; map.
Pursuant to the provisions of Article 9, § 11, of the Pennsylvania
Constitution, from and after the passage of this chapter, the following seven
wards shall be established as follows: (Sections 1 through 8, inclusive).10
The seven wards of the Township of Shaler are outlined in a master map
which is on display in the offices of the Township of Shaler, 300 Wetzel Road,
Glenshaw, Pennsylvania 15116, and may be inspected by any person during
normal business hours.
Chapter 18
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
§ 18-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Disaster Response Ordinance."
§ 18-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DISASTER — A man-made disaster, natural disaster or war-caused disaster,
as hereinafter defined.
9. Editor's Note: See 43 P.S. § 802.1.
10.Editor's Note: Sections 1 through 8 are on file in the Township offices.
§ 13-6 SHALER CODE § 18-2
1:24
DISASTER EMERGENCY — Those conditions which may, by investigation
made, be found actually or likely to:
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT — The judicious planning, assignment and
coordination of all available resources in an integrated program of
prevention, mitigation, preparedness, response and recovery for
emergencies of any kind, whether from attack or man-made or natural
sources.
EMERGENCY SERVICES — The preparation for and the carrying out of
functions, other than functions for which military forces are primarily
responsible, to prevent, minimize and provide emergency repair of injury
and damage resulting from disasters, together with all other activities
necessary or incidental to the preparation for and carrying out of those
functions. The functions include, without limitation, firefighting services;
police services; medical and health services; rescue, engineering and
disaster-warning services; communications; radiological, chemical and
other special weapons defense; shelter, evacuation of persons from stricken
areas; emergency welfare services; emergency transportation; emergency
resources management; existing or properly assigned functions of plant
protection; temporary restoration of public utility services; and other
functions related to civilian protection.
LOCAL EMERGENCY — The condition declared by the Board of
Commissioners of the Township of Shaler or the Township Manager and, in
his absence, the Assistant Township Manager when, in their judgment, the
threat or actual occurrence of a disaster is or threatens to be of sufficient
severity and magnitude to warrant coordinated local government action to
prevent or alleviate the damage, loss, hardship or suffering threatened or
caused thereby. A local emergency arising wholly or substantially out of
a resource shortage may be declared only by the Governor, upon petition
of the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Shaler, when he deems
the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster to be of sufficient severity
and magnitude to warrant coordinated local government action to prevent
or alleviate the damage, loss, hardship or suffering threatened or caused
thereby.
MAN-MADE DISASTER — Any industrial, nuclear or transportation
accident; explosion; conflagration; power failure; natural resource
Affect seriously the safety, health or welfare of a substantial number
of citizens of this commonwealth or preclude the operation or use of
essential public facilities;
A.
Be of such magnitude or severity as to render essential state
supplementation of county and local efforts or to have resources
exerted or utilized in alleviating the danger, damage, suffering or
hardship faced; and
B.
Have been caused by forces beyond the control of man, by reason of
civil disorder, riot or disturbance, or by factors not foreseen and not
known to exist when appropriation bills were enacted.
C.
§ 18-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-2
1:25
shortage; or other condition, except enemy action, resulting from man-made
causes, such as oil spills and other injurious environmental contamination,
which threatens or causes substantial damage to property, human suffering,
hardship or loss of life.
NATURAL DISASTER — Any hurricane, tornado, storm, flood, high water,
wind-driven water, tidal wave, earthquake, landslide, mudslide, snowstorm,
drought, fire, explosion or other catastrophe which results in substantial
damage to property, hardship, suffering or possible loss of life.
TOWNSHIP MANAGER — The Township Manager of the Township of Shaler
and, in his absence, the Assistant Township Manager.
WAR-CAUSED DISASTER — Any condition following an attack upon the
United States resulting in substantial damage to property or injury to
persons in the United States caused by use of bombs, missiles, shellfire
or nuclear, radiological, chemical or biological means or other weapons or
overt paramilitary actions or other conditions, such as sabotage.
§ 18-3. Declaration of disaster emergency.
§ 18-4. Contracts and obligations.
In carrying out the provisions of this chapter, the Board of Commissioners
and the Manager of the Township of Shaler shall have the power and
authority to enter into emergency contracts and incur obligations necessary
to disaster emergency management, as well as emergency services,
response and recovery.
A. A local disaster emergency may be declared by the Board of
Commissioners of the Township of Shaler upon finding a disaster has
occurred or is imminent. The Township Manager of Shaler Township
and, in his absence, the Assistant Township Manager is hereby
authorized to declare a local disaster emergency subject to ratification
by the Board of Commissioners. The declaration shall not be continued
or renewed for a period in excess of seven days, except by or with the
consent of the Board of Commissioners of Shaler Township.
B. Any order or proclamation declaring, continuing or terminating a local
disaster emergency shall be given prompt and general publicity to the
residents of Shaler Township and shall be promptly filed with the Board
of Commissioners. A written copy of the disaster declaration shall be
promptly posted in the municipal building.
C. The effect of a declaration of a local disaster emergency is to activate
the response and recovery aspects of any and all applicable local
emergency management plans and emergency services and to
authorize the furnishing of aid and assistance hereunder.
§ 18-2 SHALER CODE § 18-5
1:26
§ 18-5. Temporary suspension of formal requirements.
The Township of Shaler and the Township Manager are hereby authorized
to exercise the powers vested in them under the Emergency Management
Services Code,11 without regard to time-consuming procedures and
formalities prescribed by law (except mandatory constitutional
requirements) pertaining to the performance of public work, entering into
contracts, the incurring of obligations, the employment of temporary
workers, the rental of equipment, the purchase of supplies and materials,
the levying of taxes and the appropriation and expenditures of public funds.
§ 18-6. Employment of personnel.
In order to meet prescribed requirements for eligibility to receive federal
contributions authorized under the provisions of the Federal Civil Defense
Act of 1950 (64 Stat. 1245, 50 U.S.C. § 2251 et seq.), or any amendment
or reenactment thereof, the Township of Shaler and the Township Manager
are authorized to avail themselves of those services authorized by the State
Civil Service Commission under the provisions of the Act of August 5, 1941
(P.L. 752, No. 286), known as the "Civil Service Act" (71 P.S. § 741.1 et seq.),
in connection with the employment of personnel and local organizations
established pursuant to the Emergency Management Services Code.
§ 18-7. Designation of agent.
The Township Manager is hereby authorized to act as the designated agent
of the Board of Commissioners in any request for county, state and federal
assistance for disaster mitigation, response and recovery and is authorized
to sign, on behalf of the Township, any and all documents necessary to
secure aid and abate the threat to the public's health, safety and welfare. In
the event the signature of the President of the Board of Commissioners is
also required, he is similarly authorized.
§ 18-8. Construal of provisions.
Where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with the
provisions of any other chapter of the Township existing on the effective
date of this chapter, the provision which establishes the greater protection
during a disaster for the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the
Township of Shaler shall prevail.
11.Editor's Note: See 35 Pa.C.S.A. § 7101 et seq.
§ 18-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-8
1:27
Chapter 22
FIRE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Retirement and pensions — See Ch. 47.
Fire insurance — See Ch. 122.
Fire lanes — See Ch. 123.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 125.
§ 18-8 SHALER CODE § 18-8
1:28
ARTICLE I
Firemen's Relief Association Appropriations
[Adopted 3-3-1931 by Ord. No. 239]
§ 22-1. Deposit in separate account.
All sums of money that may hereafter be paid into the Township treasury
by the Treasurer of Pennsylvania on account of taxes paid on premiums by
foreign fire insurance companies shall be deposited in a separate fund to
be known and designated as "Appropriation No. 13," and all appropriations
heretofore made to the Shaler Township Firemen's Relief Association shall
be paid out of said appropriation.
§ 22-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-1
1:29

ARTICLE II
Duties
[Adopted 2-8-1944 by Ord. No. 425]
§ 22-2. Maintenance of facilities and equipment.
All members of the volunteer fire department of the Township are hereby
directed and authorized to maintain its firehouses in proper condition for
the purpose of housing its fire apparatus, equipment and property, as well
as conducting and operating the affairs of the Fire Department generally.
§ 22-3. Indemnification.
All members, while in performance of duties relative thereto, shall be
indemnified against accidents by the workers' compensation policy.
§ 22-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-3
1:31

ARTICLE III
Volunteer Companies
[Adopted 5-11-1993 by Ord. No. 1693]
§ 22-4. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to recognize the within named fire companies
as the official volunteer fire companies of the Township, to accord such
volunteer fire companies the status of officially recognized volunteer fire
companies and to state additional authorized activities for firefighters for
workers' compensation purposes as well as for governmental immunity
under 42 P.S. § 8541, even when not engaged in firefighting activities.
§ 22-5. Fire companies recognized.
§ 22-6. Authorized services of companies.
A. The Bauerstown Volunteer Fire Department, organized and existing in
the Township of Shaler, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania, is hereby
designated as an officially recognized volunteer fire company for the
Township.
B. The Cherry City Volunteer Fire Company, organized and existing in the
Township of Shaler, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania, is hereby
designated as an officially recognized volunteer fire company for the
Township.
C. The Elfinwild Volunteer Fire Company, organized and existing in the
Township of Shaler, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania, is hereby
designated as an officially recognized volunteer fire company for the
Township.
D. The Shaler Villa Volunteer Fire Company, organized and existing in the
Township of Shaler, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania, is hereby
designated as an officially recognized volunteer fire company for the
Township.
E. The Sharp Hill Volunteer Fire Department, organized and existing in
the Township of Shaler, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania, is hereby
designated as an officially recognized volunteer fire company for the
Township.
F. The Undercliff Volunteer Fire Company, organized and existing in the
Township of Shaler, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania, is hereby
designated as an officially recognized volunteer fire company for the
Township.
A. The volunteer fire companies recognized by the Township are hereby
authorized to provide such services to the Township as may be
necessary for the protection of property and persons situate therein,
which include, by way of example and not of limitation, the
§ 22-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-6
1:33
§ 22-7. Authorized activities of members.
In addition to actually participating in the activities of the volunteer fire
companies as authorized above or in going to or returning from any activity,
the members of the volunteer fire companies recognized by the Township
are also authorized to do the following things:
§ 22-8. Volunteer Service Credit Program. [Added 11-14-2017 by
Ord. No. 194312]
extinguishing and prevention of loss of life and property from fire,
automobile accidents, medical emergencies, hazardous materials
incidents, and other dangerous situations.
B. The volunteer fire companies may also provide nonemergency and
public service functions, such as, again by way of example and not of
limitation, removing water from property after storms and assisting in
the removal, abatement and prevention of damage or injury to persons
or property, whether through natural causes or man-made situations.
C. The volunteer fire companies may also conduct and participate in such
training activities and drills, either within or outside of the Township, as
may be deemed necessary by the officers of the fire companies to
maintain proficiency in providing service.
D. The volunteer fire companies may also respond to calls and provide
services to municipalities outside of the Township.
A. Engage in any type of drill, training, ceremony, practice, test or parade
when duly called for or authorized by an officer or officers of the fire
company.
B. Engage in fund-raising activities for the fire company, when authorized
by an officer or officers of the fire company.
C. Engage in the performance of any other duty or activity authorized by
any officer or officers of the recognized fire company.
A. Definitions. The following words and phrases, when used in this section,
shall have the meanings given to them in this section unless the context
clearly indicates otherwise.
ACTIVE VOLUNTEER — An individual who volunteers at a volunteer
fire company or nonprofit emergency medical services agency and has
satisfied the following conditions:
Completes the activities of the Volunteer Service Credit Program
set forth in Subsection B;
(1)
12.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided an effective date of 11-14-2017 and stated that
once effective, the ordinance shall apply retroactively to 1-20-2017.
§ 22-6 SHALER CODE § 22-8
1:34
APPLICATION — A form provided by the Township of Shaler to a
volunteer applying for certification under the Volunteer Service Credit
Program.
AUTHORIZED EARNED INCOME TAX COLLECTOR — Keystone
Collections Group or the current regional Earned Income Tax Collector.
COMMISSIONER — The State Fire Commissioner of the
commonwealth.
EARNED INCOME TAX — A tax on earned income and net profits levied
under Chapter 3 of the act of December 31, 1965 (P.L.1257, No. 511),
known as the "Local Tax Enabling Act."13
ELIGIBILITY PERIOD — The time frame when volunteers may earn
credit under the Volunteer Service Credit Program.
EMERGENCY RESPONDER — A volunteer who responds to an
emergency call with the volunteer fire company (one of the entities)
listed under Subsection B(3).
EMERGENCY RESPONSE CALL — Any emergency call to which a
volunteer responds, including travel directly from and to a volunteer's
home, place of business or other place where he/she shall have been
when the call was received.
VOLUNTEER — A member of a volunteer fire company or a nonprofit
emergency medical service agency.
Receives certification as an active volunteer by the Chief or
designee of a volunteer fire company or the Supervisor, Chief or
designee of a nonprofit emergency medical services agency; and
(2)
Receives approval as an active volunteer by the Board of
Commissioners for the Township of Shaler.
(3)
B. Volunteer Service Credit Program.
(1) Establishment. The Township of Shaler hereby establishes a
Volunteer Service Credit Program. The goal of the program is to
encourage membership and service in the community's volunteer
fire companies and nonprofit emergency medical services agencies.
(2) Program criteria. The Board shall establish, by resolution, the
criteria that must be met during the eligibility period to qualify for
credits under the program based on the following:
(a) The number of emergency response calls to which a volunteer
responds.
(b) The level of training and participation in formal training and
drills for a volunteer.
13.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 22-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-8
1:35
(c) The total amount of time expended by a volunteer on
administrative and other support services, including but not
limited to:
[1] Fundraising.
[2] Providing facility or equipment maintenance .
[3] Financial bookkeeping.
(d) The involvement in other events or projects that aid the
financial viability, emergency response or operational
readiness of a volunteer fire company or a nonprofit
emergency medical service agency.
(e) The total number of years the volunteer has served.
(3) Eligible entities. The Volunteer Service Credit Program is available
to VFD personnel and nonprofit emergency medical service
agencies, residing within any member municipality of the NHCOG,
and having a written mutual aid agreement with Shaler Township
Volunteer Fire Companies and Shaler EMS, who have been
certified by their respective Fire Chief, and approved by the
pertinent municipality, as meeting the individual service
qualifications of the applicable Act 172 ordinance. Such entities
include:
(a) Bauerstown Volunteer Fire Department, 15 Wible Run Road,
Pittsburgh, PA 15209.
(b) Cherry City Volunteer Fire Company, 309 Davis Avenue,
Pittsburgh, PA 15209.
(c) Elfinwild Volunteer Fire Company, 2807 Mt. Royal Boulevard,
Glenshaw, PA 15116.
(d) Shaler Villa Volunteer Fire Company, 960 Saxonburg
Boulevard, Pittsburgh, PA 15223.
(e) Sharps Hill Volunteer Fire Department, 503 Berner Street,
Pittsburgh, PA 15215.
(f) Undercliff Volunteer Fire Company, 700 Mt. Royal Boulevard,
Pittsburgh, PA 15223.
(g) Shaler Emergency Medical Services, 339 Wetzel Road,
Glenshaw, PA 15116.
(4) Eligibility period. A volunteer must meet the minimum criteria, set
by resolution under this section, during the eligibility period set
forth in this section to qualify for the tax credits authorized under
Subsection C.
§ 22-8 SHALER CODE § 22-8
1:36
(a) For Tax Year 2017, the eligibility period under the Volunteer
Service Credit Program shall run from January 20, 2017, until
October 31, 2017.
(b) For Tax Year 2018, and each tax year thereafter, the eligibility
period shall run from the prior November 1 until October 31 of
the year for which the tax credit will apply.
(5) Recordkeeping. The Chief of each volunteer fire company or the
Supervisor of the nonprofit emergency medical service agency
listed under Subsection B(3) shall keep specific records of each
volunteer's activities in a service log to establish credits under the
Volunteer Service Credit Program. Service logs shall be subject to
audit/review by:
(a) The Township of Shaler Manager or the Manager's designee;
(b) The State Fire Commissioner; and
(c) The State Auditor General.
(6) Volunteer application. On or before the first Monday in November
of each year, volunteers who have met the minimum criteria of the
Volunteer Service Credit Program shall sign and submit an
application for certification provided by the Township of Shaler to
their Chief or Supervisor. The Chief or Supervisor shall sign the
application if the volunteer has met the minimum criteria of the
Volunteer Service Credit Program during the eligibility period, and
shall forward said application to the Manager for the Township of
Shaler together with the notarized list required by Subsection B(7)
within the time frame specified herein.
(7) Notarized List. On or before November 15 of each year, the Chief,
or Supervisor, shall mail or hand deliver to the Manager for the
Township of Shaler a notarized eligibility list of all volunteers that
have met the minimum criteria for the Volunteer Service Credit
Program and applied for certification pursuant to Subsection B(6).
The Chief or Supervisor shall post the notarized eligibility list in an
accessible area of the volunteer agency's facilities.
(8) Municipal review. The Manager for the Township of Shaler shall
review the applications for credit under the Volunteer Service
Credit Program and shall cross-reference them with the notarized
eligibility list. At the first regular meeting in December of each
year, the Board of Commissioners for the Township of Shaler shall
approve or disapprove the volunteers that appear on the notarized
list submitted by the Chief or Supervisor pursuant to Subsection
B(6). All applicants approved by the Board of Commissioners for
the Township of Shaler shall be issued a tax credit certificate by the
Manager for the Township of Shaler by no later than December 15
of each year.
§ 22-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-8
1:37
(9) Appeal of denial of certification. A volunteer who is denied
certification as an active volunteer shall have the right to request a
hearing before Board of Commissioners within 30 days of the
denial pursuant to the provisions of 2 Pa.C.S.A. Chapter 5,
Subchapter B (relating to practice and procedure of local
agencies), and 2 Pa.C.S.A. Chapter 7, Subchapter B (relating to
judicial review of local agency action), also known as the "Local
Agency Law."
(10) Official tax credit register. The Township of Shaler shall keep an
official tax credit register of all active volunteers that were issued
tax credit certificates. No later than December 31 of each year, the
Manager for the Township of Shaler shall issue updates, as needed,
of the official tax credit register to the following:
(a) The Board of Commissioners for the Township of Shaler;
(b) Chief of the volunteer fire company;
(c) Authorized Earned Income Tax Collector;
(d) Chief or Supervisor of the nonprofit emergency medical
services agency.
(11) Injured volunteers.
(a) An emergency responder that is injured during an emergency
response call may be eligible for future tax credits. The injury
must have occurred while responding to, participating in, or
returning from an emergency response call with one of the
entities listed under Subsection B(3).
(b) An injured emergency responder shall provide documentation
from a licensed physician with the application required under
Subsection B(6) stating that his or her injury prevents him or
her from performing duties to qualify as an active volunteer. In
such a case, the injured emergency responder shall be deemed
an active volunteer for that tax year.
(c) An injured emergency responder shall annually submit the
application required under Subsection B(6), along with
updated documentation from a licensed physician stating that
the injury still exists and prevents him or her from qualifying as
an active volunteer. The injured emergency responder shall
again be deemed an active volunteer for that tax year. An
injured emergency responder shall only be deemed an active
volunteer for a maximum of five consecutive tax years.
C. Earned income tax credit.
(1) Tax credit. Each active volunteer who has been certified under the
Township of Shaler Volunteer Service Credit Program shall be
eligible to receive a tax credit of up to $300 of the earned income
§ 22-8 SHALER CODE § 22-8
1:38
tax levied by the Township of Shaler. When an active volunteer's
earned income tax liability is less than the amount of the tax
credit, the tax credit shall equal the individual's earned income tax
liability.
(2) Claim. An active volunteer with a tax credit certificate may claim a
tax credit on his or her Township of Shaler earned income tax
liability when filing a final return for the preceding calendar year
with the authorized Earned Income Tax Collector.
(3) Rejection of tax credit claim.
(a) The Tax Officer shall reject a claim for a tax credit if the
taxpayer is not on the official tax credit register issued by the
Manager for the Township of Shaler.
(b) If the Tax Officer rejects the claim, the taxpayer shall be
notified in writing of the decision. The notice shall include the
reasons for the rejection and provide the method of appealing
the decision pursuant to Subsection D.
(c) Taxpayers shall have 30 days to appeal the decision of the Tax
Officer pursuant to Subsection D.
D. Appeals.
(1) Earned income tax credit appeals.
(a) Any taxpayer aggrieved by a decision under Subsection C shall
have a right to appeal said decision.
(b) A taxpayer shall have 30 days to appeal a decision or rejection
of a claim.
(c) All appeals of decisions under Subsection C shall follow the
provisions of the Act of May 5, 1998, P.L. 301, No. 50, known as
the "Local Taxpayers Bill of Rights."14
E. Penalties for false reporting.
(1) Any individual who knowingly makes or conspires to make a false
report in an application for certification under this section commits
a misdemeanor of the first degree punishable by a fine of $2,500.
(2) Any individual who knowingly provides or conspires to provide
false information that is used to compile a service log under this
section commits a misdemeanor of the first degree punishable by a
fine of $2,500.
14.Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 8421 et seq.
§ 22-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-8
1:39
Chapter 24
INTERGOVERNMENTAL AGREEMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
North Hills Council of Governments — See
Ch. 35.
Police Department — See Ch. 40.
§ 22-8 SHALER CODE § 22-8
1:40
ARTICLE I
NEWCOM
[Adopted 7-11-1995 by Ord. No. 1724]
§ 24-1. Creation of intergovernmental emergency dispatching and
communication entity.
The Township is hereby authorized to create an intergovernmental
emergency dispatching and communication entity consisting of, but not
limited to, one or more of the municipalities of Aspinwall, Blawnox, Etna,
Fox Chapel, Hampton, Indiana, Millvale, O'Hara, Reserve, Richland, Shaler,
Sharpsburg or West Deer.
§ 24-2. Delegation of transfer of emergency dispatching and
communication services.
The Township is hereby authorized to delegate or transfer its emergency
dispatching and communication services to such intergovernmental entity,
which shall manage and operate an emergency communication dispatch
center.
§ 24-3. Approval of agreement.
The intergovernmental cooperation agreement ("agreement"), attached
hereto and made a part of this article, between the Township and the above
municipalities creating such entity is hereby approved and ratified in all
respects.15
§ 24-4. Conditions of agreement.
The conditions of the agreement are those conditions set forth therein.
§ 24-5. Duration and term.
The agreement shall be effective for one year, commencing January 1, 1996,
and will remain in effect on a year-to-year basis thereafter, until renewed,
amended or terminated as set forth in the agreement.
§ 24-6. Purpose and objectives.
The purpose and objectives of the agreement are those purposes and
objectives set forth therein.
§ 24-7. Powers and scope of authority delegated.
A. The intergovernmental communication entity is hereby authorized to
establish a board of delegates to provide for representation of all
municipalities thereon. The Board is hereby authorized to set policies,
adopt a budget and generally govern the emergency dispatching and
15.Editor's Note: Said agreement is on file in the Township offices.
§ 24-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-7
1:41
§ 24-8. Manner and extent of financing.
The manner and extent of financing of the entity shall be the manner and
extent as set forth in the agreement.
§ 24-9. Organizational structure.
The organization structure of the entity shall be that organizational
structure as set forth in the agreement.
§ 24-10. Acquisition, management and disposal of property.
The entity may acquire, manage and dispose of property as set forth in the
agreement.
§ 24-11. Power to enter into contracts.
The entity is hereby authorized to enter into contracts for policies of group
insurance and employee benefits, including social security, for its
employees, as determined by the Board of Delegates.
§ 24-12. Execution of agreement.
The proper officers of the Township are hereby authorized and directed to
execute and deliver to the other municipalities the attached agreement and
any additional documents to effectuate the purposes of this article as well
as the agreement.
communication services of the emergency communication dispatch
center, which shall be known as "NEWCOM." The Board shall be
comprised of one delegate from each participating municipality. Each
delegate shall be a member of the governing body of the municipality
represented and shall have one vote on the Board per each 1,000
municipal residents, based upon the most recent United States census,
rounded down to the nearest whole number. The affirmative vote of
a majority of the total weighted votes of the Board shall be required
in order to take action, which action shall be binding upon each
municipality. The Board shall meet regularly as it shall determine.
B. An operating committee is also authorized to be created at the
administrative level to carry out the policies of the Board in the
operation of NEWCOM and to perform such other functions as shall be
designated by the Board. The Committee shall be comprised of the
Municipal Manager/Secretary of each municipality. Each member shall
have one vote in the Committee. The affirmative vote of a majority of all
of the members of the Committee shall be required in order to take
action or approve a Committee recommendation. The Committee shall
meet regularly as it shall determine. The Committee shall develop
recommendations of policies, budgets and procedures for NEWCOM.
Such recommendations shall be subject to approval by the Board.
§ 24-7 SHALER CODE § 24-13
1:42
§ 24-13. Statutory authority.
This article is adopted pursuant to the powers and authority of the
Intergovernmental Cooperation Act, 53 P.S. § 481.16
16.Editor's Note: See now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq, Intergovernmental Cooperation Act
1996
§ 24-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-13
1:43

ARTICLE II
North Hills Council of Governments Municipal Appeals Board
[Adopted 5-12-2009 by Ord. No. 1877]
§ 24-14. Authorization to enter into agreement.
Pursuant to the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act, 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301
et seq., the Township of Shaler is hereby authorized to enter into a joint
intergovernmental cooperation agreement with any or all of the
municipalities of the Borough of Bradford Woods, the Township of
Cranberry, the Borough of Etna, the Borough of Fox Chapel, the Borough
of Franklin Park, the Township of Hampton, the Township of Indiana, the
Township of Marshall, the Town of McCandless, the Borough of Millvale,
the Township of O'Hara, the Township of Ohio, the Township of Pine, the
Township of Reserve, the Township of Richland, the Township of Ross, the
Borough of Sharpsburg, the Township of West Deer, the Borough of West
View (hereinafter "the member municipalities") and the North Hills Council
of Governments (hereinafter "the NHCOG") to establish the North Hills
Council of Governments Municipal Appeals Board.
§ 24-15. Authorization to execute agreement.
The proper officers of the Township are hereby authorized to take any and
all steps necessary to execute an intergovernmental cooperation agreement
by and between the member municipalities to effectuate the authorization
granted by this article.
§ 24-16. Conditions of agreement.
The conditions of the intergovernmental cooperation agreement are those
conditions set forth therein, a copy of which is attached hereto and made a
part hereof as Exhibit 1.17
§ 24-17. Duration and term.
The intergovernmental cooperation agreement shall be effective
immediately for two years and will remain in effect on a calendar-year-toyear
basis thereafter, until renewed, amended or terminated as set forth in
the intergovernmental cooperation agreement by and between the member
municipalities.
§ 24-18. Purpose and objectives.
The purpose and objectives of the intergovernmental cooperation
agreement are those purposes and objectives set forth therein.
17.Editor's Note: A copy of said exhibit (the agreement) is on file in the Township offices.
§ 24-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-19
1:45
§ 24-19. Powers and scope of authority delegated.
The NHCOG is hereby authorized to manage the Municipal Appeals Board
as set forth in the intergovernmental cooperation agreement and the bylaws
of the Appeals Board.
§ 24-20. Manner and extent of financing.
The manner and extent of financing of the Municipal Appeals Board shall be
as agreed upon by the member municipalities.
§ 24-21. Organizational structure.
The organizational structure of the Municipal Appeals Board authorized by
this article shall be the organizational structure set forth in the agreement
between the member municipalities.
§ 24-22. Acquisition, management and disposal of property.
The acquisition, management and disposal of property is set forth in the
intergovernmental cooperation agreement.
§ 24-23. Power to enter into contracts.
The NHCOG Municipal Appeals Board is not authorized to enter into
contracts.
§ 24-24. Legislative authority.
This article is adopted pursuant to the powers and authority of the
Intergovernmental Cooperation Act, 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2305.
§ 24-25. Affirmation of other intergovernmental cooperation
agreements.
All provisions of all other intergovernmental cooperation agreements
between the member municipalities not conflicting with the provisions
hereof are ratified and affirmed.
§ 24-19 SHALER CODE § 24-25
1:46
ARTICLE III
Regional Speed Enforcement
[Adopted 4-8-2014 by Ord. No. 1924]
§ 24-26. Approval of agreement.
Pursuant to the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act, 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et
seq., the terms and conditions of the Municipal Regional Police Department
Speed Enforcement Intergovernmental Agreement, a copy of which is
attached hereto and made a part hereof as Exhibit "A," is hereby
approved.18
§ 24-27. Execution of agreement.
The proper officers of the Township, specifically the Township Chief of
Police, Chief Bryan B. Kelly, and/or the Township Manager, Timothy J.
Rogers, Esquire, is hereby authorized to execute the within Municipal
Regional Police Department Speed Enforcement Intergovernmental
Agreement with the PSP (Pennsylvania State Police) on behalf of the
Township.
§ 24-28. Term of agreement.
This Agreement shall remain in effect for a period of two years from the
date of execution unless rescinded or annulled by either party.
§ 24-29. Effect on participating officers.
The PSP and all participating municipalities, including the Township of
Shaler, as host municipalities, invite, accept and will receive those officers
of any other participating municipality (including any subsequently made
officers) to be police officers of the host municipality during the current
contract term and any renewals thereof.
18.Editor's Note: A copy of said exhibit (the agreement) is on file in the Township offices.
§ 24-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-29
1:47
Chapter 26
LIBRARY
§ 26-1. Designation of public library.
Whereas the North Hills Library was established to provide library service
to the residents and taxpayers of the Township of Shaler, it is hereby
authorized by the Board of Commissioners that the Board does designate
the Library to act as a legal agent of the Township of Shaler for the purpose
of providing public library service to said residents for and on behalf of the
Township of Shaler.
§ 26-2. Maintenance. [Amended 10-8-1996 by Ord. No. 1742]
The Township of Shaler does hereby agree to assist in the maintenance
of the Shaler North Hills Library, from this time on to be known and
designated as the "Shaler North Hills Library," in accordance with the
provisions of Section 401 of the Library Code, Act of June 14, 1961, P.L.
324.19
§ 26-3. Board of Directors.
In accordance with Section 411 of the said Library Code,20 the Township
does hereby appoint seven persons to serve as its representatives on the
Board of Directors of the Township of Shaler North Hills Library, each
representative to serve for the term of three years, the terms of same to
expire on different calendar years. All subsequent vacancies thereon shall
be filled by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Shaler.
§ 26-4. Bonding.
In accordance with Section 412 of the Library Code,21 the designated
Treasurer of the Board of Directors of said Library shall give a bond to
the municipality with satisfactory surety in such amount as the Board of
Directors shall determine.
§ 26-5. Finances.
In accordance with Section 413 of the Library Code,22 the Board of
Directors of the Library shall prepare and furnish a financial report annually
to the Township of Shaler, and said Township shall arrange to have all
accounts of said Treasurer and the Board of Directors of said Library
audited annually as in the case of all other municipal expenditures.
19.Editor's Note: See now 24 Pa.C.S.A. § 9351, the Public Library Code.
20.Editor's Note: See now 24 Pa.C.S.A. § 9318, the Public Library Code.
21.Editor's Note: See now 24 Pa.C.S.A. § 9318, the Public Library Code.
22.Editor's Note: See now 24 Pa.C.S.A. § 9318, the Public Library Code.
§ 24-29 SHALER CODE § 26-6
1:48
§ 26-6. Reports.
The Board of Directors of the Library shall prepare and present to the
Township of Shaler such reports as are required by Section 414 of the
Library Code,23 and shall give and provide free library service to the
residents and taxpayers of the Township of Shaler as provided in Section
415 of the Library Code.24
Chapter 29
LOCAL GOVERNMENT INVESTMENT TRUST
GENERAL REFERENCES
Girty's Run Joint Sewer Authority — See Ch. 5,
Art. I.
North Hills Council of Governments — See
Ch. 35.
Intergovernmental police cooperation — See
Ch. 40, Art. II.
§ 29-1. Entering of trust.
This governmental unit shall join with other local governmental units in
accordance with the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act25 by becoming a
settlor of the Pennsylvania Local Government Investment Trust (the "Trust")
and entering into the Declaration of Trust, which is adopted by reference
with the same effect as if it had been set out verbatim in this section, and
a copy of which shall be filed with the minutes of the meeting at which this
chapter was adopted.
§ 29-2. Purchase of shares.
This governmental unit is authorized to purchase shares in the Trust from
time to time with available funds and to redeem some or all of those shares
from time to time as funds are needed for other purposes. These actions are
to be taken by the officers designated for this purpose, pursuant to general
or specific instructions by the governing body of this governmental unit.
§ 29-3. Custody of funds.
The trustees of the Trust are designated as having official custody of this
governmental unit's funds which are invested by the purchase of shares in
the Trust.
23.Editor's Note: See now 24 Pa.C.S.A. § 9318, the Public Library Code.
24.Editor's Note: See now 24 Pa.C.S.A. § 9371, the Public Library Code.
25.Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
§ 26-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-4
1:49
§ 29-4. Findings.
As required by the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act, the following
matters are specifically found and determined:
Chapter 32
MANAGER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Residency requirements — See Ch. 44. Retirement — See Ch. 47.
§ 32-1. Establishment of office.
The office of Township Manager is hereby created for the Township of
Shaler.
A. The conditions of the agreement are set forth in the Declaration of
Trust referred to in § 29-1.
B. This governmental unit's participation in the Trust shall be terminable
at any time by resolution.
C. The Declaration of Trust and the purchase of its shares are for the
purpose of investing this governmental units funds in obligations which
are otherwise legal investments, as part of a pooled arrangement with
other local governmental units, thereby achieving economic and other
advantages of pooled investments; and the powers and scope of
authority delegated are set forth in the Declaration of Trust referred to
in § 29-1.
D. It is not necessary to finance the agreement authorized herein from
funds of this governmental unit except through the purchase of shares
in the Trust.
E. The Trust shall be managed by a board of trustees as set forth in the
Declaration of Trust and the bylaws provided for therein.
F. Shares may be repurchased and redeemed from time to time as this
governmental unit may determine to be necessary or appropriate to
meet its cash investment requirements.
G. The Trust shall be empowered to enter into contracts for policies of
group insurance and employee benefits, including social security, for its
employees.
§ 29-4 SHALER CODE § 32-2
1:50
§ 32-2. Appointment; term; removal. [Amended 3-27-1951 by Ord.
No. 524; 6-13-1961 by Ord. No. 900]
The Board of Township Commissioners, by a majority vote of said Board,
shall appoint a suitable person for the office of Township Manager, who
shall serve until the first Monday of January of the even-numbered year
following said appointment and/or until his successor has qualified; subject,
however, to removal at any time by a majority vote of the Commissioners of
the Township of Shaler.
§ 32-3. Powers and duties.
The Township Manager shall perform the following duties and such other
duties as may be, from time to time, delegated to him by the Township
Commissioners and subject to the supervision and control of the proper
committee of said Board of Commissioners having in charge the respective
matters to be done and performed by said Township Manager:
A. The Township Manager shall exercise supervision over the
construction, maintenance and repair of the sewer system of the
Township and shall supervise the keeping of the same in proper and
sanitary condition.
B. The Township Manager shall exercise supervision over the public
buildings of the Township, shall arrange for the cleaning of the same as
often as may be reasonably necessary and shall provide that the same
are kept and maintained in proper repair and in clean and sanitary
condition.26
C. It shall be the duty of the Township Manager from time to time to make
inspection of all public work of said Township for the purpose of
determining whether the same is being done in accordance with the
contract and plans and specifications relating thereto. The inspection is
to be in addition to the inspection furnished by the Township Engineer.
All violations disclosed by said inspection shall be reported by the
Township Manager promptly to the Chairman of the Streets, Highways
or Water Committee and the Township Engineer. Before work is started,
complete copies of contract, plans and specifications approved by the
proper committee must be furnished to the Township Manager.
D. It shall be the duty of the Township Manager to direct the care, custody
and repair of all tools, machinery and equipment belonging to the
Township and used by it in construction, repair and maintenance of the
highway, water and sewer system of said Township, and report to the
proper committee of the Commissioners the need of supplies, repairs
and additional equipment from time to time.
26.Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, regarding the supervisory powers of the Township
Manager, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 5-14-1996 by Ord. No.
1739. See now Chapter 90, Building Construction.
§ 32-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 32-3
1:51
§ 32-4. Bond.
The Township Manager shall give bond to the Township with sureties to be
approved by the Board of Commissioners, in an amount stipulated by the
E. It shall be the duty of the Township Manager to purchase equipment
and supplies pursuant to action of the Board of Commissioners, and the
Township Manager shall also purchase the necessary minor supplies
and equipment required for the ordinary work of the Township.
F. It shall be the duty of the Township Manager to receive complaints,
remonstrances, requests for service and other such demands of
citizens, to investigate the same and to make report thereon to the
Board of Commissioners or to the proper committee thereof.
G. The Township Manager shall exercise supervision over the employees
in the various departments herein placed under his control. He shall
have authority, for cause and without pay, to suspend any employee
until the succeeding regular meeting of the Board of Township
Commissioners, at which time the Board of Township Commissioners,
by a vote of not fewer than five members, shall discharge or reinstate
such employee. He shall exercise general supervision in the repair and
maintenance of the streets and highways and water system of the
Township, the actual work upon which shall be under the direct
supervision of the Road Superintendent and the Water Superintendent,
respectively, who shall report to the Board of Commissioners through
the Township Manager. [Amended 3-27-1951 by Ord. No. 524]
H. The duties of the Township Manager shall further consist of the general
management of all other business of the Township not especially given
by statute or by ordinance of the Township to other officers thereof, and
the Township Manager shall perform such further and additional
administrative work of the Township as from time to time may be
directed by the action of the Board of Commissioners.
I. The Township Manager shall exercise general supervision over such
policemen as from time to time may be employed by the Board of
Township Commissioners, which shall designate one of said policemen
as the Chief of Police. The Township Manager shall have full charge and
control, subject to such instructions as he may receive from the Board
of Commissioners, of the Chief of Police and the police force, and he
shall direct the time during which, the place where and the manner in
which the Chief of Police and the police force shall perform their duties.
Said Township Manager shall have authority, for cause and without pay,
to suspend any policeman until the succeeding regular meeting of the
Board of Township Commissioners, at which time the Board of
Township Commissioners, by a vote of not less than five members, may
discharge or reinstate such policeman, subject to police civil service
ordinances.27 [Amended 3-27-1951 by Ord. No. 524]
27.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 55625 et seq.
§ 32-3 SHALER CODE § 32-4
1:52
Township Commissioners, conditioned for the faithful performance of the
duties of his office.
Chapter 35
NORTH HILLS COUNCIL OF GOVERNMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Municipal authorities — See Ch. 5, Art. I.
Intergovernmental agreements — See Ch. 24.
Local government investment trust — See Ch.
29.
Intergovernmental police assistance — See
Ch. 40, Art. II.
§ 35-1. Formation; representative.
In accordance with the provisions of Act No. 180 of 1972, 53 P.S. § 481
et seq.,28 the Township of Shaler hereby joins with the other participating
members in the existing unincorporated association known as the "North
Hills Council of Governments," in the formation of a Pennsylvania nonprofit
corporation to be known as the "North Hills Council of Governments, Inc.,"
and the person presently designated as the representative of the Township
of Shaler is hereby authorized to execute Articles of Incorporation for the
formation of said corporation.
§ 35-2. Purpose.
The purpose of the corporation shall be as set forth in the present bylaws of
the existing unincorporated association known as the "North Hills Council
of Governments" and also for the purpose of acquiring and owning both real
and personal property, applying for and receiving moneys in the form of
grants or loans, applying for self-insuring Worker's Compensation Act of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,29 covering those members desiring to join
in such application, and also for such other lawful purposes as may in the
future be desirable in order to carry on the intergovernmental cooperation
aims of the corporation.
§ 35-3. Term.
The term for which the corporation is to exist is perpetual, but member
communities may join and withdraw from the corporation as set forth in the
bylaws of the existing unincorporated association known as the "North Hills
Council of Governments."
28.Editor's Note: See now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.; Act No. 180 of 1972 was repealed by
Act No. 177 of 1996, the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act.
29.Editor's Note: See 77 P.S. § 1 et seq.
§ 32-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 35-4
1:53
§ 35-4. Financing.
The North Hills Council of Governments, Inc., shall be financed by annual
dues paid by member municipalities and by funds obtained by the
corporation from public or private sources.
§ 35-5. Organization; management of property.
The organizational structure of the corporation and the manner in which
real or personal property shall be acquired, managed or disposed of shall be
as set forth in the bylaws of the existing unincorporated association known
as the "North Hills Council of Governments."
§ 35-6. Effect of legal obligations.
No action taken by the North Hills Council of Governments, Inc., which
creates a legal obligation, whether it be contractual, financial or otherwise,
upon a member municipality, shall be binding upon the municipality unless
and until its legislative body ordains, resolves or otherwise approves the
actions recommended by the corporation in accordance with the procedures
set forth in the appropriate municipal code, charter or administrative
ordinance.
Chapter 40
POLICE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Regional speed enforcement — See Ch. 24,
Art. III.
Retirement — See Ch. 47.
Seized vehicles — See Ch. 215.
§ 35-4 SHALER CODE § 35-6
1:54
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 2-5-1929 by Ord. No. 192; amended in its entirety
5-14-1996 by Ord. No. 1739]
§ 40-1. Continuation; governing regulations.
The Shaler Township Police Department, as presently constituted, is hereby
continued. Said Police Department shall be governed by the provisions
of the First Class Township Code,30 the Police Department rules and
regulations and any other state or Township legislation which may apply.
30.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 55625 et seq. and 53 P.S. § 56401 et seq.
§ 40-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-1
1:55

ARTICLE II
Intergovernmental Police Cooperation
[Adopted 12-11-1990 by Ord. No. 1662]
§ 40-2. Entering of agreement.
The proper officers of the Township of Shaler are hereby authorized to
enter into an intergovernmental police cooperation agreement with the
Townships of Ross, Hampton, Reserve, Kilbuck, Indiana, Richland, Ohio,
Pine-Marshall-Bradfordwoods, McCandless, West Deer, Crescent, Leet,
Aleppo, Sewickley Heights and the Boroughs of Millvale, Sharpsburg, Etna,
West View, Edgeworth, Aspinwall, Bellevue, Avalon, Franklin Park, Bell
Acres, Leetsdale and Blawnox, as well as the City of Pittsburgh, and any
prior intergovernmental police cooperation agreement with the above
municipalities is hereby ratified and approved by which the police officers
of each municipality are granted authority to officially act as police officers
of the other municipality, subject to the terms of the agreement, when
performing duties in the other municipality, and establishing procedures for
the police department of each municipality to render aid and assistance
to one another, such agreement to conform substantially to the agreement
attached hereto and made a part of this article as Exhibit "A."31
§ 40-3. Duration.
The duration of the agreement shall be indefinite, subject to termination by
any municipality as provided in the agreement.
§ 40-4. Purpose.
The purpose and objective of the agreement is to foster improved
governmental cooperation between the Townships and boroughs listed to
improve law enforcement in the County of Allegheny, by providing police
officers with the authority to exercise official duties in the other
municipalities thereby alleviating problems of arrests being determined
improper or unlawful by reason of jurisdictional or boundary issues.
§ 40-5. Expenses.
Each municipality shall be responsible for all expenses incurred by reason
of action taken by its police pursuant to the agreement, no other financing
being necessary or required to effect its purpose.
§ 40-6. Limitations.
No additional organizational structure will be necessary to implement this
agreement, nor will any property, real or personal, be acquired, managed or
disposed of in order to effect the purpose of the agreement.
31.Editor's Note: Said agreement is on file in the Township offices.
§ 40-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-7
1:57
§ 40-7. Effectiveness of article.
The effectiveness of this article is conditioned upon the other townships
and boroughs executing the aforesaid agreement and enacting an ordinance
implementing the agreement.
§ 40-8. Statutory authorization.
This action is taken pursuant to the authority granted the Township of
Shaler by the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act, 1972, July 12, No. 180,
§ 1 et seq., 53 P.S. § 481 et seq., as amended.32
32.Editor's Note: See now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.; Act No. 180 of 1972 was repealed by
Act No. 177 of 1996, the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act.
§ 40-7 SHALER CODE § 40-8
1:58
ARTICLE III
Restitution of Workers' Compensation Paid to Police Officers
[Adopted 1-13-1998 by Ord. No. 1752]
§ 40-9. Provisions in effect.
From and after the effective date of this article, the following provisions
shall be in full force and effect in the Township of Shaler.
§ 40-10. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Township of Shaler Restitution of
Workers' Compensation Paid to Police Officers Ordinance."
§ 40-11. Purpose and intention.
This article is adopted for the above-stated purposes33 and to aid in
compensating victims for harm directly caused by an offender, to decrease
the cost of workers' compensation insurance in order to minimize taxes to
the residents of the Township of Shaler, to minimize losses sustained by the
Township and its police officers through workers' compensation payments
which occur as a direct result of criminal conduct inflicted upon its police
officers by criminal offenders and to obtain restitution for losses sustained
by the Township and its police officers as the direct result of criminal
conduct resulting in personal injury to police officers in the performance of
their official duties.
§ 40-12. Rules of construction.
A. In the construction of this article, the rules and definitions contained in
this section shall be observed and applied, except when the context
clearly indicates otherwise.
B. Words used in the singular shall include the plural, and the plural the
singular.
C. Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense.
33.Editor's Note: The preamble of this article listed the following purposes for its enactment:
A. 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 1106 mandates that offenders convicted of criminal conduct wherein
victims suffer personal injury directly resulting from the crime may be sentenced to make
restitution in addition to the punishment prescribed therefor. B. Restitution should be
encouraged as both an aid in assisting an offender's rehabilitation and as an aid in
compensating a victim for harm directly caused by an offender. C. 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 1106
requires that mandatory restitution shall be ordered to the victim, the Crime Victim's
Compensation Board, any other governmental agency which has provided reimbursement
to the victim as a result of the offender's criminal conduct and any insurance company
which has provided reimbursement to the victim as a result of the offender's criminal
conduct. D. The Board of Commissioners of Shaler Township desires to decrease the cost
of workers' compensation insurance in order to minimize taxes for the residents of the
Township. E. The Board of Commissioners intends to minimize losses sustained by the
Township and its police officers through workers' compensation payments which occur as
a direct result of criminal conduct inflicted upon its police officers by criminal offenders F.
The Township desires to obtain restitution of losses sustained by the Township and its
police officers as the direct result of criminal conduct resulting in personal injury to its
police officers in the performance of their official duties.
§ 40-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-12
1:59
§ 40-13. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CRIME — Any offense punishable under Title 18 Pennsylvania Consolidated
Statutes or Title 75 Pennsylvania Consolidated Statutes.
OFFENDER — Any person, except a victim, who criminally causes personal
injury to the person or property of another as a direct result of a crime and
who is adjudged guilty of an offense punishable under Title 18 Pennsylvania
Consolidated Statutes or Title 75 Pennsylvania Consolidated Statutes.
PERSONAL INJURY — Actual bodily harm directly resulting from the crime.
POLICE OFFICER — Any person duly employed by the Township of Shaler
who is, by law, given the power to arrest when acting within the scope of
the person's employment.
RESTITUTION — The return of property of the victim or payments in cash
or the equivalent thereof pursuant to an order of a court.
VICTIM — Any person, except an offender, who suffered injuries to his
person or property as a direct result of the crime. The term "victim"
specifically includes the Township of Shaler and any insurance company
that has compensated the victim for loss under an insurance contract.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Shaler.
TOWNSHIP MANAGER — The Manager of the Township of Shaler.
§ 40-14. Requirement of offenders to make restitution.
When required as a condition of probation or parole, offenders convicted
of a crime wherein a police officer suffered injury to property or personal
injury directly resulting from the crime shall make restitution in the amount
of the value of the loss sustained by the victim, the Township or an
insurance company, as ordered by the sentencing court.
§ 40-15. Duties of police officers.
D. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary.
E. The word "may" is permissive.
F. This article shall be liberally construed to accomplish its purpose to
protect the public's health, safety and welfare.
A. Request for information of loss. When a Township police officer who has
suffered personal injury receives notification from the District
Attorney's Office of a pending trial for the offender, the officer who
suffered personal injury shall request the Township Manager to provide
to the officer the monetary value of the loss sustained by the Township
and the Township's insurance carrier.
§ 40-12 SHALER CODE § 40-15
1:60
§ 40-16. Duties of Township Manager.
B. Reporting. If the offender is convicted of a crime which resulted in
personal injury to the Township police officer, the police officer shall
inform the Assistant District Attorney prior to sentencing of the loss
sustained by the victim, the Township and the Township's insurance
carrier so that restitution may be ordered by the court pursuant to 18
Pa.C.S.A. § 1106(c).
C. Preservation of private remedies. No judgment or order of restitution
shall debar the Township or any police officer who sustained personal
injury, by appropriate action, to recover from the offender as otherwise
provided by law, provided that any civil award shall be reduced by the
amount paid under this article.
A. Notification of value of Township loss. Upon request from a Township
police officer who has suffered personal injury directly resulting from a
crime, the Township Manager shall provide to the requesting officer the
monetary value of the loss sustained by the Township and the
Township's insurance carrier.
B. Value of loss. Value of Township loss shall include, but not be limited to,
medical expenses, amount of medical expenses not covered by the
Township insurance carrier, amount of compensation received by the
police officer during absence from duty caused by the offender and the
amount of compensation paid to the police officer not reimbursed by the
insurance carrier of the Township as a direct result of the offender's
crime.
§ 40-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-16
1:61

ARTICLE IV
Mutual Aid Agreement
[Adopted 5-12-1998 by Ord. No. 1759]
§ 40-17. Participation authorized.
The Township is hereby authorized to enter into an agreement for the
mutual aid of police services between the municipalities of Aspinwall,
Blawnox, Bradford Woods, Etna, Fox Chapel, Hampton, Indiana, Marshall,
Millvale, O'Hara, Pine, Reserve, Richland, Ross, Shaler, Sharpsburg and
West Deer and any other member police departments of the NEWCOM
Communications Dispatch Center.
§ 40-18. Approval.
The intergovernmental cooperation agreement, attached hereto and made
a part of this article,34 between the Township and the above municipalities
is hereby approved and ratified in all respects.
§ 40-19. Conditions of agreement.
The conditions of the agreement are those conditions set forth therein.
§ 40-20. Duration and term.
The agreement shall be effective for one year commencing March 1, 1998,
and will remain in effect on a year-to-year basis thereafter, until renewed,
amended or terminated as set forth in the agreement.
§ 40-21. Purpose and objectives.
The purpose and objectives of the agreement are those purposes and
objectives set forth therein.
§ 40-22. Powers and scope of authority delegated.
The power and scope of authority of the agreement are the power and scope
of authority as set forth therein.
§ 40-23. Manner and extent of financing.
The manner and extent of financing of the costs of the mutual aid rendered
shall be the manner and extent as set forth in the agreement.
§ 40-24. Organizational structure.
The agreement is an agreement to provide mutual aid upon request, and it
is not anticipated that an organizational structure will exist.
34.Editor's Note: Said agreement is on file in the Township offices.
§ 40-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-25
1:63
§ 40-25. Acquisition, management and disposal of property.
The agreement is an agreement to provide mutual aid upon request, and
it is neither contemplated nor intended that the mutual aid agreement will
confer authority to acquire manage or dispose of property.
§ 40-26. Power to enter into contracts.
The agreement is an agreement to provide mutual aid upon request, and it
is neither contemplated nor intended that any contracts be entered into for
policies of group insurance and employee benefits, including social security.
§ 40-27. Authority to execute and deliver.
The proper officers of the Township are hereby authorized and directed to
execute and deliver to the other municipalities the attached agreement and
any additional documents to effectuate the purposes of this article as well
as the agreement.
§ 40-28. Legislative authority.
This article is adopted pursuant to the powers and authority of the
Intergovernmental Cooperation Act, 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
§ 40-25 SHALER CODE § 40-28
1:64
Chapter 42
PROPERTY, MUNICIPAL
§ 40-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-28
1:65

ARTICLE I
Dedication of Beyerle Property
[Adopted 1-3-2006 by Ord. No. 1843]
§ 42-1. Dedication of Beyerle property for recreational purposes
forever.
From and after the effective date of this article and pursuant to the abovementioned
Order of Court at Case No. 5682 of 2005,35 the Township hereby
formally substitutes the 7.7 acres of Township property as shown on the GIS
Map of Allegheny County and known as "the Beyerle property" and located
at the intersection of Beyerle Road and Little Pine Creek Road in Shaler
Township, which property is of at least equal size and value, in exchange
for the Kiwanis Park trust property, pursuant to 53 P.S. § 3384(1), and the
Township of Shaler hereby formally dedicates forever said Beyerle property
for recreational purposes.
35.Editor's Note: By Order of Court dated October 24, 2005, the Township, at Case No. 5682
of 2005, in the Orphans' Court of Allegheny County, was ordered to formally substitute by
ordinance the 7.7 acres of Township property known as "the Beyerle property" and located
at the intersection of Beyerle Road and Little Pine Creek Road in Shaler Township, which
property is of at least equal size and value, in exchange for the Kiwanis Park trust
property of approximately 0.96 acres, pursuant to 53 P.S. § 3384(1), subject to the
reversion conditions set forth in the Declaration of Relinquishment of the Kiwanis Club of
Glenshaw at Deed Book Volume 12548, Page 495.
§ 42-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 42-1
1:67
Chapter 44
RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Manager — See Ch. 32. Treasurer — See Ch. 60.
§ 44-1. Compliance required.
All persons who shall hereinafter be employed by the Township of Shaler
shall be required to maintain their bona fide residences in the Township
of Shaler during the continuance of their employment by the Township of
Shaler.
§ 44-2. Construal of provisions.
The requirements for Township employees as set forth in this chapter are in
addition to any and all requirements as set forth by any Act of Assembly of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 44-3. Waivers. [Added 3-19-1980 by Ord. No. 1486]
The Board of Commissioners may, by resolution, waive the requirements
of § 44-1 of this chapter with respect to any applicant for Township
employment named in the resolution who possesses experience or training
needed to perform the position applied for; provided, however, that no such
resolution shall be adopted unless the Board shall first have found that no
Township resident with the necessary experience or training has responded
to an advertisement of the position, published at least twice between 60
days and 30 days prior to the adoption of the resolution in a newspaper of
general circulation in the Township.
Chapter 47
RETIREMENT AND PENSIONS
§ 42-1 SHALER CODE § 44-3
1:68
Part 1
[AdoptMeda4n-d2a-t1o9r6y2 RBetyirOermde. nNto. 936]
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 47-1. Retirement age. [Amended 10-13-1964 by Ord. No. 1045;
8-8-1978 by Ord. No. 1451; 8-8-2006 by Ord. No. 1849]
The employment of all regular and/or full-time employees, other than police
officers and firefighters, of the Township of Shaler, whether receiving a
salary or being paid at an hourly rate, shall not, solely by reason of their
age, cease and terminate as they reach the calendar age of 70 years so
long as no bona fide occupational qualification exists which would otherwise
mandate such termination.
§ 47-2. Termination of employment. [Amended 8-8-1978 by Ord. No.
1451; 8-8-2006 by Ord. No. 1849]
The employment of each regular and/or full-time employee, other than
police officers and firefighters, shall not, solely by reason of their age,
automatically cease and terminate on the last working day of the month in
which the 70th anniversary of his or her birth shall fall.
§ 47-3. Documentation certifying age required.
At the request of the Secretary of the Township or at the request of any
Commissioner of the Township, each and every regular and/or full-time
employee shall be required to produce a birth certificate or other legally
acceptable document certifying as to his age.
§ 47-4. Dismissal upon failure to produce documentation.
[Amended 5-14-1996 by Ord. No. 1739]
The neglect or refusal to produce the evidence outlined in § 47-3 by any
regular and/or full-time employee shall constitute a cause for their dismissal
as an employee of the Township of Shaler.
§ 47-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-4
1:69

Part 2
[AdopteNdo6n-u1n4-io1n9 9P4enBsyioOnr dP.l aNno. 1705]
ARTICLE II
Terminology
§ 47-5. Definitions.
The following words and phrases as used herein shall have the meanings
set forth in this Part 2, unless a different meaning is plainly required by the
context:
ACCRUED BENEFIT — As of any given date, the participant's monthly
benefit determined under § 47-15, calculated on the basis of average annual
compensation and credited service determined as of such date and which
shall represent, as of a given date, the monthly benefit that would be
payable at the participant's normal retirement date (or the actuarial
equivalent thereof), provided that the participant satisfies any requirements
set forth herein for entitlement to receive such benefit. The "accrued
benefit" shall not exceed the maximum limitation, determined as of the date
of computation, provided under § 47-24. All "accrued benefits" are subject
to all applicable limitations, reductions, offsets and actuarial adjustments
provided pursuant to the terms of the plan prior to the actual payment
thereof.
ACCUMULATED CONTRIBUTIONS — The total amount contributed by any
participant to this fund or its predecessor by way of payroll deduction
or otherwise, plus interest credited at 4% per annum. Interest shall be
credited annually in the form of a compound interest rate from the first day
of the plan year immediately following the date on which the contributions
were paid to the first day of the month preceding the date on which a
refund of "accumulated contributions" under § 47-32 or 47-35 shall be paid
or payment of benefits shall commence. There shall be no interest credited
for any period of time prior to December 30, 1970.
ACT — The Municipal Pension Plan Funding Standard and Recovery Act,
which was enacted as Act 205 of 1984, as amended, 53 P.S. § 895.101 et
seq.
ACTUARIAL EQUIVALENT — Two forms of payment of equal actuarial
present value on a specified date. The actuarial present value shall be
determined by use of the UP-1984 Mortality Table and seven-percent
interest.
ACTUARY — The person, partnership, association or corporation which at
any given time is serving as actuary, provided that such actuary must be an
approved actuary as defined in the Act.
AGGREGATE SERVICE — The total period or periods of the participant's
employment with the employer, whether or not interrupted.
Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, should any such participant
receive a distribution of accumulated contributions with respect to a period
of employment, such period of employment shall not be included in
§ 47-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-5
1:71
"aggregate service" thereafter unless, at the commencement of the next
period of employment, the participant repays to the fund the amount of
such withdrawal with interest. For purposes of this definition, interest
shall accrue as of the date the employee receives a refund of accumulated
contributions and shall be computed at the same rate and in the same
manner as described in the definition of "accumulated contributions."
AVERAGE ANNUAL COMPENSATION — The annual average of a
participant's basic annual earnings computed based upon the consecutive
thirty-six-month period of employment during which the participant earned
the highest basic annual earnings.
BASIC ANNUAL EARNINGS — The base compensation of the employee,
whether salary or hourly wages, excluding overtime pay, holiday pay,
longevity pay and any other form of irregular compensation, paid by the
employer for services rendered during normal working hours as established
by the employer. The compensation used in determining an employee's
basic annual earnings shall be limited on an annual basis to the amount
specified for government plans pursuant to Internal Revenue Code Section
401(a)(17), as adjusted under Code Section 415(d).
BENEFICIARY — The person or entity designated by the participant to
receive a refund of the participant's accumulated contributions should the
participant die prior to becoming entitled to a retirement benefit. In the
event that a participant does not designate a beneficiary or the beneficiary
does not survive the participant, the beneficiary shall be the surviving
spouse or, if there is no surviving spouse, the issue, per stirpes, or if there
is no surviving issue, the estate but, if no personal representative has been
appointed, to those persons who would be entitled to the estate under the
intestacy laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania if the participant had
died intestate and a resident of Pennsylvania.
BOARD — The Board of Commissioners of the Township of Shaler.
CHIEF ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — The person designated by the
Township who has the primary responsibility for the execution of the
administrative affairs for the plan.
CODE — The Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended.
CREDITED SERVICE — The total number of completed years and months of
aggregate service but only to the extent such aggregate service represents
any period of time for which an employee is in employment as set forth
in § 47-5, provided that participant contributions under § 47-10 are paid
into the plan for the periods of aggregate service.[Amended 3-14-2000 by
Ord. No. 1769]
DEFERRED VESTED PARTICIPANT — Any participant who has completed
at least 10 years of aggregate service, who has separated from employment
for reasons other than retirement, death or disability, and who has elected
to receive a vested retirement benefit pursuant to § 47-36 to commence at
a later date.
§ 47-5 SHALER CODE § 47-5
1:72
DISABILITY DATE — The date when a participant is determined by the plan
administrator to be incapacitated due to total and permanent disability or
the date when the participant's employment terminates due to such total
and permanent disability, if later.
EARLY RETIREMENT AGE — The date on which the participant has
completed 10 years of aggregate service with the employer and has attained
age 55.
EARLY RETIREMENT DATE — The first day of the month coincident with
or next following the date on which a participant who has attained early
retirement age ceases employment and chooses to commence receipt of
retirement benefits prior to the normal retirement date.
EMPLOYEE — Any individual employed by the employer on a regular, fulltime
basis, who is not eligible to participate under the provisions of any
other pension plan sponsored by the employer; who is not a member of
a collective bargaining unit for purposes of bargaining collectively with
the employer regarding wages, hours and other terms and conditions of
employment; and who is not a police officer. "Employee," for purposes of
this plan, shall also mean the Township Commissioners.
EMPLOYER — The Township of Shaler, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania.
EMPLOYMENT — For the purpose of determining aggregate
service:[Amended 9-11-2001 by Ord. No. 1783]
The period of time for which an employee is directly or indirectly
compensated or entitled to compensation by the employer for the
performance of duties as an employee;
A.
Any period of time for which an employee is paid a fixed, periodic
amount in the nature of salary continuation payments for reasons other
than the performance of duties (such as vacation, holidays, sickness,
entitlement to benefits under workers' compensation or similar laws),
either directly by the employer or through a program to which the
employer has made contributions on behalf of the employee;
B.
Any period during which an employee is entitled to disability benefits
under this plan, provided that the employee returns to employment
within three months of the date on which it is determined that the
employee is no longer totally and permanently disabled, if such
determination occurs prior to the participant's normal retirement date;
C.
Any period of voluntary or involuntary military service with the armed
forces of the United States of America, provided that the participant
has been employed as a regular, full-time employee for a period of at
least six months immediately prior to the period of military service,
and the participant returns to employment within six months following
discharge from military service or within such longer period during
which employment rights are guaranteed by applicable law; and
D.
Any period of qualified military service as determined under the
requirements of Chapter 43 of Title 38, United States Code, provided
E.
§ 47-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-5
1:73
INSURER or INSURANCE COMPANY — A legal reserve life insurance
company authorized to do business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
NORMAL RETIREMENT AGE — The date on which the participant has
completed 10 years of aggregate service with the employer and has attained
age 65.
NORMAL RETIREMENT DATE — The first day of the month coincident with
or next following the attainment of normal retirement age.
PARTICIPANT — An employee who has met the eligibility requirements to
participate in the plan as provided in § 47-6 and who has not for any reason
ceased to be a participant hereunder.
PENSION FUND or FUND — The pension fund administered under the
terms of this plan, and which shall include all money, property, investments,
policies and contracts standing in the name of the plan.
PLAN — The plan set forth herein, as amended from time to time and
designated as the Pension Plan of the Township of Shaler (Nonunion).
PLAN ADMINISTRATOR — The Pension and Insurance Committee
appointed by the Board for the purpose of supervising and administering
the provisions of the plan. In the event that no such appointment is made,
the plan administrator shall be the Board.
PLAN YEAR — The twelve-month period beginning on January 1 and ending
on December 31 of each year.
POLICY or CONTRACT — A retirement annuity or retirement income
endowment policy (or a combination of both) or any other form of insurance
contract or policy which shall be deemed appropriate in accordance with
the provisions of applicable law.
RESTATEMENT DATE — January 1, 1994, the date upon which this
amendment and restatement of the plan becomes effective.
SPOUSE — The person in a valid marriage with the participant according
to the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. A common law marriage
that the participant returns to employment following such period of
qualified military service, and the participant makes payment to the
plan in an amount equal to the participant contributions that would
otherwise have been paid to the plan during such period of qualified
military service. The amount of participant contributions shall be based
upon an estimate of the compensation that would have been paid
to the participant during such period of qualified military service as
determined by the average compensation paid to the participant during
the 12 months immediately preceding the period of qualified military
service. The amount of participant contributions so calculated must be
paid into the plan before the end of the period that begins on the date
of reemployment and ends on the earlier of the date that ends the
period that has a duration of three times the period of qualified military
service, or the date that is five years after the date of reemployment.
§ 47-5 SHALER CODE § 47-5
1:74
contracted after January 1, 2005, was made invalid by the enactment of Act
144 of 2004.[Added 12-13-2005 by Ord. No. 1840]
TOTAL AND PERMANENT DISABILITY — A condition of physical or mental
impairment due to which a participant is unable to perform the usual and
customary duties of employment, which is reasonably expected to continue
to be permanent for the remainder of the participant's lifetime and which
qualifies the participant for receipt of disability benefits under the Federal
Social Security Act. For purposes of this section and Article VI, a condition
shall not be treated as a "total and permanent disability" if such condition is
a result of alcoholism, addiction to narcotics, willfully self-inflicted injuries
or the perpetration of any criminal activity.
§ 47-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-5
1:75

ARTICLE III
Participation
§ 47-6. Eligibility requirements.
Each employee who is employed as a regular, full-time employee of the
employer shall participate herein as of the first day of employment,
provided that all prerequisites to participation under this plan shall have
been fulfilled, including but not limited to completion of all forms required
by the plan administrator.
§ 47-7. Notification of appointment of new employee.
The Board shall furnish the plan administrator with written notification of
the appointment of any new full-time permanent employee who is eligible
for participation hereunder within 60 days of the date of such appointment.
§ 47-8. Designation of beneficiary.
Any new, full-time employee who becomes a participant hereunder shall
provide a written notice which designates the beneficiary or beneficiaries
to the Board at the time participation commences. (The beneficiary shall
receive a refund of accumulated contributions if such refund is payable
pursuant to § 47-33.) The participant's election of any such beneficiary or
beneficiaries may be rescinded or changed, without the consent of the
beneficiary or beneficiaries, at any time, provided that the participant
provides the written notice of the changed designation to the plan
administrator in the manner prescribed by the plan administrator. Any
designation of a beneficiary made in any manner other than one acceptable
to the plan administrator shall be null and void and have no effect under the
terms of this plan.
§ 47-9. Change in status.
A. If an employee of the employer shall be transferred into an employment
position which will make such person an employee eligible for
participation hereunder, then such employee shall participate herein as
of the date of such transfer. Aggregate service and credited service
hereunder shall include those periods for which such service was
accumulated as a participant under the Pension Plan of the Township of
Shaler (Union),36 provided that such service is no longer recognized
under the Pension Plan of the Township of Shaler (Union).
B. If a participant in this plan shall be transferred into an employment
position which will make such person an employee eligible for
participation under the Pension Plan of the Township of Shaler (Union),
then such person shall participate thereunder as of the date of such
transfer and shall no longer be a participant in this plan. Aggregate
service and credited service hereunder shall be determined as of the
36.Editor's Note: See Part 3, Union Pension Plan, of this chapter.
§ 47-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-9
1:77
date of transfer and shall thereafter be recognized under the Pension
Plan of the Township of Shaler (Union). The actuary shall determine the
accrued benefit of such participant and shall determine a reasonable
amount of assets which will be transferred to the Pension Plan of the
Township of Shaler (Union) to meet such accrued benefit liability so
transferred.
C. This § 47-9 is intended to provide for an uninterrupted accrual of
benefits for a participant under either the Pension Plan of the Township
of Shaler (Union) or this plan when such a change in employment status
shall occur and is specifically intended to prevent or preclude a
duplicate accrual of benefits for the same period of employment with
the employer.
§ 47-9 SHALER CODE § 47-9
1:78
ARTICLE IV
Contributions
§ 47-10. Participant contributions. [Amended 3-14-2000 by Ord. No.
1769; 9-11-2001 by Ord. No. 1783; 1-7-2008 by Ord. No. 1865;
7-10-2012 by Ord. No. 1909]
Each participant shall, as a requirement for participation, pay regular
contributions to the Pension Fund. Each participant shall complete the
necessary forms to authorize the payment of participant contributions by
way of payroll deduction or otherwise. Prior to January 1, 2010, participant
contributions shall be paid in those amounts as set forth in Shaler Township
Ordinance No. 1865, enacted on January 7, 2008. After December 31, 2009,
participant contributions shall be paid in an amount equal to 5% of the
participant's basic annual earnings. This amount is subject to review by an
annual study performed by the actuary.
§ 47-11. Increase or reduction of participant contributions.
[Amended 7-10-2012 by Ord. No. 1909]
§ 47-12. Payments of state aid.
Payments of general municipal pension system state aid or any other
amount of state aid received in accordance with the Act from the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, which are received by the employer and
deposited into the Pension Fund governed by this plan, shall be used as
follows:
A. Notwithstanding the preceding § 47-10, if an actuarial study performed
by the actuary shows that the condition of the Pension Fund is such that
contributions by the employer will be required to meet the annual
financial requirements determined in accordance with the Act, the
employer, on an annual basis, by ordinance, may increase participant
contributions into the Pension Fund by participants. Participant
contributions may be increased to a maximum of 5.5% of the basic
annual earnings, regardless of the date of hire or amount of service. No
additional payroll deduction forms will be required to implement the
revised contribution amount.
B. Conversely, if the actuarial study performed by the actuary shows that
the condition of the Pension Fund is such that payments into the
Pension Fund by the participants may be reduced below the minimum
percentages prescribed in § 47-10 or may be eliminated and that, if
such payments are reduced or eliminated, contributions by the
employer will not be required to keep the Pension Fund actuarially
sound, the employer may, on an annual basis, by ordinance, reduce or
eliminate participant contributions into the Pension Fund.
A. To reduce the unfunded liability; or after such liability has been funded,
§ 47-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-12
1:79
§ 47-13. Employer contributions.
The remainder of the annual contributions required under the provisions
of the Act, as determined by the actuary in accordance with the Act, shall
become the obligation of the employer and shall be paid into the Pension
Fund by annual appropriations.
§ 47-14. Gifts, grants and other donations.
The Board is authorized to take by gift, grant, devise or otherwise any
money or property, real or personal, for the benefit of the plan and cause
the same to be held as a part of the Pension Fund. The care, management,
investment and disposal of such amounts shall be vested in the Board or its
delegate, the plan administrator, subject to the direction of the donor and
not inconsistent with applicable laws and the terms of the plan.
B. To apply against the annual obligation of the employer for future
service costs; or to the extent that the payment may be in excess of such
obligation,
C. To reduce participant contributions hereunder.
§ 47-12 SHALER CODE § 47-14
1:80
ARTICLE V
Retirement Benefits
§ 47-15. Normal retirement.
Each participant shall be entitled to a normal retirement benefit after
retirement on or after attainment of normal retirement age.
§ 47-16. Normal retirement benefit. [Amended 9-11-2001 by Ord.
No. 1783; 12-13-2005 by Ord. No. 184037]
Each participant who shall become entitled to a benefit pursuant to § 47-15
shall receive a benefit commencing on the normal retirement date paid
monthly in an amount equal to 1.5% of 1/12 of participant's average annual
compensation for each year of credited service up to 25 years. A participant
who retires with between 25 and 30 years of credited service shall receive a
monthly benefit in an amount equal to 1.8% of 1/12 of participant's average
annual compensation for each year of credited service. A participant who
retires with over 30 years of credited service shall receive a monthly
benefit in an amount equal to 2% of 1/12 of participant's average annual
compensation for each year of credited service, not to exceed 40 years of
credited service.
§ 47-17. Late retirement.
A participant may continue to work beyond the normal retirement date,
subject to the employer's rules and regulations regarding retirement age.
If a participant who has met the requirements of § 47-16 continues to work
beyond the normal retirement date, there shall be no retirement benefits
paid until employment ceases and retirement begins. The retirement benefit
of a participant who retires after normal retirement date shall be calculated
in accordance with § 47-16 on the basis of the average annual compensation
and credited service as of such participant's actual date of retirement and
shall commence on the first day of the month coincident with or next
following the actual date of retirement.
§ 47-18. Early retirement.
Each participant shall be entitled to an early retirement benefit after
retirement on or after attainment of early retirement age.
§ 47-19. Early retirement benefit. [Amended 9-11-2007 by Ord. No.
185538; 1-7-2008 by Ord. No. 1865]
A. Each participant who shall become entitled to a benefit pursuant to
§ 47-18 shall receive a benefit commencing on the early retirement
37.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided that this amendment would be effective as of
1-1-2005.
38.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that the effective date of the amended § 47-19
is 1-1-2007.
§ 47-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-19
1:81
§ 47-20. (Reserved)39
§ 47-21. Township Commissioners.
A Township Commissioner who is a participant hereunder may only elect to
retire pursuant to a normal, early or late retirement if the Commissioner
is out of office, consents in writing to having credited service calculated as
of the end of the last year of the most recent term in office and waives, in
writing, any right to accumulate any additional credited service.
date, paid monthly in an amount calculated in accordance with § 47-16
on the basis of average annual compensation and credited service as
of the actual date of retirement. Each employee who either became a
participant in this plan prior to January 1, 2008, and shall not have
completed at least 25 years of aggregate service, or became a
participant in this plan after December 31, 2007, and shall not have
both completed at least 25 years of aggregate service and attained
age 60, shall have the benefit determined herein multiplied by the
applicable percentage from the following table based upon the number
of years prior to attainment of normal retirement age that the payment
of an early retirement benefit shall commence.
Number of Years Percentage
0 100%
1 91.6%
2 84.1%
3 77.5%
4 71.5%
5 66.2%
6 61.4%
7 57.1%
8 53.2%
9 49.6%
10 46.4%
B. If the commencement of benefit payments hereunder is not an exact
number of years prior to attainment of normal retirement age, an
equitable interpolation will be made to determine the applicable
percentage.
39.Editor's Note: Former § 47-20, Service increment, was repealed 9-11-2001 by Ord. No.
1783, effective 7-1-2001. This ordinance also provided that the benefit amount of any
participant who may have retired prior to this amendment shall not be in any way altered
by this amended provision of the plan and shall continue to be determined on the basis of
the plan provisions in effect on the day preceding this amendment.
§ 47-19 SHALER CODE § 47-22
1:82
§ 47-22. Payment of benefits.
Retirement payments shall be payable as of the first day of the month
coincident with or next following the participant's retirement date and the
first day of each month thereafter during the participant's lifetime.
§ 47-23. Joint and survivor annuity option. [Amended 7-12-2005 by
Ord. No. 1835; 12-13-2005 by Ord. No. 1840]
A participant who shall retire pursuant to an early, normal or late retirement
or a deferred vested participant who has elected to receive a vested
retirement benefit pursuant to § 47-36 may, upon benefit commencement,
elect to receive benefits in the form of a joint and survivor annuity in
lieu of the prescribed normal form of benefit payments under the plan.
Such joint and survivor annuity option shall be the actuarial equivalent of
the prescribed normal form of benefit and shall be payable as a reduced
monthly amount to the participant for life and thereafter paid monthly to
the spouse of the participant, if then surviving, for the life of the spouse in
an amount equal to 50% of the monthly amount paid to the participant.
§ 47-24. Maximum benefit limitations. [Amended 3-14-2000 by Ord.
No. 1769; 7-12-2005 by Ord. No. 1835]
Notwithstanding any provision of this plan to the contrary, no benefit
provided under this plan attributable to contributions of the employer shall
exceed, as an annual amount, the amount specified in Code Section
415(b)(1)(A) as adjusted pursuant to Code Section 415(d), assuming the
form of benefit shall be a straight life annuity (with no ancillary benefits).
The limitations described in this § 47-24 shall be governed by the following
conditions and definitions:
A. Benefits paid or payable in a form other than a straight life annuity
(with no ancillary benefits) or where the employee contributes to the
plan or makes rollover contributions shall be adjusted on an actuarially
equivalent basis in accordance with applicable regulations to determine
the limitation contained herein;
B. In the case of a benefit which commences prior to the attainment of age
62 by the participant, the limitation herein shall be adjusted on an
actuarially equivalent basis to the amount determined pursuant to this
section commencing at age 62; however, in the case of a qualified
participant (a participant with respect to whom a period of at least 15
years of service, including applicable military service, as a full-time
employee of a police or fire department is taken into account in
determining the amount of benefit), the limitation contained herein
shall not apply;
C. In the case of a benefit which commences after attainment of age 65 by
the participant, the limitation herein shall be adjusted on an actuarially
equivalent basis in accordance with applicable regulations to the
amount determined commencing at age 65;
§ 47-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-24
1:83
§ 47-25. Required distributions.
D. Benefits paid to a participant which total less than $10,000 from all
defined benefit plans maintained by the employer expressed as an
annual benefit shall be deemed not to exceed the limitation of this
section, provided that the employer has not at any time maintained a
defined contribution plan in which the participant has participated;
however, in the case of a participant who is not receiving a survivor
benefit pursuant to § 47-33 or 47-33.1 or a disability retirement benefit
pursuant to § 47-29 with fewer than 10 years of participation, the
limitation expressed in this Subsection D shall be reduced by 1/10 for
each year of participation less than 10, but in no event shall this
limitation be less than $1,000;
E. The limitations expressed herein shall be based upon plan years for
calculation purposes, shall be applied to all defined benefit plans
maintained by the employer as one defined benefit plan and to all
defined contribution plans maintained by the employer as one defined
contribution plan, and shall be applied and interpreted consistent with
Code Section 415 and regulations thereunder as applicable to
government plans in general and this plan in particular; and
F. In the case of a survivor benefit under § 47-33 or 47-33.1 or a disability
retirement benefit under § 47-29, the adjustment under Subsection B
hereof shall not apply, and the applicable limitation shall be the
limitation contained herein without regard to the age of the benefit
recipient.
A. Notwithstanding any other provision of this plan, the entire benefit of
any participant who becomes entitled to benefits prior to his death shall
be distributed either:
(1) Not later than the required beginning date; or
(2) Over a period beginning not later than the required beginning date
and extending over the life of such participant or over the lives of
such participant and a designated beneficiary (or over a period not
extending beyond the life expectancy of such participant or the
joint life expectancies of such participant and a designated
beneficiary).
B. If a participant who is entitled to benefits under this plan dies prior to
the date when his entire interest has been distributed to him after
distribution of his benefits has begun in accordance with Subsection
A(2) above, the remaining portion of such benefit shall be distributed at
least as rapidly as under the method of distribution being used under
Subsection A(2) as of the date of his death.
C. If a participant who is entitled to benefits under this plan dies before
distribution of his benefit has begun, the entire interest of such
employee shall be distributed within five years of the death of such
§ 47-24 SHALER CODE § 47-25
1:84
§ 47-26. Assignment. [Amended 12-13-2005 by Ord. No. 1840]
The pension benefit payments prescribed herein shall not be subject to
attachment, execution, levy, garnishment or other legal process and shall be
payable only to the participant or designated beneficiary and shall not be
subject to assignment or transfer unless the subject of a domestic relations
order, mandated by a court of competent jurisdiction, that clearly provides
for proper distribution of a portion of the pension benefit payments to an
alternate payee (former spouse of the participant) and does not require any
benefit to be paid in excess of the available funds earned and accrued under
the plan.
employee, unless the following sentence is applicable. If any portion of
the employee's interest is payable to (or for the benefit of) a designated
beneficiary, such portion shall be distributed over the life of such
designated beneficiary (or over a period not extending beyond the life
expectancy of such beneficiary), and such distributions begin not later
than one year after the date of the employee's death or such later date
as provided by regulations issued by the Secretary of the Treasury; then
for purposes of the five-year rule set forth in the preceding sentence,
the benefit payable to the beneficiary shall be treated as distributed
on the date on which such distributions begin; provided, however, that,
notwithstanding the preceding sentence, if the designated beneficiary
is the surviving spouse of the participant, then the date on which
distributions are required to begin shall not be earlier than the date
upon which the employee would have attained age 70 1/2; and, further
provided that, if the surviving spouse dies before the distributions to
such spouse begin, this subsection shall be applied as if the surviving
spouse were the employee.
D. For purposes of this section, the following definitions and procedures
shall apply:
(1) "Required beginning date" shall mean April 1 of the calendar year
following the later of the calendar year in which the employee
attains age 70 1/2 or the calendar year in which the employee
retires.
(2) The phrase "designated beneficiary" shall mean any individual
designated by the employee under this plan according to its rules.
(3) Any amount paid to a child shall be treated as if it had been paid to
the surviving spouse if such amount will become payable to the
surviving spouse upon such child's reaching majority (or other
designated event permitted under regulations issued by the
Secretary of the Treasury).
(4) For purposes of this section, the life expectancy of an employee
and/or the employee's spouse (other than in the case of a life
annuity) may be redetermined but not more frequently than
annually.
§ 47-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-27
1:85
§ 47-27. Retired participants.
Any participant who shall have retired prior to the restatement date shall
not have the benefit altered in any way by the provisions of this amended
and restated plan, except where otherwise expressly provided herein. Such
retired participants shall continue to have their benefits governed by the
terms of the plan in effect on the day preceding the restatement date.
§ 47-27.1. Incorporation of Code Section 415 by reference. [Added
1-14-2003 by Ord. No. 180740]
Notwithstanding anything contained in § 47-24 to the contrary, the
limitations, adjustments and other requirements prescribed in § 47-24 shall
at all times comply with the provisions of Code Section 415 and the
regulations thereunder (as such apply to governmental plans), the terms of
which are specifically incorporated herein by reference.
§ 47-27.2. Direct rollovers. [Added 1-14-2003 by Ord. No. 1807;
amended 7-12-2005 by Ord. No. 1835; 12-13-2005 by Ord. No.
184041]
A. Notwithstanding any provision of the plan to the contrary that would
otherwise limit a distributee's election under this section, a distributee
may elect, at the time and in the manner prescribed by the plan
administrator, to have any portion of an eligible rollover distribution
that is equal to at least $500 paid directly to an eligible retirement plan
specified by the distributee in a direct rollover.
B. This Subsection B shall apply to distributions made on or after January
1, 2006. Notwithstanding any provision of the plan to the contrary that
would otherwise limit a distributee's election under this section, if a
distribution in excess of $1,000 is made and the distributee does not
make an election under Subsection A and does not elect to receive the
distribution directly, the plan administrator shall make such transfer to
an individual retirement plan of a designated trustee or issuer pursuant
to § 47-39A(9). The plan administrator shall notify the distributee in
writing, within a reasonable period of time and as otherwise prescribed
by law, that the distribution may be transferred to another individual
retirement plan.
C. For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply:
DIRECT ROLLOVER — A payment by the plan to the eligible retirement
plan specified by the distributee or by the plan administrator, if the
distributee does not make an election.
DISTRIBUTEE — Includes an employee or former employee. In
addition, the employee's or former employee's surviving spouse and the
40.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided for an effective date of 1-1-2002.
41.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided that this amendment would become effective as of
1-1-2006.
§ 47-27 SHALER CODE § 47-27.2
1:86
employee's or former employee's spouse or former spouse who is the
alternate payee under a qualified domestic relations order, as defined
in Code Section 414(p), are distributees with regard to the interest of
the spouse or former spouse.
ELIGIBLE RETIREMENT PLAN — A qualified trust described in Code
Section 401(a), an individual retirement account described in Code
Section 408(a), an individual retirement annuity described in Code
Section 408(b), an annuity plan described in Code Section 403(a), an
annuity contract described in Code Section 403(b), an eligible deferred
compensation plan described in Code Section 457(b), which is
maintained by a state, political subdivision of a state, and any agency
or instrumentality of a state or political subdivision of a state and which
agrees to separately account for amounts transferred into such plan
from this plan.
ELIGIBLE ROLLOVER DISTRIBUTION —
Any distribution of all or any portion of the balance to the credit
of the distributee, except that an eligible rollover distribution does
not include: any distribution that is one of a series of substantially
equal periodic payments (not less frequently than annually) made
for the life or (life expectancy) of the distributee or the joint lives
(or joint life expectancies) of the distributee and the distributee's
designated beneficiary or for a specified period of 10 years or
more; any distribution to the extent such distribution is required
under Code Section 401(a)(9); and the portion of any distribution
that is not includible in gross income (determined without regard
to the exclusion for net unrealized appreciation with respect to
employer securities).
(1)
For purposes of the direct rollover provisions in this section of the
plan, a portion of the distribution shall not fail to be an eligible
rollover distribution merely because the portion consists of aftertax
employee contributions that are not includible in gross income.
However, such portion may only be paid to an individual retirement
account or annuity described in Section 408(a) or (b) of the Code,
or to a qualified defined contribution plan described in Section
401(a) or 403(a) of the Code that agrees to separately account for
amounts so transferred, including separately accounting for the
portion of such distribution which is includible in gross income and
the portion which is not includible.
(2)
§ 47-27.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-27.2
1:87

ARTICLE VI
Disability Retirement
§ 47-28. Entitlement.
A participant who has completed at least 10 years of aggregate service,
has attained 40 years of age, is an employee and shall incur a total and
permanent disability shall be entitled to a disability retirement benefit as of
the disability date.
§ 47-29. Benefit.
A participant who shall be entitled to a disability retirement benefit under
§ 47-28 shall receive a benefit in the amount as calculated pursuant to
§ 47-16, reduced by the amount of any payments for which the participant
shall be eligible under any workers' compensation or similar laws or any
other disability compensation program provided by the employer, including
social security disability benefits.
§ 47-30. Payment of disability benefits.
§ 47-31. Verification of disability.
The plan administrator shall, in its sole discretion, determine whether a
participant shall have incurred a total and permanent disability. The plan
administrator shall rely on the determination of eligibility to receive a
federal social security disability benefit and the facts and circumstances
causing such disability. If the plan administrator shall determine that a
participant is no longer eligible for receipt of a disability retirement benefit
under this plan, the payment of such benefits shall cease.
A. Disability payments shall be made monthly as of the first day of each
month, commencing as of the first day of the month immediately
following or coincident with the participant's disability date and
continuing until the earliest of the death of the participant or cessation
of total and permanent disability.
B. A participant who shall fail to return within three months to
employment as an employee of the employer upon cessation of total and
permanent disability prior to the normal retirement date shall be
deemed to have terminated employment as of the disability date and
shall not be entitled to any refund of accumulated contributions
pursuant to § 47-35, unless the accumulated contributions exceeds the
total amount of disability benefits paid under the plan, then the
participant shall be entitled to receive a refund in an amount equal to
the accumulated contributions as of the disability date minus the total
amount of disability benefits paid under the plan. In lieu of receiving a
refund of accumulated contributions, such a participant may elect to
receive vested benefits pursuant to § 47-36, which shall be reduced by
any payments made under this Article VI.
§ 47-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-32
1:89
§ 47-32. Cessation of disability.
A participant who is receiving payment of disability retirement benefits
under this plan must notify the plan administrator of any change which may
cause a cessation of entitlement to receipt of such benefits hereunder. If
a participant fails to provide immediate notice to the plan administrator
of any such change in status and continues to receive payment of benefits
hereunder to which the participant is not entitled, then the plan may take
whatever action is necessary to recover any amount of improperly paid
amounts, including legal action or offsetting such amounts against any
future payments of retirement or other benefits under the plan, including
the costs of such actions.
§ 47-32 SHALER CODE § 47-32
1:90
ARTICLE VII
Death Benefits
§ 47-33. Death of participant prior to retirement. [Amended
9-11-2001 by Ord. No. 1783; 12-13-2005 by Ord. No. 1840;
9-11-2007 by Ord. No. 185542]
A survivor benefit shall be paid to the surviving spouse, if any, of the
participant in an amount equal to 50% of the participant's accrued benefit
as of the date of death. The survivor benefit shall be paid monthly to the
surviving spouse, commencing on or after the date that would have been
the participant's earliest retirement date if the participant had survived to
such date, reduced based upon the plan's early retirement factors pursuant
to § 47-19. Payment of this survivor benefit under this § 47-33 precludes
any distribution of the participant's accumulated contributions pursuant to
§ 47-35.
§ 47-33.1. Death of participant after retirement.
In the event that a participant shall die after the receipt of any benefit
payments under the plan, the beneficiary shall be entitled to the amount of
the accumulated contributions of the participant minus the total amount of
benefits paid under the plan. Notwithstanding anything contained herein to
the contrary, where a joint and survivor form of benefit has been selected,
payments upon the occurrence of the death of the participant shall first
be made in accord with the form of benefit payment so selected, and
the provisions of this § 47-33.1 shall be applicable upon the death of the
survivor. Where the total amount of benefits paid under the plan exceeds
the amount of the participant's accumulated contributions, there shall be no
additional amounts due under the plan.
42.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that the effective date of the amended § 47-33
is 1-1-2007.
§ 47-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-33.1
1:91

ARTICLE VIII
Termination of Employment
§ 47-34. Rights of terminated employees.
A participant who shall cease to be an employee except as otherwise
hereinbefore provided shall have all interest and rights under this plan
limited to those contained in the following sections of this article.
§ 47-35. Refund of accumulated contributions.
A participant whose employment with the employer shall terminate for
any reason other than death or total and permanent disability prior to
early retirement date shall be entitled to receive a refund of accumulated
contributions. Upon receipt of such accumulated contributions, said
participant and beneficiary shall not be entitled to any further payments
from the plan.
§ 47-36. Vested benefits upon termination. [Amended 11-13-2012 by
Ord. No. 191243]
A. In lieu of receiving a refund of accumulated contributions, a participant
who shall have completed 10 years of aggregate service with the
employer and who ceases to be an employee of the employer for any
reason other than death, retirement or total and permanent disability
may elect to vest retirement benefits under the plan by filing a written
notice of the intention to vest with the plan administrator within 90
days of the date employment ceases. A participant who exercises such
an option shall be eligible, upon attainment of what would have been
normal retirement date, for a vested retirement benefit equal to the
accrued benefit, determined as of the date on which employment
ceased. If a participant elects to vest a benefit but dies prior to the
commencement thereof, the beneficiary shall be entitled to a refund of
the participant's accumulated contributions in accordance with the
terms of §§ 47-32 and 47-35.
B. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a participant hired before January 1,
2005, who has completed eight years of aggregate service and who
ceases to be an employee of the employer after October 1, 2012, may
elect to vest retirement benefits under the plan in the same manner as
described in the preceding paragraph and, if so elected, would be
considered a deferred vested participant as defined in Article II
(§ 47-5).
43.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided an effective date of 10-1-2012.
§ 47-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-36
1:93

ARTICLE IX
Administration
§ 47-37. Plan administrator.
The Board of the employer shall appoint the Pension and Insurance
Committee, consisting of a minimum of five members. The Pension and
Insurance Committee shall have the power and authority, by a majority
of its members, to do all acts and to execute, acknowledge and deliver
all instruments necessary to implement and effectuate the purpose of this
plan. The Pension and Insurance Committee may delegate authority to act
on its behalf to any persons it deems appropriate. If the Board does not
appoint a Pension and Insurance Committee, the Board shall be the plan
administrator.
§ 47-38. Membership of Pension and Insurance Committee.
The Pension and Insurance Committee shall consist of not less than five
members appointed by the Board. Two members of the Pension and
Insurance Committee may be employees, provided that such employees
shall be nonvoting members. Each member of the Pension and Insurance
Committee shall serve in that capacity until the earliest of resignation,
death, removal or otherwise. Each member may be removed at any time,
with or without cause, by the Board. Each member may resign by delivering
written notice to the Board and other members of the Pension and
Insurance Committee. Vacancies on the Pension and Insurance Committee
shall be filled by the Board; provided, however, that the remaining members
of the Pension and Insurance Committee shall have full power to act
pending the filling of such vacancies.
§ 47-39. Authority and duties of plan administrator.
A. The Pension and Insurance Committee shall have full power and
authority to do whatever shall, in its judgment, be reasonably necessary
for the proper administration and operation of the plan. The
interpretation or construction placed upon any term or provision of the
plan by the Pension and Insurance Committee or any action of the
Pension and Insurance Committee taken in good faith shall, upon the
Board's review and approval thereof, be final and conclusive upon all
parties hereto, whether employees, participants or other persons
concerned. By way of specification and not limitation and except as
specifically limited hereafter, the Pension and Insurance Committee is
authorized:
(1) To construe this plan;
(2) To determine all questions affecting the eligibility of any employee
to participate herein;
(3) To compute the amount and source of any benefit payable
hereunder to any participant or beneficiary;
§ 47-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-39
1:95
§ 47-40. Pension and Insurance Committee organization.
The Committee may organize itself in any manner deemed appropriate to
effectuate its purposes hereunder, subject to the following:
(4) To authorize any and all disbursements;
(5) To prescribe any procedure to be followed by any participant and/
or other person in filing any application or election;
(6) To prepare and distribute, in such manner as may be required by
law or as the Committee deems appropriate, information explaining
the plan;
(7) To require from the employer or any participant such information
as shall be necessary for the proper administration of the plan;
(8) To appoint and retain any individual to assist in the administration
of the plan, including such legal, clerical, accounting and actuarial
services as may be required by any applicable law or laws; and
(9) To select an individual retirement plan provider (either the state or
a federally regulated financial institution) and invest funds in
connection with the rollover of mandatory distributions as
described in § 47-27.2B. [Added 7-12-2005 by Ord. No. 183544]
B. The Pension and Insurance Committee shall have no power to add to,
subtract from or modify the terms of the plan or change or add to any
benefits provided by the plan or to waive or fail to apply any
requirements of eligibility for benefits under the plan. Further, the
Pension and Insurance Committee shall have no power to adopt, amend
or terminate the plan, to select or appoint any trustee or to determine
or require any contributions to the plan, said powers being exclusively
reserved to the Board.
A. The Committee shall act by a majority of its members at the time in
office, and such action may be taken either by vote at a meeting or in
writing without a meeting.
B. The Committee shall, from time to time, appoint a Chairman, a
Secretary, who may but need not be a Committee member, and such
other agents as it may deem advisable.
C. The Committee may, from time to time, authorize any one or more of its
members to execute any document or documents, including any
application, request, certificate, notice, consent, waiver or direction
and shall notify the Board, in writing, of the name or names of the
member or members so authorized. In the absence of a designation, the
Chairman shall be deemed to be so authorized. Any trustee or other
fiduciary appointed hereunder shall accept and be fully protected in
44.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided that this amendment would become effective as of
1-1-2006.
§ 47-39 SHALER CODE § 47-40
1:96
§ 47-41. Pension and Insurance Committee costs.
The Committee members shall each serve without compensation for
services unless otherwise agreed by the Board in writing. All reasonable
expenses incident to the functioning of the Committee, including, but not
limited to, fees of accountants, counsel, actuaries and other specialists and
other costs of administering the plan, may be paid from the Pension Fund
upon approval by the Board to the extent permitted under applicable law
and not otherwise paid by the employer.
§ 47-42. Indemnification.
No member of the Board or the Committee nor the plan manager nor the
actuary nor any other person involved in the administration of the plan shall
be liable to any person on account of any act or failure to act which is
taken or omitted to be taken in good faith in performing their respective
duties under the terms of this plan. To the extent permitted by law, the
employer shall and hereby does agree to indemnify and hold harmless each
present member of the Committee and each successor and each of any
such member's heirs, executors and administrators and the Committee's
delegates and appointees (other than any person, bank, firm or corporation
which is independent of the employer and which renders services to the
plan for a fee) from any and all liability and expenses, including counsel
fees, reasonably incurred in any action, suit or proceeding to which he is or
may be made a party by reason of being or having been a member, delegate
or appointee of the Committee, except in matters involving criminal liability,
intentional or willful misconduct. If the employer purchases insurance to
cover claims of a nature described above, then there shall be no right of
indemnification except to the extent of any deductible amount under the
insurance coverage or to the extent of the amount the claims exceed the
insured amount.
§ 47-43. Approval of benefits.
The plan administrator shall review and approve or deny any application for
retirement benefits within 30 days following receipt thereof or within such
longer time as may be necessary under the circumstances. Any denial of an
relying upon any document executed by the designated member or
members, or the Chairman in the absence of a designation, as
representing a valid action by the Committee until the Committee shall
file with such fiduciary a written revocation of such designation.
D. The Committee or its delegate shall maintain and keep such records as
are necessary for the efficient operation of the plan or as may be
required by any applicable law, regulation or ruling and shall provide
for the preparation and filing of such forms or reports as may be
required to be filed with any governmental agency or department and
with the participants and/or other persons entitled to benefits under the
plan.
§ 47-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-43
1:97
application for retirement benefits shall be in writing and shall specify the
reason for such denial.
§ 47-44. Appeal procedure.
Any person whose application for retirement benefits is denied, who
questions the amount of benefit paid, who believes a benefit should have
commenced which did not so commence, or who has some other claim
arising under the plan ("claimant") shall first seek a resolution of such claim
under the procedure hereinafter set forth:
A. Any claimant shall file a notice of the claim with the Committee which
shall fully describe the nature of the claim. The Committee shall review
the claim and make an initial determination approving or denying the
claim.
B. If the claim is denied in whole or in part, the Committee shall, within 90
days (or such other period as may be established by applicable law)
from the time the application is received, mail notice of such denial to
the claimant. Such ninety-day period may be extended by the
Committee, if special circumstances so require, for up to 90 additional
days by the Committee's delivering notice of such extension to the
claimant within the first ninety-day period. Any notice hereunder shall
be written in a manner calculated to be understood by the claimant and,
if a notice of denial, shall set forth the specific plan provisions on which
the denial is based; an explanation of additional material or
information, if any, necessary to perfect such claim, and a statement of
why such material or information is necessary; and an explanation of
the review procedure.
C. Upon receipt of notice denying the claim, the claimant shall have the
right to request a full and fair review by the Board of the initial
determination. Such request for review must be made by notice to the
Board within 60 days of receipt of such notice of denial. During such
review, the claimant or a duly authorized representative shall have the
right to review any pertinent documents and to submit any issues or
comments in writing. The Board shall, within 60 days after receipt of
the notice requesting such review, (or in special circumstances, such as
where the Board in its sole discretion holds a hearing, within 120 days
of receipt of such notice), submit its decision in writing to the person or
persons whose claim has been denied. The decision shall be final,
conclusive and binding on all parties, shall be written in a manner
calculated to be understood by the claimant and shall contain specific
references to the pertinent plan provisions on which the decision is
based.
D. Any notice of a claim questioning the amount of a benefit in pay status
shall be filed within 90 days following the date of the first payment
which would be adjusted if the claim is granted, unless the Committee
allows a later filing for good cause shown.
§ 47-43 SHALER CODE § 47-44
1:98
E. A claimant who does not submit a notice of a claim or a notice
requesting a review of a denial of a claim within the time limitations
specified above shall be deemed to have waived such claim or right to
review.
§ 47-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-44
1:99

ARTICLE X
Pension Fund
§ 47-45. Operation of Pension Fund.
§ 47-46. Powers and duties of employer.
With respect to the Pension Fund, the employer shall have the following
powers, rights and duties, in addition to those vested in it elsewhere in the
plan or by law, unless such duties are delegated:
A. The Board is hereby authorized to hold and supervise the investment of
the assets of the Pension Fund, subject to the provisions of the laws of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and of this plan and any
amendment thereto.
B. The Pension Fund shall be used to pay benefits as provided in the plan
and, to the extent not paid directly by the employer, to pay the expenses
of administering the plan pursuant to authorization by the employer.
C. The employer intends the plan to be permanent and for the exclusive
benefit of its employees. It expects to make the contributions to the
Pension Fund required under the plan. The employer shall not be liable
in any manner for any insufficiency in the Pension Fund; benefits are
payable only from the Pension Fund and only to the extent that there
are moneys available therein.
D. The Pension Fund will consist of all funds held by the employer under
the plan, including contributions made pursuant to the provisions
hereof and the provisions, investments, reinvestments and proceeds
thereof. The Pension Fund shall be held, managed and administered
pursuant to the terms of the plan. Except as otherwise expressly
provided in the plan, the employer has exclusive authority and
discretion to manage and control the Pension Fund assets. The
employer may, however, appoint a trustee, custodian and/or investment
manager, at its sole discretion.
A. To retain in cash so much of the Pension Fund as it deems advisable and
to deposit any cash so retained in any bank or similar financial
institution (including any such institution which may be appointed to
serve as trustee hereunder), without liability for interest thereon.
B. To invest and reinvest the principal and income of the fund and keep
said fund invested, without distinction between principal and income, in
securities which are at the time legal investments for fiduciaries under
the Pennsylvania Fiduciaries Investment Act, or as the same may be
subsequently modified or amended.
C. To sell property held in the fund at either public or private sale for cash
or on credit at such times as it may deem appropriate; to exchange such
property or to grant options for the purchase or exchange thereof.
§ 47-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-46
1:101
D. To consent to and participate in any plan of reorganization,
consolidation, merger, extension or other similar plan affecting
property held in the fund or to consent to any contract, lease, mortgage,
purchase, sale or other action by any corporation pursuant to any such
plan.
E. To exercise all conversion and subscription rights pertaining to
property held in the fund.
F. To exercise all voting rights with respect to property held in the fund
and, in connection therewith, to grant proxies, discretionary or
otherwise.
G. To place money at any time in a deposit bank deemed to be appropriate
for the purposes of this plan no matter where situated, including, in
those cases where a bank has been appointed to serve as trustee
hereunder, the savings department of its own commercial bank.
H. In addition to the foregoing powers, the employer shall also have all of
the powers, rights and privileges conferred upon trustees by the
Pennsylvania Fiduciaries Investment Act, or as the same may be
subsequently modified or amended, and the power to do all acts, take
all proceedings and execute all rights and privileges, although not
specifically mentioned herein, as the employer may deem necessary to
administer the Pension Fund.
I. To maintain and invest the assets of this plan on a collective and
commingled basis with the assets of other pension plans maintained by
the employer, provided that the assets of each respective plan shall be
accounted for and administered separately.
J. To invest the assets of the Pension Fund in any collective commingled
trust fund maintained by a bank or trust company, including any bank or
trust company which may act as a trustee hereunder. In this connection,
the commingling of the assets of this plan with assets of other eligible,
participating plans through such a medium is hereby specifically
authorized. Any assets of the plan which may be so added to such
collective trusts shall be subject to all of the provisions of the applicable
declaration of trust, as amended from time to time, which declaration, if
required by its terms or by applicable law, is hereby adopted as part of
the plan, to the extent of the participation in such collective or
commingled trust fund by the plan.
K. To make any payment or distribution required or advisable to carry out
the provisions of the plan, provided that, if a trustee is appointed by the
employer, such trustee shall make such distribution only at the
direction of the employer.
L. To compromise, contest, arbitrate, enforce or abandon claims and
demands with respect to the plan.
§ 47-46 SHALER CODE § 47-46
1:102
§ 47-47. Common investments.
The employer shall not be required to make separate investments for
individual participants or to maintain separate investments for each
participant's account but may invest contributions and any profits or gains
therefrom in common investments.
M. To retain any funds or property subject to any dispute without liability
for the payment of interest thereon and to decline to make payment or
delivery thereof until final adjudication is made by a court of competent
jurisdiction.
N. To pay and to deduct from and charge against the Pension Fund any
taxes which may be imposed thereon, whether with respect to the
income, property or transfer thereof or upon or with respect to the
interest of any person therein which the fund is required to pay; or to
contest, in its discretion, the validity or amount of any tax, assessment,
claim or demand which may be levied or made against or in respect of
the Pension Fund, the income, property or transfer thereof or in any
matter or thing connected therewith.
O. To appoint any persons or firms (including but not limited to
accountants, investment advisors, counsel, actuaries, physicians,
appraisers, consultants, professional plan administrators and other
specialists) or otherwise act to secure specialized advice or assistance,
as it deems necessary or desirable in connection with the management
of the fund. To the extent not prohibited by applicable law, the employer
shall be entitled to rely conclusively upon and shall be fully protected in
any action or omission taken by it in good faith reliance upon the advice
or opinion of such persons or firms, provided that such persons or firms
were prudently chosen by the employer, taking into account the
interests of the participants and beneficiaries and with due regard to
the ability of the persons or firms to perform their assigned functions.
P. To retain the services of one or more persons or firms for the
management of (including the power to acquire and dispose of) all or
any part of the fund assets, provided that each of such persons or firms
is registered as an investment advisor under the Investment Advisors
Act of 1940, is a bank (as defined in that Act) or is an insurance
company qualified to manage, acquire or dispose of pension trust assets
under the laws of more than one state; in such event, the employer shall
follow the directions of such investment manager or managers with
respect to the acquisition and disposition of fund assets but shall not be
liable for the acts or omissions of such investment manager or
managers, nor shall it be under any obligation to review or otherwise
manage any fund assets which are subject to the management of such
investment manager or managers. If the employer appoints a trustee,
the trustee shall not be permitted to retain such an investment manager
except with the express written consent of the employer.
§ 47-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-48
1:103
§ 47-48. Compensation and express of appointed trustee.
If a trustee is appointed, the trustee shall be entitled to such reasonable
compensation as shall from time to time be agreed upon by the employer
and the trustee, unless such compensation is prohibited by law. Such
compensation, and all expenses reasonably incurred by the trustee in
carrying out his functions, shall constitute a charge upon the employer or
the Pension Fund, which may be executed at any time after 30 days' written
notice to the employer. The employer shall be under no obligation to pay
such costs and expenses, and, in the event of its failure to do so, the trustee
shall be entitled to pay the same or to reimburse himself for the payment
thereof from the Pension Fund.
§ 47-49. Periodic accounting.
If a trustee is appointed, the Pension Fund shall be evaluated annually
or at more frequent intervals by the trustee and a written accounting
rendered as of each fiscal year end of the fund, and as of the effective
date of any removal or resignation of the trustee, and such additional
dates as requested by the employer, showing the condition of the fund and
all receipts, disbursements and other transactions effected by the trustee
during the period covered by the accounting, based on fair market values
prevailing as of such date.
§ 47-50. Value.
All determinations as to the value of the assets of the Pension Fund and as
to the amount of the liabilities thereof shall be made by the employer or its
appointed trustee, whose decisions shall be final and conclusive and binding
on all parties hereto, the participants and beneficiaries and their estates. In
making any such determination, the employer or trustee shall be entitled to
seek and rely upon the opinion of or any information furnished by brokers,
appraisers and other experts and shall also be entitled to rely upon reports
as to sales and quotations, both on security exchanges and otherwise as
contained in newspapers and in financial publications.
§ 47-48 SHALER CODE § 47-50
1:104
ARTICLE XI
Amendment and Termination of Plan or Fund
§ 47-51. Amendment.
The employer may amend this plan at any time or from time to time by
an instrument in writing executed in the name of the employer under its
Municipal Seal by officers duly authorized to execute such instrument and
delivered to the Board; provided, however, that:
§ 47-52. Termination of plan.
The employer shall have the power to terminate this plan in its entirety at
any time by an instrument in writing executed in the name of the employer.
§ 47-53. Automatic termination of contributions.
Subject to the provisions of the Act governing financially distressed
municipalities, the liability of the employer to make contributions to the
Pension Fund shall automatically terminate upon liquidation or dissolution
of the employer, upon its adjudication as a bankrupt or upon the making of
a general assignment for the benefit of its creditors.
§ 47-54. Distribution upon termination.
A. No amendment shall deprive any participant or any beneficiary of a
deceased participant of any of the benefits to which he is entitled under
this plan with respect to contributions previously made;
B. No amendment shall provide for the use of funds or assets held under
this plan other than for the benefit of employees, and no funds
contributed to this plan or assets of this plan shall, except as provided
in § 47-55, ever revert to or be used or enjoyed by the employer; and
C. No amendment to the plan which provides for a benefit modification
shall be made unless the cost estimate described in § 47-59 has been
prepared and presented to the Board in accordance with the Act.
A. In the event of the termination of the plan, all amounts of vested
benefits accrued by the affected participants as of the date of such
termination, to the extent funded on such date, shall be nonforfeitable
hereunder. In the event of termination of the plan, the employer shall
direct either that the plan administrator continue to hold the vested
accrued benefits of participants in the Pension Fund in accordance with
the provisions of the plan (other than those provisions related to
forfeitures) without regard to such termination until all funds have been
distributed in accordance with the provisions or that the plan
administrator immediately distribute to each participant an amount
equal to the vested accrued benefit to the date.
B. If there are insufficient assets in the Pension Fund to provide for all
vested accrued benefits as of the date of plan termination, priority shall
§ 47-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-54
1:105
§ 47-55. Residual assets.
If all liabilities to vested participants and any others entitled to receive a
benefit under the terms of the plan have been satisfied and there remain any
residual assets in the Pension Fund, such residual assets remaining shall
be returned to the employer insofar as such return does not contravene
any provision of law, and any remaining balance in excess of employer
contributions shall be returned to the commonwealth.
§ 47-56. Exclusive benefit rule.
In the event of the discontinuance and termination of the plan as provided
herein, the employer shall dispose of the Pension Fund in accordance
with the terms of the plan and applicable law; at no time prior to the
satisfaction of all liabilities under the plan shall any part of the corpus or
income of the Pension Fund, after deducting any administrative or other
expenses properly chargeable to the Pension Fund, be used for or diverted
to purposes other than for the exclusive benefit of the participants in the
plan, their beneficiaries or their estates.
first be given to the distribution of any amounts attributable to
mandatory or voluntary employee contributions before assets are
applied to the distribution of any vested benefits attributable to other
sources hereunder.
C. All other assets attributable to the terminated plan shall be distributed
and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of applicable law and
the terms of any instrument adopted by the employer which effects
such termination.
§ 47-54 SHALER CODE § 47-56
1:106
ARTICLE XII
Compliance with Other Provisions
§ 47-57. Actuarial valuations.
§ 47-58. Powers and duties of chief administrative officer.
A. The plan's actuary shall perform an actuarial valuation at least
biennially unless the employer is applying or has applied for
supplemental state assistance pursuant to Section 603 of the Act45,
whereupon actuarial valuation reports shall be made annually.
B. Such biennial actuarial valuation report shall be made as of the
beginning of each plan year occurring in an odd-numbered calendar
year, beginning with the year 1985.
C. Such actuarial valuation shall be prepared and certified by an approved
actuary, as such term is defined in the Act.
D. The expenses attributable to the preparation of any actuarial valuation
report or investigation required by the Act or any other expense which
is permissible under the terms of the Act and which is directly
associated with administering the plan shall be an allowable
administrative expense payable from the assets of the Pension Fund.
Such allowable expenses shall include but not be limited to the
following:
(1) Investment costs associated with obtaining authorized investments
and investment management fees;
(2) Accounting expenses;
(3) Premiums for insurance coverage on fund assets;
(4) Reasonable and necessary counsel fees incurred for advice or to
defend the fund; and
(5) Legitimate travel and education expenses for plan officials;
provided, however, that the municipal officials of the employer, in
their fiduciary role, shall monitor the services provided to the plan
to ensure that the expenses are necessary, reasonable and benefit
the plan; and, further provided that, the plan administrator shall
document all such expenses item by item and, where necessary,
hour by hour.
A. Such actuarial reports shall be prepared and filed under the supervision
of the chief administrative officer.
B. The chief administrative officer of the plan shall determine the financial
requirements of the plan on the basis of the most recent actuarial
report and shall determine the minimum obligation of the employer
45.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 895.603.
§ 47-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-58
1:107
§ 47-59. Benefit plan modifications.
Prior to the adoption of any benefit plan modification by the employer, the
chief administrative officer of the plan shall provide to the Board a cost
estimate of the proposed benefit plan modification. Such estimate shall be
prepared by an approved actuary, which estimate shall disclose to the Board
the impact of the proposed benefit plan modification on the future financial
requirements of the plan and the future minimum obligation of the employer
with respect to the plan.
with respect to funding the plan for any given plan year. The chief
administrative officer shall submit the financial requirements of the
plan and the minimum obligation of the employer to the Board annually
and shall certify the accuracy of such calculations and their
conformance with the Act.
§ 47-58 SHALER CODE § 47-59
1:108
ARTICLE XIII
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 47-60. Plan not contract of employment.
No employee of the employer nor anyone else shall have any rights
whatsoever against the employer or the plan administrator as a result
of this plan except those expressly granted to them hereunder. Nothing
herein shall be construed to give any employee the right to remain in the
employment of the employer.
§ 47-61. Word usage.
For purposes of this plan, the masculine shall be read for the feminine, and
the singular shall be read for the plural, wherever the person or context
shall plainly so require.
§ 47-62. Construction of document.
This plan may be executed and/or conformed in any number of
counterparts, each of which shall be deemed an original and shall be
construed and enforced according to the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, except that such commonwealth's choice of law rules.
§ 47-63. Headings.
The headings of articles are included solely for convenience of reference,
and if there be any conflict between such headings and the text of the plan,
the text shall control.
§ 47-64. Severability of provisions.
In case any provisions of this plan shall be held illegal or invalid for any
reason, said illegality or invalidity shall not affect the remaining parts of
this plan, and the plan shall be construed and enforced as if said illegal and
invalid provisions had never been inserted therein.
§ 47-65. Incapacity of participant.
If any participant shall be physically or mentally incapable of receiving
or acknowledging receipt of any payment of pension benefits hereunder,
the plan administrator, upon the receipt of satisfactory evidence that such
participant is so incapacitated and that another person or institution is
maintaining him, may provide for such payment of pension benefits
hereunder to such person or institution so maintaining him, and any such
payments so made shall be deemed for every purpose to have been made to
such participant.
§ 47-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-66
1:109
§ 47-66. Liability of officers.
Subject to the provisions of the Act and unless otherwise specifically
required by other applicable laws, no past, present or future officer of the
employer shall be personally liable to any participant, beneficiary or other
person under any provision of the plan.
§ 47-67. Assets of fund.
Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to give any participant or
beneficiary any interest in any specific property of the Pension Fund or
any right except to receive such distributions as are expressly provided for
under the plan.
§ 47-68. Pension Fund for sole benefit of participants.
The income and principal of the Pension Fund are for the sole use and
benefit of the participants covered hereunder and, to the extent permitted
by law, shall be free, clear and discharged from and are not to be in any
way liable for debts, contracts or agreements now contracted or which may
hereafter be contracted and from all claims and liabilities now or hereafter
incurred by any participant or beneficiary.
§ 47-68.1. Compliance with PPA and HEART Act. [Added 12-13-2011
by Ord. No. 1900]
The following provisions are added to the plan. Any prior provisions that are
inconsistent with the provisions in this section are hereby superseded.
A. The purpose of this section is to comply with the Pension Protection Act
of 2006 (PPA)46 and the Heroes Earnings Assistance Relief Tax Act
(HEART Act).47 Notwithstanding anything in this plan to the contrary,
this plan shall be interpreted so as to comply with the applicable
required provisions of the PPA and the HEART Act.
B. For the purposes of Code Section 415(b)(1)(A), effective as of January 1,
2008, the "applicable mortality table" and "applicable interest rate" are
found in Rev. Rul. 2007-67. The "applicable mortality table" in Rev. Rul.
2001-62 was effective from December 31, 2002 through December 31,
2007.
C. Section 415(c) compensation. For the purposes of this section,
"compensation" includes only those items specified in Treas. Reg.
§ 1.415(c)-2(b)(1) or (2) and excludes all items listed in Treas. Reg.
§ 1.415(c)-2(c), the terms of which are specifically incorporated herein
by reference. Effective as of January 1, 2009, to the extent required by
the Heroes Earnings Assistance Relief Tax Act of 2008 (HEART Act),
differential wage payments shall be included in compensation.
46.Editor's Note: See 29 U.S.C. § 1001 et seq.
47.Editor's Note: See 26 U.S.C. § 1 et seq.
§ 47-66 SHALER CODE § 47-68.1
1:110
D. Effective as of January 1, 2007, an "eligible rollover distribution" shall
include any eligible rollover distribution (including distributions
containing after-tax contributions) that is transferred in a direct
trustee-to-trustee transfer to a Section 403(b) annuity contract or a
qualified trust under Code Section 401(a) that agrees to separately
account for amounts so transferred, including separately accounting for
the portion of such distribution which is includible in gross income and
the portion of such distribution which is not so includible.
E. Effective as of January 1, 2008, a Roth IRA is an eligible retirement
plan.
F. Nonspousal rollover. Effective January 1, 2007, if a beneficiary who is
not a surviving spouse is entitled to receive what would otherwise be an
eligible rollover distribution, the beneficiary may, in accordance with
Code Section 402(c)(11), make a trustee-to-trustee transfer of that
amount to an IRA or individual retirement annuity (other than an
endowment contract), provided that:
(1) The transfer is made not later than the end of the fourth year after
the year of the participant's death; and
(2) The account or annuity to which the amount is transferred is
treated as an inherited IRA or individual retirement annuity in
accordance with Code Section 408(d)(3)(C).
G. HEART Act. Effective for participant deaths occurring while performing
qualified military service [as defined in Code Section 414(u)] on or after
January 1, 2007, the plan will provide retirement benefits and service
credit to the extent required by the HEART Act.
§ 47-68.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-68.1
1:111

Part 3
[AdoptedU6-n1i4on-1 P9e9n4sBioynO Prlda.n No. 1706]
ARTICLE XIV
Terminology
§ 47-69. Definitions; word usage.
The following words and phrases, as used herein, shall have the meanings
set forth in this article, unless a different meaning is plainly required by the
context:
ACCRUED BENEFIT — As of any given date, the participant's monthly
benefit determined under § 47-80, calculated on the basis of average annual
compensation and credited service determined as of such date, and which
shall represent, as of a given date, the monthly benefit that would be
payable at the participant's normal retirement date (or the actuarial
equivalent thereof), provided that the participant satisfies any requirements
set forth herein for entitlement to receive such benefit. The accrued benefit
shall not exceed the maximum limitation, determined as of the date of
computation, provided under § 47-86. All accrued benefits are subject to
all applicable limitations, reductions, offsets and actuarial adjustments
provided pursuant to the terms of the plan prior to the actual payment
thereof.
ACCUMULATED CONTRIBUTIONS — The total amount contributed by any
participant to this fund or its predecessor by way of payroll deduction
or otherwise, plus interest credited at 4% per annum. Interest shall be
credited annually in the form of a compound interest rate from the first day
of the plan year immediately following the date on which the contributions
were paid to the first day of the month preceding the date on which a
refund of accumulated contributions under §§ 47-95 or 47-98 shall be paid
or payment of benefits shall commence. There shall be no interest credited
for any period of time prior to December 30, 1970.
ACT — The Municipal Pension Plan Funding Standard and Recovery Act,
which was enacted as Act 205 of 1984, as amended, 53 P.S. § 895.101 et
seq.
ACTUARIAL EQUIVALENT — Two forms of payment of equal actuarial
present value on a specified date. The actuarial present value shall be
determined by use of the UP-1984 Mortality Table and seven-percent
interest.
ACTUARY — The person, partnership, association or corporation which at
any given time is serving as actuary, provided that such actuary must be an
approved actuary as defined in the Act.
AGGREGATE SERVICE — The total period or periods of the participant's
employment with the employer, whether or not interrupted.
Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, should any such participant
receive a distribution of accumulated contributions with respect to a period
of employment, such period of employment shall not be included in
§ 47-69 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-69
1:113
"aggregate service" thereafter unless, at the commencement of the next
period of employment, the participant repays to the fund the amount of
such withdrawal with interest. For purposes of this section, interest shall
accrue as of the date the employee receives a refund of accumulated
contributions and shall be computed at the same rate and in the same
manner as described in the definition of "accumulated contributions."
AVERAGE ANNUAL COMPENSATION — The annual average of a
participant's basic annual earnings computed based upon the consecutive
thirty-six-month period of employment during which the participant earned
the highest basic annual earnings.
BASIC ANNUAL EARNINGS — The base compensation of the employee,
whether salary or hourly wages, excluding overtime pay, holiday pay,
longevity pay and any other form of irregular compensation, paid by the
employer for services rendered during normal working hours as established
by the employer. The compensation used in determining an employee's
basic annual earnings shall be limited on an annual basis to the amount
specified for government plans pursuant to Code Section 401(a)(17), as
adjusted under Code Section 415(d).
BENEFICIARY — The person or entity designated by the participant to
receive a refund of the participant's accumulated contributions should the
participant die prior to becoming entitled to a retirement benefit. In the
event that a participant does not designate a beneficiary or the beneficiary
does not survive the participant, the beneficiary shall be the surviving
spouse or, if there is no surviving spouse, the issue, per stirpes, or if there
is no surviving issue, the estate but, if no personal representative has been
appointed, to those persons who would be entitled to the estate under the
intestacy laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania if the participant had
died intestate and a resident of Pennsylvania.
BOARD — The Board of Commissioners of the Township of Shaler.
CHIEF ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — The person designated by the
Township who has the primary responsibility for the execution of the
administrative affairs for the plan.
CODE — The Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended.
CREDITED SERVICE — The total number of completed years and months of
aggregate service, but only to the extent such aggregate service represents
any period of time for which an employee is employed in employment as
set forth in § 47-69. Any probationary period of employment which occurs
prior to the date an employee becomes a participant hereunder shall be
included when determining the credited service of a participant.[Amended
8-10-1999 by Ord. No. 1768]
DEFERRED VESTED PARTICIPANT — Any participant who has completed
at least 10 years of aggregate service, who has separated from employment
for reasons other than retirement, death or disability, and who has elected
to receive a vested retirement benefit pursuant to § 47-99 to commence at
a later date.
§ 47-69 SHALER CODE § 47-69
1:114
DISABILITY DATE — The date when a participant is determined by the plan
administrator to be incapacitated due to total and permanent disability or
the date when the participant's employment terminates due to such total
and permanent disability, if later.
EARLY RETIREMENT AGE — The date on which the participant has
completed 10 years of aggregate service with the employer and has attained
age 55.
EARLY RETIREMENT DATE — The date on which a participant who has
attained early retirement age ceases employment and chooses to commence
receipt of retirement benefits prior to the normal retirement date.
EMPLOYEE — Any individual employed by the employee on a regular
full-time basis, who is not eligible to participate under the provisions of
any other pension plan sponsored by the employer; who is a member of
a collective bargaining unit for purposes of bargaining collectively with
the employer regarding wages, hours and other terms and conditions of
employment; and who is not a police officer.
EMPLOYER — The Township of Shaler, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania.
EMPLOYMENT — For the purpose of determining aggregate
service:[Amended 9-11-2001 by Ord. No. 1784]
The period of time for which an employee is directly or indirectly
compensated or entitled to compensation by the employer for the
performance of duties as an employee;
A.
Any period of time for which an employee is paid a fixed, periodic
amount in the nature of salary continuation payments for reasons other
than the performance of duties (such as vacation, holidays, sickness,
entitlement to benefits under workers' compensation or similar laws),
either directly by the employer or through a program to which the
employer has made contributions on behalf of the employee;
B.
Any period during which an employee is entitled to disability benefits
under this plan, provided that the employee returns to employment
within three months of the date on which it is determined that the
employee is no longer totally and permanently disabled, if such
determination occurs prior to the participant's normal retirement date;
C.
Any period of voluntary or involuntary military service with the armed
forces of the United States of America, provided that the participant
has been employed as a regular, full-time employee for a period of at
least six months immediately prior to the period of military service
and the participant returns to employment within six months following
discharge from military service or within such longer period during
which employment rights are guaranteed by applicable law or under
the terms of a collective bargaining agreement with the employer; and
D.
Any period of qualified military service as determined under the
requirements of Chapter 43 of Title 38 United States Code, provided
that the participant returns to employment following such period of
E.
§ 47-69 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-69
1:115
INSURER or INSURANCE COMPANY — A legal reserve life insurance
company authorized to do business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
NORMAL RETIREMENT AGE — The date on which the participant has
completed 10 years of aggregate service with the employer and has attained
age 65.
NORMAL RETIREMENT DATE — The date on which the attainment of
normal retirement age shall occur and the participant elects to retire from
employment.
PARTICIPANT — An employee who has met the eligibility requirements to
participate in the plan as provided in § 47-70 and who has not for any reason
ceased to be a participant hereunder.
PENSION FUND or FUND — The Pension Fund administered under the
terms of this plan and which shall include all money, property, investments,
policies and contracts standing in the name of the plan.
PLAN — The plan set forth herein, as amended from time to time, and
designated as the Pension Plan of the Township of Shaler (Union).
PLAN ADMINISTRATOR — The Pension and Insurance Committee
appointed by the Board for the purpose of supervising and administering
the provisions of the plan. In the event that no such appointment is made,
the plan administrator shall be the Board.
PLAN YEAR — The twelve-month period beginning on January 1 and ending
on December 31 of each year.
POLICY or CONTRACT — A retirement annuity or retirement income
endowment policy (or a combination of both) or any other form of insurance
contract or policy which shall be deemed appropriate in accordance with
the provisions of applicable law.
RESTATEMENT DATE — January 1, 1994, the date upon which this
amendment and restatement of the plan becomes effective.
SPOUSE — The person in a valid marriage with the participant according
to the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. A common law marriage
qualified military service and the participant makes payment to the
plan in an amount equal to the participant contributions that would
otherwise have been paid to the plan during such period of qualified
military service. The amount of participant contributions shall be based
upon an estimate of the compensation that would have been paid to
the participant during such period of qualified military service, as
determined by the average compensation paid to the participant during
the 12 months immediately preceding the period of qualified military
service. The amount of participant contributions so calculated must be
paid into the plan before the end of the period that begins on the date of
reemployment and ends on the earlier of the date that ends the period
that has a duration of three times the period of qualified military service
or the date that is five years after the date of reemployment.
§ 47-69 SHALER CODE § 47-69
1:116
contracted after January 1, 2005, was made invalid by the enactment of Act
144 of 2004.[Added 12-13-2005 by Ord. No. 1839]
TOTAL AND PERMANENT DISABILITY — A condition of physical or mental
impairment due to which a participant is unable to perform the usual and
customary duties of employment, which is reasonably expected to continue
to be permanent for the remainder of the participant's lifetime and which
qualifies the participant for receipt of disability benefits under the Federal
Social Security Act. For purposes of this definition and Article XVIII, a
condition shall not be treated as a total and permanent disability if such
condition is a result of alcoholism, addiction to narcotics, willfully selfinflicted
injuries or the perpetration of any criminal activity.
§ 47-69 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-69
1:117

ARTICLE XV
Participation in Plan
§ 47-70. Eligibility requirements. [Amended 9-11-2007 by Ord. No.
185648; 7-14-2015 by Ord. No. 193449]
§ 47-71. Notification of plan administrator.
The Board shall furnish the plan administrator with written notification of
the appointment of any new full-time permanent employee who is eligible
for participation hereunder within 60 days of the date of such appointment.
§ 47-72. Designation of beneficiary.
Any new, full-time employee who becomes a participant hereunder shall
provide a written notice which designates the beneficiary or beneficiaries
to the Board at the time participation commences. (The beneficiary shall
receive a refund of accumulated contributions if such refund is payable
pursuant to § 47-95.) The participant's election of any such beneficiary or
beneficiaries may be rescinded or changed, without the consent of the
beneficiary or beneficiaries, at any time, provided that the participant
provides the written notice of the changed designation to the plan
administrator in the manner prescribed by the plan administrator. Any
designation of a beneficiary made in any manner other than one acceptable
to the plan administrator shall be null and void and have no effect under the
terms of this plan.
A. Each employee who is employed prior to January 1, 1991 as a regular,
full-time employee of the employer shall participate herein as of the day
following the completion of any probationary period of employment as
determined by the employer, provided that all prerequisites to
participation under this plan shall have been fulfilled, including but not
limited to completion of all forms required by the plan administrator.
B. Each employee who was first employed on January 1, 1991 through
December 31, 2013 as a regular, full-time employee of the employer
shall participate as of the day following the completion of the ninety-day
probationary period of employment as determined by the employer,
provided that all prerequisites to participation under this plan shall
have been fulfilled, including but not limited to completion of all forms
required by the plan administrator.
C. Each employee who was first employed on January 1, 2014 or thereafter
as a regular, full-time employee of the employer shall participate as of
such date of employment.
48.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that the effective date of the amended § 47-70
is 1-1-2007.
49.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that the effective date of the amended § 47-70
is 1-1-2014.
§ 47-70 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-73
1:119
§ 47-73. Change in status.
A. If an employee of the employer shall be transferred into an employment
position which will make such person an employee eligible for
participation hereunder, then such employee shall participate herein as
of the date of such transfer. Aggregate service and credited service
hereunder shall include those periods for which such service was
accumulated as a participant under the Pension Plan of the Township of
Shaler (Nonunion),50 provided that such service is no longer recognized
under the Pension Plan of the Township of Shaler (Nonunion).
B. If a participant in this plan shall be transferred into an employment
position which will make such person an employee eligible for
participation under the Pension Plan of the Township of Shaler
(Nonunion), then such person shall participate thereunder as of the
date of such transfer and shall no longer be a participant in this plan.
Aggregate service and credited service hereunder shall be determined
as of the date of transfer and shall thereafter be recognized under the
Pension Plan of the Township of Shaler (Nonunion). The actuary shall
determine the accrued benefit of such participant and shall determine a
reasonable amount of assets which will be transferred to the Pension
Plan of the Township of Shaler (Nonunion) to meet such accrued benefit
liability so transferred.
C. This § 47-73 is intended to provide for an uninterrupted accrual of
benefits for a participant under either the Pension Plan of the Township
of Shaler (Nonunion) or this plan when such a change in employment
status shall occur and is specifically intended to prevent or preclude a
duplicate accrual of benefits for the same period of employment with
the employer.
50.Editor's Note: See Part 2, Nonunion Pension Plan, of this chapter.
§ 47-73 SHALER CODE § 47-73
1:120
ARTICLE XVI
Contributions
§ 47-74. Participant contributions. [Amended 8-10-1999 by Ord. No.
1768; 3-14-2000 by Ord. No. 1775; 7-12-2005 by Ord. No. 1834]
§ 47-75. Increase or reduction of participant contributions.
[Amended 7-10-2012 by Ord. No. 1908]
Notwithstanding the preceding § 47-74, if an actuarial study performed
by the actuary shows that the condition of the Pension Fund is such that
contributions by the employer will be required to meet the annual financial
requirements determined in accordance with the Act, the employer, on an
annual basis, by ordinance, may increase contributions into the Pension
Fund by participants. Conversely, if the actuarial study performed by the
actuary shows that the condition of the Pension Fund is such that payments
into the Pension Fund by the participants may be reduced below the
minimum percentages prescribed in § 47-74 or may be eliminated and
that, if such payments are reduced or eliminated, contributions by the
employer will not be required to keep the Pension Fund actuarially sound,
the employer may, on an annual basis, by ordinance, reduce or eliminate
participant contributions into the Pension Fund.
§ 47-76. Payments of state aid.
Payments of general municipal pension system state aid or any other
amount of state aid received in accordance with the Act from the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, which are received by the employer and
deposited into the Pension Fund governed by this plan, shall be used as
follows:
A. Each participant shall, as a requirement for participation, pay regular
contributions to the Pension Fund. Each participant shall complete the
necessary forms to authorize the payment of participant contributions
by way of payroll deduction or otherwise. Prior to January 1, 2010,
participant contributions shall be paid in an amount equal to 2.5% of
earnings. After December 31, 2009, participant contributions shall be
paid in an amount equal to 5% of earnings. This amount is subject to
review by an annual study performed by the actuary. [Amended
7-10-2012 by Ord. No. 1908]
B. "Earnings," for purposes of this § 47-74, shall mean the base
compensation of the employee, whether salary or hourly wages,
excluding overtime pay, longevity pay and any other form of irregular
compensation, paid by the employer for services rendered during
normal working hours as established by the employer.
A. To reduce the unfunded liability; or after such liability has been funded,
§ 47-74 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-76
1:121
§ 47-77. Employer contributions.
The remainder of the annual contributions required under the provisions
of the Act, as determined by the actuary in accordance with the Act, shall
become the obligation of the employer and shall be paid into the Pension
Fund by annual appropriations.
§ 47-78. Gifts, grants and other donations.
The Board is authorized to take by gift, grant, devise or otherwise any
money or property, real or personal, for the benefit of the plan and cause
the same to be held as a part of the Pension Fund. The care, management,
investment and disposal of such amounts shall be vested in the plan
administrator, subject to the direction of the donor and not inconsistent with
applicable laws and the terms of the plan.
B. To apply against the annual obligation of the employer for future
service costs; or to the extent that the payment may be in excess of such
obligation,
C. To reduce participant contributions hereunder.
§ 47-76 SHALER CODE § 47-78
1:122
ARTICLE XVII
Retirement Benefits
§ 47-79. Normal retirement.
Each participant shall be entitled to a normal retirement benefit after
retirement on or after attainment of normal retirement age.
§ 47-80. Normal retirement benefit. [Amended 7-12-2005 by Ord.
No. 1834; 12-13-2005 by Ord. No. 1839]
§ 47-81. Late retirement.
A participant may continue to work beyond the normal retirement date,
subject to the employer's rules and regulations regarding retirement age.
If a participant who has met the requirements of § 47-79 continues to work
beyond the normal retirement date, there shall be no retirement benefits
paid until employment ceases and retirement begins. The retirement benefit
of a participant who retires after normal retirement date shall be calculated
in accordance with § 47-80 on the basis of the average annual compensation
and credited service as of such participant's actual date of retirement and
shall commence as of the actual date of retirement. The initial benefit
payment shall be in a prorated amount based upon the number of days from
the actual retirement date to the first day of the month following the date of
retirement.
§ 47-82. Early retirement.
Each participant shall be entitled to an early retirement benefit after
retirement on or after attainment of early retirement age.
A. Each participant who shall become entitled to a benefit pursuant to
§ 47-79 shall receive a benefit commencing on the normal retirement
date paid monthly in an amount equal to 1.5% of 1/12 of a participant's
average annual compensation for each year of credited service up to 25
years. A participant who retires with between 25 and 30 years of
credited service shall receive a monthly benefit in an amount equal to
1.8% of 1/12 of participant's average annual compensation for each
year of credited service. A participant who retires with over 30 years of
credited service shall receive a monthly benefit in an amount equal to
2% of 1/12 of participant's average annual compensation for each year
of credited service, not to exceed 40 years of credited service.
B. No participant hired prior to January 1, 2005, shall be entitled to a
benefit that is less than an amount equal to 1.5% of 1/12 of the
participant's average annual compensation for each year of credited
service, not to exceed 40 years of credited service.
C. The initial benefit payment shall be in a prorated amount based upon
the number of days from the actual retirement date to the first day of
the month following the date of retirement.
§ 47-79 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-83
1:123
§ 47-83. Early retirement benefit. [Amended 7-12-2005 by Ord. No.
1834]
§ 47-84. Payment of benefits.
Retirement payments shall be payable as of the participant's retirement
date and the first day of each month thereafter during the participant's
lifetime.
§ 47-85. Joint and survivor annuity option. [Amended 7-12-2005 by
Ord. No. 1834; 12-13-2005 by Ord. No. 1839]
A participant who shall retire pursuant to an early, normal or late retirement
or a deferred vested participant who has elected to receive a vested
retirement benefit pursuant to § 47-99 may, upon benefit commencement,
elect to receive benefits in the form of a joint and survivor annuity in
lieu of the prescribed normal form of benefit payments under the plan.
Such joint and survivor annuity option shall be the actuarial equivalent of
A. Each participant who shall become entitled to a benefit pursuant to
§ 47-82 shall receive a benefit commencing on the early retirement date
paid monthly in an amount calculated in accordance with § 47-80 on the
basis of the average annual compensation and credited service as of the
actual date of retirement multiplied by the applicable percentage from
the following table based upon the number of years prior to attainment
of normal retirement age that the payment of an early retirement
benefit shall commence:
Number of Years Percentage
0 100%
1 91.6%
2 84.1%
3 77.5%
4 71.5%
5 66.2%
6 61.4%
7 57.1%
8 53.2%
9 49.6%
10 46.4%
B. If the commencement of benefit payments hereunder is not an exact
number of years prior to attainment of normal retirement age, an
equitable interpolation will be made to determine the applicable
percentage. The initial benefit payment shall be in a prorated amount
based upon the number of days from the actual retirement date to the
first day of the month following the date of retirement.
§ 47-83 SHALER CODE § 47-85
1:124
the prescribed normal form of benefit and shall be payable as a reduced
monthly amount to the participant for life and thereafter paid monthly to
the spouse of the participant, if then surviving, for the life of the spouse in
an amount equal to 50% of the monthly amount paid to the participant.
§ 47-86. Maximum benefit limitations. [Amended 8-10-1999 by Ord.
No. 1768; 7-12-2005 by Ord. No. 1834]
Notwithstanding any provision of this plan to the contrary, no benefit
provided under this plan attributable to contributions of the employer shall
exceed, as an annual amount, the amount specified in Code Section
415(b)(1)(A) as adjusted pursuant to Code Section 415(d), assuming the
form of benefit shall be a straight life annuity (with no ancillary benefits).
The limitations described in this § 47-86 shall be governed by the following
conditions and definitions:
A. Benefits paid or payable in a form other than a straight life annuity
(with no ancillary benefits) or where the employee contributes to the
plan or makes rollover contributions shall be adjusted on an actuarially
equivalent basis in accordance with applicable regulations to determine
the limitation contained herein;
B. In the case of a benefit which commences prior to the attainment of age
62 by the participant, the limitation herein shall be adjusted on an
actuarially equivalent basis to the amount determined pursuant to this
section commencing at age 62; however, in the case of a qualified
participant (a participant with respect to whom a period of at least 15
years of service, including applicable military service, as a full-time
employee of a police or fire department is taken into account in
determining the amount of benefit), the limitation contained herein
shall not apply;
C. In the case of a benefit which commences after attainment of age 65 by
the participant, the limitation herein shall be adjusted on an actuarially
equivalent basis in accordance with applicable regulations to the
amount determined commencing at age 65;
D. Benefits paid to a participant which total less than $10,000 from all
defined benefit plans maintained by the employer expressed as an
annual benefit shall be deemed not to exceed the limitation of this
section, provided that the employer has not at any time maintained a
defined contribution plan in which the participant has participated;
however, in the case of a participant who is not receiving a survivor
benefit pursuant to § 47-96.1 or a disability retirement benefit pursuant
to § 47-91, with fewer than 10 years of participation, the limitation
expressed in this Subsection D shall be reduced by 1/10 for each year of
participation less than 10, but in no event shall this limitation be less
than $1,000;
E. The limitations expressed herein shall be based upon plan years for
calculation purposes, shall be applied to all defined benefit plans
§ 47-85 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-86
1:125
§ 47-87. Required distributions.
maintained by the employer as one defined benefit plan and to all
defined contribution plans maintained by the employer as one defined
contribution plan, and shall be applied and interpreted consistent with
Code Section 415 and regulations thereunder as applicable to
government plans in general and this plan in particular; and
F. In the case of a survivor benefit under § 47-96.1 or a disability
retirement benefit under § 47-91, the adjustment under Subsection B
hereof shall not apply, and the applicable limitation shall be the
limitation contained herein without regard to the age of the benefit
recipient.
A. Notwithstanding any other provision of this plan, the entire benefit of
any participant who becomes entitled to benefits prior to his death shall
be distributed either:
(1) Not later than the required beginning date; or
(2) Over a period beginning not later than the required beginning date
and extending over the life of such participant or over the lives of
such participant and a designated beneficiary (or over a period not
extending beyond the life expectancy of such participant or the
joint life expectancies of such participant and a designated
beneficiary).
B. If a participant who is entitled to benefits under this plan dies prior to
the date when his entire interest has been distributed to him after
distribution of his benefits has begun in accordance with Subsection
A(2) above, the remaining portion of such benefit shall be distributed at
least as rapidly as under the method of distribution being used under
Subsection A(2) as of the date of his death.
C. If a participant who is entitled to benefits under this plan dies before
distribution of his benefit has begun, the entire interest of such
employee shall be distributed within five years of the death of such
employee, unless the following sentence is applicable. If any portion of
the employee's interest is payable to (or for the benefit of) a designated
beneficiary, such portion shall be distributed over the life of such
designated beneficiary (or over a period not extending beyond the life
expectancy of such beneficiary) and such distributions begin not later
than one year after the date of the employee's death or such later date
as provided by regulations issued by the Secretary of the Treasury,
then, for purposes of the five-year rule set forth in the preceding
sentence, the benefit payable to the beneficiary shall be treated as
distributed on the date on which such distributions begin; provided,
however, that notwithstanding the preceding sentence, if the
designated beneficiary is the surviving spouse of the participant, then
the date on which distributions are required to begin shall not be
earlier than the date upon which the employee would have attained age
§ 47-86 SHALER CODE § 47-87
1:126
§ 47-88. Assignment. [Amended 12-13-2005 by Ord. No. 1839]
The pension benefit payments prescribed herein shall not be subject to
attachment, execution, levy, garnishment or other legal process and shall be
payable only to the participant or designated beneficiary and shall not be
subject to assignment or transfer unless the subject of a domestic relations
order, mandated by a court of competent jurisdiction, that clearly provides
for proper distribution of a portion of the pension benefit payments to an
alternate payee (former spouse of the participant) and does not require any
benefit to be paid in excess of the available funds earned and accrued under
the plan.
§ 47-89. Retired participants.
Any participant who shall have retired prior to the restatement date shall
not have the benefit altered in any way by the provisions of this amended
and restated plan, except where otherwise expressly provided herein. Such
retired participants shall continue to have their benefits governed by the
terms of the plan in effect on the day preceding the restatement date.
§ 47-89.1. (Reserved)51
70 1/2 and, further provided that, if the surviving spouse dies before
the distributions to such spouse begin, this subsection shall be applied
as if the surviving spouse were the employee.
D. For purposes of this section, the following definitions and procedures
shall apply:
(1) "Required Beginning Date" shall mean April 1 of the calendar year
following the later of the calendar year in which the employee
attains age 70 1/2 or the calendar year in which the employee
retires.
(2) The phrase "designated beneficiary" shall mean any individual
designated by the employee under this plan according to its rules.
(3) Any amount paid to a child shall be treated as if it had been paid to
the surviving spouse if such amount will become payable to the
surviving spouse upon such child's reaching majority (or other
designated event permitted under regulations issued by the
Secretary of the Treasury).
(4) For purposes of this section, the life expectancy of an employee
and/or the employee's spouse (other than in the case of a life
annuity) may be redetermined but not more frequently than
annually.
51.Editor's Note: Former § 47-89.1, Service increment benefit, added 3-14-2000 by Ord. No.
1775, was repealed 12-13-2005 by Ord. No. 1839.
§ 47-87 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-89.2
1:127
§ 47-89.2. Incorporation of Code Section 425 by reference. [Added
1-14-2003 by Ord. No. 180752]
Notwithstanding anything contained in § 47-86 to the contrary, the
limitations, adjustments and other requirements prescribed in § 47-86 shall
at all times comply with the provisions of Code Section 415 and the
regulations thereunder (as such apply to governmental plans), the terms of
which are specifically incorporated herein by reference.
§ 47-89.3. Direct rollovers. [Added 1-14-2003 by Ord. No. 1807;
amended 7-12-2005 by Ord. No. 183453; 12-13-2005 by Ord. No.
1839]
A. Notwithstanding any provision of the plan to the contrary that would
otherwise limit a distributee's election under this section, a distributee
may elect, at the time and in the manner prescribed by the plan
administrator, to have any portion of an eligible rollover distribution
that is equal to at least $500 paid directly to an eligible retirement plan
specified by the distributee in a direct rollover.
B. This Subsection B shall apply to distributions made on or after January
1, 2006. Notwithstanding any provision of the plan to the contrary that
would otherwise limit a distributee's election under this section, if a
distribution in excess of $1,000 is made and the distributee does not
make an election under Subsection A and does not elect to receive the
distribution directly, the plan administrator shall make such transfer to
an individual retirement plan of a designated trustee or issuer pursuant
to § 47-102A(9). The plan administrator shall notify the distributee in
writing, within a reasonable period of time and as otherwise prescribed
by law, that the distribution may be transferred to another individual
retirement plan.
C. For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply:
DIRECT ROLLOVER — A payment by the plan to the eligible retirement
plan specified by the distributee or by the plan administrator, if the
distributee does not make an election.
DISTRIBUTEE — Includes an employee or former employee. In
addition, the employee's or former employee's surviving spouse and the
employee's or former employee's spouse or former spouse who is the
alternate payee under a qualified domestic relations order, as defined
in Code Section 414(p), are distributees with regard to the interest of
the spouse or former spouse.
ELIGIBLE RETIREMENT PLAN — A qualified trust described in Code
Section 401(a), an individual retirement account described in Code
Section 408(a), an individual retirement annuity described in Code
52.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided for an effective date of 1-1-2002.
53.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided that this amendment would become effective as of
1-1-2006.
§ 47-89.2 SHALER CODE § 47-89.3
1:128
Section 408(b), an annuity plan described in Code Section 403(a), an
annuity contract described in Code Section 403(b), an eligible deferred
compensation plan described in Code Section 457(b), which is
maintained by a state, political subdivision of a state, and any agency or
instrumentality of a state or political subdivision of a state, and which
agrees to separately account for amounts transferred into such plan
from this plan.
ELIGIBLE ROLLOVER DISTRIBUTION —
Any distribution of all or any portion of the balance to the credit
of the distributee, except that an eligible rollover distribution does
not include any distribution that is one of a series of substantially
equal periodic payments (not less frequently than annually) made
for the life or (life expectancy) of the distributee or the joint lives
(or joint life expectancies) of the distributee and the distributee's
designated beneficiary, or for a specified period of 10 years or
more; any distribution to the extent such distribution is required
under Code Section 401(a)(9); and the portion of any distribution
that is not includible in gross income (determined without regard
to the exclusion for net unrealized appreciation with respect to
employer securities).
(1)
For purposes of the direct rollover provisions in this section of the
plan, a portion of the distribution shall not fail to be an eligible
rollover distribution merely because the portion consists of aftertax
employee contributions that are not includible in gross income.
However, such portion may only be paid to an individual retirement
account or annuity described in Section 408(a) or (b) of the Code,
or to a qualified defined contribution plan described in Section
401(a) or 403(a) of the Code that agrees to separately account for
amounts so transferred, including separately accounting for the
portion of such distribution which is includible in gross income and
the portion which is not includible.
(2)
§ 47-89.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-89.3
1:129

ARTICLE XVIII
Disability Retirement
§ 47-90. Entitlement.
A participant who has completed at least 10 years of aggregate service,
has attained 40 years of age, is an employee and shall incur a total and
permanent disability shall be entitled to a disability retirement benefit as of
the disability date.
§ 47-91. Benefit. [Amended 3-14-2000 by Ord. No. 1775]
A participant who shall be entitled to a disability retirement benefit under
§ 47-90 shall receive a benefit in the amount as calculated pursuant to
§ 47-80.
§ 47-92. Payment of benefits.
§ 47-93. Verification of disability.
The plan administrator shall, in its sole discretion, determine whether a
participant shall have incurred a total and permanent disability. The plan
administrator shall rely on the determination of eligibility to receive a
federal social security disability benefit and the facts and circumstances
causing such disability. If the plan administrator shall determine that a
participant is no longer eligible for receipt of a disability retirement benefit
under this plan, the payment of such benefits shall cease.
A. Disability payments shall be made monthly as of the first day of each
month, commencing as of the participant's disability date and
continuing until the earliest of the death of the participant or cessation
of total and permanent disability. The initial benefit payment shall be in
a prorated amount based upon the number of days from the actual
retirement date to the first day of the month following the date of
retirement.
B. Participant who shall fail to return within three months to employment
as an employee of the employer upon cessation of total and permanent
disability prior to normal retirement date shall be deemed to have
terminated employment as of the disability date and shall not be
entitled to any refund of accumulated contributions pursuant to
§ 47-95, unless the accumulated contributions exceed the total amount
of disability benefits paid under the plan, then the participant shall be
entitled to receive a refund in an amount equal to the accumulated
contributions as of the disability date minus the total amount of
disability benefits paid under the plan. In lieu of receiving a refund of
accumulated contributions, such a participant may elect to receive
vested benefits pursuant to § 47-99, which shall be reduced by any
payments made under this article.
§ 47-90 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-94
1:131
§ 47-94. Cessation of disability.
A participant who is receiving payment of disability retirement benefits
under this plan must notify the plan administrator of any change which may
cause a cessation of entitlement to receipt of such benefits hereunder. If
a participant fails to provide immediate notice to the plan administrator
of any such change in status and continues to receive payment of benefits
hereunder to which the participant is not entitled, then the plan may take
whatever action is necessary to recover any amount of improperly paid
amounts, including legal action or offsetting such amounts against any
future payments of retirement or other benefits under the plan, including
the costs of such actions.
§ 47-94 SHALER CODE § 47-94
1:132
ARTICLE XIX
Death Benefits
§ 47-95. Death of participant prior to retirement. [Amended
7-12-2005 by Ord. No. 1834]
If a participant shall die prior to the commencement of the payment of any
retirement or other benefits under this plan and with eligibility for payment
of a survivor benefit under § 47-96.1, the beneficiary may elect to receive
a distribution of the participant's accumulated contributions determined
as of the date of death of the participant pursuant to § 47-69 in lieu of
the payment of the survivor benefit under § 47-96.1. If the participant
has received disability retirement benefits hereunder, the amount of
distribution of accumulated contributions shall be reduced by the amount of
disability retirement benefits which have been paid hereunder.
§ 47-96. Death of participant after retirement.
In the event that a participant shall die after the receipt of any benefit
payments under the plan, the beneficiary shall be entitled to the amount of
the accumulated contributions of the participant minus the total amount of
benefits paid under the plan. Notwithstanding anything contained herein to
the contrary, where a joint and survivor form of benefit has been selected,
payments upon the occurrence of the death of the participant shall first
be made in accord with the form of benefit payment so selected, and the
provisions of this § 47-96 shall be applicable upon the death of the survivor.
Where the total amount of benefits paid under the plan exceeds the amount
of the participant's accumulated contributions, there shall be no additional
amounts due under the plan.
§ 47-96.1. Survivor benefit. [Added 7-12-2005 by Ord. No. 1834;
amended 12-13-2005 by Ord. No. 1839]
A survivor benefit shall be paid to the surviving spouse, if any, of the
participant in an amount equal to 50% of the participant's accrued benefit
as of the date of death. The survivor benefit shall be paid to the surviving
spouse, commencing on or after the date that would have been the
participant's earliest retirement date if the participant had survived to such
date, reduced based upon the plan's early retirement factors pursuant to
§ 47-83. Payment of this survivor benefit under this § 47-96.1 precludes
any distribution of the participant's accumulated contributions pursuant to
§ 47-95.
§ 47-95 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-96.1
1:133

ARTICLE XX
Termination of Employment
§ 47-97. Rights of terminated employees.
A participant who shall cease to be an employee except as otherwise
hereinbefore provided shall have all interest and rights under this plan
limited to those contained in the following sections of this article.
§ 47-98. Refund of accumulated contributions.
A participant whose employment with the employer shall terminate for
any reason other than death or total and permanent disability prior to
early retirement date shall be entitled to receive a refund of accumulated
contributions. Upon receipt of such accumulated contributions, said
participant and beneficiary shall not be entitled to any further payments
from the plan.
§ 47-99. Vested benefits upon termination.
In lieu of receiving a refund of accumulated contributions, a participant
who shall have completed 10 years of aggregate service with the employer
and who ceases to be an employee of the employer for any reason other
than death, retirement or total and permanent disability may elect to vest
retirement benefits under the plan by filing a written notice of the intention
to vest with the plan administrator within 90 days of the date employment
ceases. A participant who exercises such an option shall be eligible, upon
attainment of what would have been normal retirement date, for a vested
retirement benefit equal to the accrued benefit, determined as of the date
on which employment ceased. If a participant elects to vest a benefit but
dies prior to the commencement thereof, the beneficiary shall be entitled to
a refund of the participant's accumulated contributions in accordance with
the terms of §§ 47-92 and 47-95.
§ 47-97 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-99
1:135

ARTICLE XXI
Administration
§ 47-100. Plan administrator.
The Board of the employer shall appoint the Pension and Insurance
Committee, consisting of a minimum of five members. The Pension and
Insurance Committee shall have the power and authority, by a majority
of its members, to do all acts and to execute, acknowledge and deliver
all instruments necessary to implement and effectuate the purpose of this
plan. The Pension and Insurance Committee may delegate authority to act
on its behalf to any persons it deems appropriate. If the Board does not
appoint a Pension and Insurance Committee, the Board shall be the plan
administrator.
§ 47-101. Pension and Insurance Committee.
The Pension and Insurance Committee shall consist of not less than five
members appointed by the Board. Two members of the Pension and
Insurance Committee may be employees, provided that such employees
shall be nonvoting members. Each member of the Pension and Insurance
Committee shall serve in that capacity until the earliest of resignation,
death, removal or otherwise. Each member may be removed at any time,
with or without cause, by the Board. Each member may resign by delivering
written notice to the Board and other members of the Pension and
Insurance Committee. Vacancies on the Pension and Insurance Committee
shall be filled by the Board; provided, however, that the remaining members
of the Pension and Insurance Committee shall have full power to act
pending the filling of such vacancies.
§ 47-102. Authority and duties of plan administrator.
A. The Pension and Insurance Committee shall have full power and
authority to do whatever shall, in its judgment, be reasonably necessary
for the proper administration and operation of the plan. The
interpretation or construction placed upon any term or provision of the
plan by the Pension and Insurance Committee or any action of the
Pension and Insurance Committee taken in good faith shall, upon the
Board's review and approval thereof, be final and conclusive upon all
parties hereto, whether employees, participants or other persons
concerned. By way of specification and not limitation and except as
specifically limited hereafter, the Pension and Insurance Committee is
authorized:
(1) To construe this plan;
(2) To determine all questions affecting the eligibility of any employee
to participate herein;
(3) To compute the amount and source of any benefit payable
hereunder to any participant or beneficiary;
§ 47-100 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-102
1:137
§ 47-103. Pension and Insurance Committee organization.
The Committee may organize itself in any manner deemed appropriate to
effectuate its purposes hereunder, subject to the following:
(4) To authorize any and all disbursements;
(5) To prescribe any procedure to be followed by any participant and/
or other person in filing any application or election;
(6) To prepare and distribute, in such manner as may be required by
law or as the Committee deems appropriate, information explaining
the plan;
(7) To require from the employer or any participant such information
as shall be necessary for the proper administration of the plan;
(8) To appoint and retain any individual to assist in the administration
of the plan, including such legal, clerical, accounting and actuarial
services as may be required by any applicable law or laws; and
(9) To select an individual retirement plan provider (either the state or
a federally regulated financial institution) and invest funds in
connection with the rollover of mandatory distributions as
described in § 47-89.3B. [Added 7-12-2005 by Ord. No. 1834]
B. The Pension and Insurance Committee shall have no power to add to,
subtract from or modify the terms of the plan or change or add to any
benefits provided by the plan or to waive or fail to apply any
requirements of eligibility for benefits under the plan. Further, the
Pension and Insurance Committee shall have no power to adopt, amend
or terminate the plan, to select or appoint any trustee or to determine
or require any contributions to the plan, said powers being exclusively
reserved to the Board.
A. The Committee shall act by a majority of its members at the time in
office, and such action may be taken either by vote at a meeting or in
writing without a meeting.
B. The Committee shall, from time to time, appoint a Chairman, a
Secretary, who may but need not be a Committee member, and such
other agents as it may deem advisable.
C. The Committee may, from time to time, authorize any one or more of its
members to execute any document or documents, including any
application, request, certificate, notice, consent, waiver or direction,
and shall notify the Board, in writing, of the name or names of the
member or members so authorized. In the absence of a designation, the
Chairman shall be deemed to be so authorized. Any trustee or other
fiduciary appointed hereunder shall accept and be fully protected in
relying upon any document executed by the designated member or
members (or the Chairman in the absence of a designation) as
§ 47-102 SHALER CODE § 47-103
1:138
§ 47-104. Pension and Insurance Committee costs.
The Committee members shall each serve without compensation for
services unless otherwise agreed by the Board in writing. All reasonable
expenses incident to the functioning of the Committee, including, but not
limited to, fees of accountants, counsel, actuaries and other specialists and
other costs of administering the plan, may be paid from the Pension Fund
upon approval by the Board to the extent permitted under applicable law
and not otherwise paid by the employer.
§ 47-105. Indemnification.
No member of the Board or the Committee nor the plan manager nor the
actuary nor any other person involved in the administration of the plan shall
be liable to any person on account of any act or failure to act which is
taken or omitted to be taken in good faith in performing their respective
duties under the terms of this plan. To the extent permitted by law, the
employer shall and hereby does agree to indemnify and hold harmless each
present member of the Committee and each successor and each of any
such member's heirs, executors and administrators and the Committee's
delegates and appointees (other than any person, bank, firm or corporation
which is independent of the employer and which renders services to the
plan for a fee) from any and all liability and expenses, including counsel
fees, reasonably incurred in any action, suit or proceeding to which he is or
may be made a party by reason of being or having been a member, delegate
or appointee of the Committee, except in matters involving criminal liability,
intentional or willful misconduct. If the employer purchases insurance to
cover claims of a nature described above, then there shall be no right of
indemnification except to the extent of any deductible amount under the
insurance coverage or to the extent of the amount the claims exceed the
insured amount.
§ 47-106. Approval of benefits.
The plan administrator shall review and approve or deny any application for
retirement benefits within 30 days following receipt thereof or within such
longer time as may be necessary under the circumstances. Any denial of an
application for retirement benefits shall be in writing and shall specify the
reason for such denial.
representing a valid action by the Committee until the Committee shall
file with such fiduciary a written revocation of such designation.
D. The Committee or its delegate shall maintain and keep such records as
are necessary for the efficient operation of the plan or as may be
required by any applicable law, regulation or ruling and shall provide
for the preparation and filing of such forms or reports as may be
required to be filed with any governmental agency or department and
with the participants and/or other persons entitled to benefits under the
plan.
§ 47-103 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-107
1:139
§ 47-107. Appeal procedure.
Any person whose application for retirement benefits is denied, who
questions the amount of benefit paid, who believes a benefit should have
commenced which did not so commence or who has some other claim
arising under the plan ("claimant"), shall first seek a resolution of such
claim under the procedure hereinafter set forth:
A. Any claimant shall file a notice of the claim with the Committee which
shall fully describe the nature of the claim. The Committee shall review
the claim and make an initial determination approving or denying the
claim.
B. If the claim is denied in whole or in part, the Committee shall, within 90
days (or such other period as may be established by the applicable law)
from the time the application is received, mail notice of such denial to
the claimant. Such ninety-day period may be extended by the
Committee, if special circumstances so require, for up to 90 additional
days by the Committee's delivering notice of such extension to the
claimant within the first ninety-day period. Any notice hereunder shall
be written in a manner calculated to be understood by the claimant and,
if a notice of denial, shall set forth the specific plan provisions on which
the denial is based, an explanation of additional material or
information, if any, necessary to perfect such claim and a statement of
why such material or information is necessary, and an explanation of
the review procedure.
C. Upon receipt of notice denying the claim, the claimant shall have the
right to request a full and fair review by the Board of the initial
determination. Such request for review must be made by notice to the
Board within 60 days of receipt of such notice of denial. During such
review, the claimant or a duly authorized representative shall have the
right to review any pertinent documents and to submit any issues or
comments in writing. The Board shall, within 60 days after receipt of
the notice requesting such review (or in special circumstances, such as
where the Board in its sole discretion holds a hearing, within 120 days
of receipt of such notice), submit its decision in writing to the person or
persons whose claim has been denied. The decision shall be final,
conclusive and binding on all parties, shall be written in a manner
calculated to be understood by the claimant and shall contain specific
references to the pertinent plan provisions on which the decision is
based.
D. Any notice of a claim questioning the amount of a benefit in pay status
shall be filed within 90 days following the date of the first payment
which would be adjusted if the claim is granted unless the Committee
allows a later filing for good cause shown.
E. A claimant who does not submit a notice of a claim or a notice
requesting a review of a denial of a claim within the time limitations
§ 47-107 SHALER CODE § 47-107
1:140
specified above shall be deemed to have waived such claim or right to
review.
§ 47-107 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-107
1:141

ARTICLE XXII
Pension Fund
§ 47-108. Operation.
§ 47-109. Powers and duties of employer.
With respect to the Pension Fund, the employer shall have the following
powers, rights and duties, in addition to those vested in it elsewhere in the
plan or by law, unless such duties are delegated:
A. The Board is hereby authorized to hold and supervise the investment of
the assets of the Pension Fund, subject to the provisions of the laws of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and of this plan and any
amendment thereto.
B. The Pension Fund shall be used to pay benefits as provided in the plan
and, to the extent not paid directly by the employer, to pay the expenses
of administering the plan pursuant to authorization by the employer.
C. The employer intends the plan to be permanent and for the exclusive
benefit of its employees. It expects to make the contributions to the
Pension Fund required under the plan. The employer shall not be liable
in any manner for any insufficiency in the Pension Fund; benefits are
payable only from the Pension Fund and only to the extent that there
are moneys available therein.
D. The Pension Fund will consist of all funds held by the employer under
the plan, including contributions made pursuant to the provisions
hereof and the investments, reinvestments and proceeds thereof. The
Pension Fund shall be held, managed and administered pursuant to the
terms of the plan. Except as otherwise expressly provided in the plan,
the employer has exclusive authority and discretion to manage and
control the Pension Fund assets. The employer may, however, appoint a
trustee, custodian and/or investment manager, at its sole discretion.
A. To retain in cash so much of the Pension Fund as it deems advisable and
to deposit any cash so retained in any bank or similar financial
institution (including any such institution which may be appointed to
serve as trustee hereunder), without liability for interest thereon.
B. To invest and reinvest the principal and income of the fund and keep
said fund invested, without distinction between principal and income, in
securities which are at the time legal investments for fiduciaries under
the Pennsylvania Fiduciaries Investment Act, or as the same may be
subsequently modified or amended.
C. To sell property held in the fund at either public or private sale, for cash
or on credit, at such times, as it may deem appropriate; to exchange
such property or to grant options for the purchase or exchange thereof.
§ 47-108 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-109
1:143
D. To consent to and participate in any plan of reorganization,
consolidation, merger, extension or other similar plan affecting
property held in the fund, or to consent to any contract, lease,
mortgage, purchase, sale or other action by any corporation pursuant
to any such plan.
E. To exercise all conversion and subscription rights pertaining to
property held in the fund.
F. To exercise all voting rights with respect to property held in the fund
and, in connection therewith, to grant proxies, discretionary or
otherwise.
G. To place money at any time in a deposit bank deemed to be appropriate
for the purposes of this plan, no matter where situated, including, in
those cases where a bank has been appointed to serve as trustee
hereunder, the savings department of its own commercial bank.
H. In addition to the foregoing powers, the employer shall also have all of
the powers, rights and privileges conferred upon trustees by the
Pennsylvania Fiduciaries Investment Act, or as the same may be
subsequently modified or amended, and the power to do all acts, take
all proceedings and execute all rights and privileges, although not
specifically mentioned herein, as the employer may deem necessary to
administer the Pension Fund.
I. To maintain and invest the assets of this plan on a collective and
commingled basis with the assets of other pension plans maintained by
the employer, provided that the assets of each respective plan shall be
accounted for and administered separately.
J. To invest the assets of the Pension Fund in any collective commingled
trust fund maintained by a bank or trust company, including any bank or
trust company which may act as a trustee hereunder. In this connection,
the commingling of the assets of this plan with assets of other eligible
participating plans through such a medium is hereby specifically
authorized. Any assets of the plan which may be so added to such
collective trusts shall be subject to all of the provisions of the applicable
declaration of trust, as amended from time to time, which declaration, if
required by its terms or by applicable law, is hereby adopted as part of
the plan, to the extent of the participation in such collective or
commingled trust fund by the plan.
K. To make any payment or distribution required or advisable to carry out
the provisions of the plan, provided that, if a trustee is appointed by the
employer, such trustee shall make such distribution only at the
direction of the employer.
L. To compromise, contest, arbitrate, enforce or abandon claims and
demands with respect to the plan.
§ 47-109 SHALER CODE § 47-109
1:144
§ 47-110. Common investments.
The employer shall not be required to make separate investments for
individual participants or to maintain separate investments for each
participant's account but may invest contributions and any profits or gains
therefrom in common investments.
M. To retain any funds or property subject to any dispute without liability
for the payment of interest thereon and to decline to make payment or
delivery thereof until final adjudication is made by a court of competent
jurisdiction.
N. To pay and to deduct from and charge against the Pension Fund any
taxes which may be imposed thereon, whether with respect to the
income, property or transfer thereof or upon or with respect to the
interest of any person therein, which the fund is required to pay; or to
contest, in its discretion, the validity or amount of any tax, assessment,
claim or demand which may be levied or made against or in respect of
the Pension Fund, the income, property or transfer thereof or in any
matter or thing connected therewith.
O. To appoint any persons or firms (including but not limited to
accountants, investment advisors, counsel, actuaries, physicians,
appraisers, consultants, professional plan administrators and other
specialists), or otherwise act to secure specialized advice or assistance,
as it deems necessary or desirable, in connection with the management
of the fund. To the extent not prohibited by applicable law, the employer
shall be entitled to rely conclusively upon and shall be fully protected in
any action or omission taken by it in good faith reliance upon the advice
or opinion of such persons or firms, provided that such persons or firms
were prudently chosen by the employer, taking into account the
interests of the participants and beneficiaries and with due regard to
the ability of the persons or firms to perform their assigned functions.
P. To retain the services of one or more persons or firms for the
management of (including the power to acquire and dispose of) all or
any part of the fund assets, provided that each of such persons or firms
is registered as an investment advisor under the Investment Advisors
Act of 1940, is a bank (as defined in that Act) or is an insurance
company qualified to manage, acquire or dispose of pension trust assets
under the laws of more than one state. In such event, the employer shall
follow the directions of such investment manager or managers with
respect to the acquisition and disposition of fund assets but shall not be
liable for the acts or omissions of such investment manager or
managers, nor shall it be under any obligation to review or otherwise
manage any fund assets which are subject to the management of such
investment manager or managers. If the employer appoints a trustee,
the trustee shall not be permitted to retain such an investment manager
except with the express written consent of the employer.
§ 47-109 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-111
1:145
§ 47-111. Compensation and expenses of appointed trustee.
If a trustee is appointed, the trustee shall be entitled to such reasonable
compensation as shall from time to time be agreed upon by the employer
and the trustee, unless such compensation is prohibited by law. Such
compensation and all expenses reasonably incurred by the trustee in
carrying out his functions shall constitute a charge upon the employer or
the Pension Fund which may be executed at any time after 30 days' written
notice to the employer. The employer shall be under no obligation to pay
such costs and expenses, and in the event of its failure to do so, the trustee
shall be entitled to pay the same or to reimburse itself for the payment
thereof from the Pension Fund.
§ 47-112. Periodic accounting.
If a trustee is appointed, the Pension Fund shall be evaluated annually or at
more frequent intervals by the trustee and a written accounting rendered as
of each fiscal year end of the fund and as of the effective date of any removal
or resignation of the trustee and such additional dates as requested by the
employer, showing the condition of the fund and all receipts, disbursements
and other transactions effected by the trustee during the period covered by
the accounting, based on fair market values prevailing as of such date.
§ 47-113. Value.
All determinations as to the value of the assets of the Pension Fund and as
to the amount of the liabilities thereof shall be made by the employer or its
appointed trustee, whose decisions shall be final and conclusive and binding
on all parties hereto, the participants and beneficiaries and their estates. In
making any such determination, the employer or trustee shall be entitled to
seek and rely upon the opinion of or any information furnished by brokers,
appraisers and other experts and shall also be entitled to rely upon reports
as to sales and quotations, both on security exchanges and otherwise as
contained in newspapers and in financial publications.
§ 47-111 SHALER CODE § 47-113
1:146
ARTICLE XXIII
Amendments and Termination of Plan or Fund
§ 47-114. Amendment of plan.
The employer may amend this plan at any time or from time to time by
an instrument in writing executed in the name of the employer under its
Municipal Seal by officers duly authorized to execute such instrument and
delivered to the Board; provided, however, that:
§ 47-115. Termination of the plan.
The employer shall have the power to terminate this plan in its entirety at
any time by an instrument in writing executed in the name of the employer.
§ 47-116. Automatic termination of contributions.
Subject to the provisions of the Act governing financially distressed
municipalities, the liability of the employer to make contributions to the
Pension Fund shall automatically terminate upon liquidation or dissolution
of the employer, upon its adjudication as a bankrupt or upon the making of
a general assignment for the benefit of its creditors.
§ 47-117. Distribution upon termination.
A. No amendment shall deprive any participant or any beneficiary of a
deceased participant of any of the benefits to which he is entitled under
this plan with respect to contributions previously made;
B. No amendment shall provide for the use of funds or assets held under
this plan other than for the benefit of employees and no funds
contributed to this plan or assets of this plan shall, except as provided
in § 47-118, ever revert to or be used or enjoyed by the employer; and
C. No amendment to the plan which provides for a benefit modification
shall be made unless the cost estimate described in § 47-122 has been
prepared and presented to the Board in accordance with the Act.
A. In the event of the termination of the plan, all amounts of vested
benefits accrued by the affected participants as of the date of such
termination, to the extent funded on such date, shall be nonforfeitable
hereunder. In the event of termination of the plan, the employer shall
direct either that the plan administrator continue to hold the vested
accrued benefits of participants in the Pension Fund in accordance with
the provisions of the plan (other than those provisions related to
forfeitures) without regard to such termination until all funds have been
distributed in accordance with the provisions or that the plan
administrator immediately distribute to each participant an amount
equal to the vested accrued benefit to the date.
B. If there are insufficient assets in the Pension Fund to provide for all
vested accrued benefits as of the date of plan termination, priority shall
§ 47-114 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-117
1:147
§ 47-118. Residual assets.
If all liabilities to vested participants and any others entitled to receive a
benefit under the terms of the plan have been satisfied and there remain any
residual assets in the Pension Fund, such residual assets remaining shall
be returned to the employer insofar as such return does not contravene
any provision of law, and any remaining balance in excess of employer
contributions shall be returned to the commonwealth.
§ 47-119. Exclusive benefit rule.
In the event of the discontinuance and termination of the plan as provided
herein, the employer shall dispose of the Pension Fund in accordance
with the terms of the plan and applicable law; at no time prior to the
satisfaction of all liabilities under the plan shall any part of the corpus or
income of the Pension Fund, after deducting any administrative or other
expenses properly chargeable to the Pension Fund, be used for or diverted
to purposes other than for the exclusive benefit of the participants in the
plan, their beneficiaries or their estates.
first be given to the distribution of any amounts attributable to
mandatory or voluntary employee contributions before assets are
applied to the distribution of any vested benefits attributable to other
sources hereunder.
C. All other assets attributable to the terminated plan shall be distributed
and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of applicable law and
the terms of any instrument adopted by the employer which effects
such termination.
§ 47-117 SHALER CODE § 47-119
1:148
ARTICLE XXIV
Compliance with Other Provisions
§ 47-120. Actuarial valuations.
§ 47-121. Duties of chief administrative officer.
A. The plan's actuary shall perform an actuarial valuation at least
biennially unless the employer is applying or has applied for
supplemental state assistance pursuant to Section 603 of the Act54,
whereupon actuarial valuation reports shall be made annually.
B. Such biennial actuarial valuation report shall be made as of the
beginning of each plan year occurring in an odd-numbered calendar
year, beginning with the year 1985.
C. Such actuarial valuation shall be prepared and certified by an approved
actuary, as such term is defined in the Act.
D. The expenses attributable to the preparation of any actuarial valuation
report or investigation required by the Act or any other expense which
is permissible under the terms of the Act and which are directly
associated with administering the plan shall be an allowable
administrative expense payable from the assets of the Pension Fund.
Such allowable expenses shall include but not be limited to the
following:
(1) Investment costs associated with obtaining authorized investments
and investment management fees;
(2) Accounting expenses;
(3) Premiums for insurance coverage on fund assets;
(4) Reasonable and necessary counsel fees incurred for advice or to
defend the fund; and
(5) Legitimate travel and education expenses for plan officials;
provided, however, that the municipal officials of the employer, in
their fiduciary role, shall monitor the services provided to the plan
to ensure that the expenses are necessary, reasonable and benefit
the plan, and further provided that the plan administrator shall
document all such expenses item by item and, where necessary,
hour by hour.
A. Such actuarial reports shall be prepared and filed under the supervision
of the Chief Administrative Officer.
B. The chief administrative officer of the plan shall determine the financial
requirements of the plan on the basis of the most recent actuarial
report and shall determine the minimum obligation of the employer
54.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 895.603.
§ 47-120 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-121
1:149
§ 47-122. Benefit plan modifications.
Prior to the adoption of any benefit plan modification by the employer, the
chief administrative officer of the plan shall provide to the Board a cost
estimate of the proposed benefit plan modification. Such estimate shall be
prepared by an approved actuary, which estimate shall disclose to the Board
the impact of the proposed benefit plan modification on the future financial
requirements of the plan and the future minimum obligation of the employer
with respect to the plan.
with respect to funding the plan for any given plan year. The chief
administrative officer shall submit the financial requirements of the
plan and the minimum obligation of the employer to the Board annually
and shall certify the accuracy of such calculations and their
conformance with the Act.
§ 47-121 SHALER CODE § 47-122
1:150
ARTICLE XXV
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 47-123. Plan not a contract of employment.
No employee of the employer nor anyone else shall have any rights
whatsoever against the employer or the plan administrator as a result
of this plan except those expressly granted to them hereunder. Nothing
herein shall be construed to give any employee the right to remain in the
employment of the employer.
§ 47-124. Word usage.
For purposes of this plan, the masculine shall be read for the feminine, and
the singular shall be read for the plural, wherever the person or context
shall plainly so require.
§ 47-125. Construction of document.
This plan may be executed and/or conformed in any number of
counterparts, each of which shall be deemed an original and shall be
construed and enforced according to the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, except that such commonwealth's choice of law rules.
§ 47-126. Headings.
The headings of articles are included solely for convenience of reference,
and if there be any conflict between such headings and the text of the plan,
the text shall control.
§ 47-127. Incapacity of participant.
If any participant shall be physically or mentally incapable of receiving
or acknowledging receipt of any payment of pension benefits hereunder,
the plan administrator, upon the receipt of satisfactory evidence that such
participant is so incapacitated and that another person or institution is
maintaining him, may provide for such payment of pension benefits
hereunder to such person or institution so maintaining him, and any such
payments so made shall be deemed for every purpose to have been made to
such participant.
§ 47-128. Liability of officers.
Subject to the provisions of the Act and unless otherwise specifically
required by other applicable laws, no past, present or future officer of the
employer shall be personally liable to any participant, beneficiary or other
person under any provision of the plan.
§ 47-123 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-129
1:151
§ 47-129. Assets of fund.
Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to give any participant or
beneficiary any interest in any specific property of the Pension Fund or
any right except to receive such distributions as are expressly provided for
under the plan.
§ 47-130. Pension fund for sole benefit of participants.
The income and principal of the Pension Fund are for the sole use and
benefit of the participants covered hereunder and, to the extent permitted
by law, shall be free, clear and discharged from and are not to be in any
way liable for debts, contracts or agreements now contracted or which may
hereafter be contracted and from all claims and liabilities now or hereafter
incurred by any participant or beneficiary.
§ 47-130.1. Compliance with PPA and HEART Act. [Added
12-13-2011 by Ord. No. 1901]
The following provisions are added to the plan. Any prior provisions that are
inconsistent with the provisions in this section are hereby superseded.
A. The purpose of this section is to comply with the Pension Protection Act
of 2006 (PPA)55 and the Heroes Earnings Assistance Relief Tax Act
(HEART Act).56 Notwithstanding anything in this plan to the contrary,
this plan shall be interpreted so as to comply with the applicable
required provisions of the PPA and the HEART Act.
B. For the purposes of Code Section 415(b)(1)(A), effective as of January 1,
2008, the "applicable mortality table" and "applicable interest rate" are
found in Rev. Rul. 2007-67. The "applicable mortality table" in Rev. Rul.
2001-62 was effective from December 31, 2002 through December 31,
2007.
C. Section 415(c) compensation. For the purposes of this section,
"compensation" includes only those items specified in Treas. Reg.
§ 1.415(c)-2(b)(1) or (2) and excludes all items listed in Treas. Reg.
§ 1.415(c)-2(c), the terms of which are specifically incorporated herein
by reference. Effective as of January 1, 2009, to the extent required by
the Heroes Earnings Assistance Relief Tax Act of 2008 (HEART Act),
differential wage payments shall be included in compensation.
D. Effective as of January 1, 2007, an "eligible rollover distribution" shall
include any eligible rollover distribution (including distributions
containing after-tax contributions) that is transferred in a direct
trustee-to-trustee transfer to a Section 403(b) annuity contract or a
qualified trust under Code Section 401(a) that agrees to separately
account for amounts so transferred, including separately accounting for
55.Editor's Note: See 29 U.S.C. § 1001 et seq.
56.Editor's Note: See 26 U.S.C. § 1 et seq.
§ 47-129 SHALER CODE § 47-130.1
1:152
the portion of such distribution which is includible in gross income and
the portion of such distribution which is not so includible.
E. Effective as of January 1, 2008, a Roth IRA is an eligible retirement
plan.
F. Nonspousal rollover. Effective January 1, 2007, if a beneficiary who is
not a surviving spouse is entitled to receive what would otherwise be an
eligible rollover distribution, the beneficiary may, in accordance with
Code Section 402(c)(11), make a trustee-to-trustee transfer of that
amount to an IRA or individual retirement annuity (other than an
endowment contract), provided that:
(1) The transfer is made not later than the end of the fourth year after
the year of the participant's death; and
(2) The account or annuity to which the amount is transferred is
treated as an inherited IRA or individual retirement annuity in
accordance with Code Section 408(d)(3)(C).
G. HEART Act. Effective for participant deaths occurring while performing
qualified military service [as defined in Code Section 414(u)] on or after
January 1, 2007, the plan will provide retirement benefits and service
credit to the extent required by the HEART Act.
§ 47-130.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-130.1
1:153

Part 4
[Adopted 7-10-2007 BPyoOlircde. PNeon. s1io8n54, Effective 1-1-2006]
ARTICLE XXVI
Pension Plan
§ 47-131. Definitions.
The following words and phrases as used in this plan shall have the
meanings set forth in this section, unless a different meaning is otherwise
clearly required by the context:
ACCRUED BENEFIT — As of any given date, the benefit determined under
§ 47-134B, calculated on the basis of final monthly average salary as of the
date of determination and multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which
shall be the participant's aggregate service determined as of such date and
the denominator of which shall be the projected aggregate service of the
participant as if the participant continues in employment until attainment
of normal retirement age. Notwithstanding anything contained herein to
the contrary, in no event shall the fraction exceed 1.0. The accrued benefit
shall not exceed the maximum limitation, determined as of the date of
computation, provided under § 47-134G. All accrued benefits are subject
to all applicable limitations, reductions, offsets and actuarial adjustments
provided pursuant to the terms of the plan prior to the actual payment
thereof.
ACCUMULATED CONTRIBUTIONS — The total amount contributed by any
participant to this pension fund or its predecessor by way of payroll
deduction or otherwise, plus interest credited at 4% per annum. Interest
shall be credited in the form of a compound interest rate from the first
day of the plan year following the date on which the contributions were
paid to the first day of the month preceding the date that a distribution
of accumulated contributions under § 47-136B or 47-137B shall be paid or
payment of benefits shall commence. Interest shall be credited as described
herein solely for any period of time commencing on or after January 1,
1980. Prior to January 1, 1980, interest credit was determined in the sole
discretion of the Board.
ACT — The Municipal Pension Plan Funding Standard and Recovery Act
which was enacted as Act 205 of 1984, as amended, 53 P.S. § 895.101 et
seq.
ACTUARIAL EQUIVALENT — Two forms of payment of equal actuarial
present value on a specified date. The actuarial present value shall be
determined by use of the UP-1984 Mortality Table and 7% interest, unless
otherwise specifically provided herein.
ACTUARY — The person, partnership, association or corporation which at
any given time is serving as actuary, provided that such actuary must be an
approved actuary as defined in the Act.
AGGREGATE SERVICE — The total period or periods of the participant's
employment with the employer, whether or not interrupted.
§ 47-131 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-131
1:155
Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, should any such participant
receive a distribution of accumulated contributions with respect to a period
of employment for which employee contributions are required, such period
of employment shall not be included in aggregate service thereafter unless,
at the commencement of the next period of employment, the participant
repays to the fund the amount of such distribution with interest. For
purposes of this definition, interest shall accrue as of the date the employee
receives a distribution of accumulated contributions and shall be computed
at the same rate and in the same manner as described in the definition of
"accumulated contributions." Aggregate service shall be calculated in whole
years and completed months.
BENEFICIARY — The person or entity designated by the participant to
receive a distribution of the participant's accumulated contributions should
the participant die prior to becoming entitled to a retirement benefit. In the
event that a participant does not designate a beneficiary or the beneficiary
does not survive the participant, the beneficiary shall be the surviving
spouse or, if there is no surviving spouse, the issue, per stirpes, or, if there
is no surviving issue, the estate, but if no personal representative has been
appointed, to those persons who would be entitled to the estate under the
intestacy laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania if the participant had
died intestate and a resident of Pennsylvania.
BOARD — The Board of Commissioners of the Township of Shaler.
CHIEF ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — The person designated by the
Township who has the primary responsibility for the execution of the
administrative affairs for the plan.
CODE — The Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended.
COMMITTEE — The Pension and Insurance Committee as determined
pursuant to § 47-138B.
COMMONWEALTH — The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
COMPENSATION — The total remuneration of the employee, whether
salary or hourly wages paid by the employer for police services rendered.
Compensation shall include overtime pay, holiday pay, longevity pay, any
other form of remuneration paid by the employer for police services
rendered, and fixed, periodic amounts paid for periods during which the
participant is not actively employed as a member of the employer's regular
full-time police force, which amounts are paid directly by the employer
or through a program to which the employer has made contributions on
behalf of the employee, other than under this plan (including, without
limitation, a worker's compensation program or payments made under the
Pennsylvania Heart and Lung Act). Certain nonperiodic payments such as
bonuses, educational incentives, unused and earned vacation and sick-leave
buyback payments shall also be included in compensation. Compensation
shall be limited on an annual basis to the amount specified for government
plans pursuant to Code Section 401(a)(17), as adjusted under Code Section
415(d).
§ 47-131 SHALER CODE § 47-131
1:156
DISABILITY DATE — The date when a participant is determined by the plan
administrator to be incapacitated due to total and permanent disability, or
the date when the participant's employment terminates due to such total
and permanent disability, if later.
EMPLOYEE — Any individual employed by the employer on a regular, fulltime
basis as a police officer of the employer's police force. For purposes
of this definition, "employed on a regular full-time basis" means that the
individual is regularly scheduled to work a minimum of 40 hours per week.
EMPLOYER — The Township of Shaler, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania.
EMPLOYMENT — For the purpose of determining aggregate service:
The period of time for which an employee is directly or indirectly
compensated or entitled to compensation by the employer for the
performance of duties as a police officer;
A.
Any period of time for which an employee is paid, either directly by
the employer or through a program to which the employer has made
contributions on behalf of the employee, a fixed, periodic amount in
the nature of salary-continuation payments for reasons other than the
performance of duties (such as vacation, holidays, sickness, entitlement
to benefits under workers' compensation or similar laws);
B.
Any period during which an employee is entitled to disability benefits
under this plan, provided that the employee returns to employment
within three months of the date on which it is determined that the
employee is no longer totally and permanently disabled, if such
determination occurs prior to the date a participant attains normal
retirement age;
C.
Any period of voluntary or involuntary military service with the Armed
Forces of the United States of America, provided that the participant
has been employed as a regular, full-time member of the employer's
police force for a period of at least six months immediately prior to the
period of military service, and the participant returns to employment
within six months following discharge from military service or within
such longer period during which employment rights are guaranteed by
applicable law or under the terms of a collective bargaining agreement
with the employer; and
D.
Any period of qualified military service as determined under the
requirements of Chapter 43 of Title 38, United States Code, provided
that the participant returns to employment following such period of
qualified military service, and the participant makes payment to the
plan in an amount equal to the participant contributions that would
otherwise have been paid to the plan during such period of qualified
military service. The amount of participant contributions shall be based
upon an estimate of the compensation that would have been paid
to the participant during such period of qualified military service as
determined by the average compensation paid to the participant during
the 12 months immediately preceding the period of qualified military
E.
§ 47-131 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-131
1:157
FINAL MONTHLY AVERAGE SALARY — The average monthly salary earned
by the participant and paid by the employer during the final 36 months
immediately preceding termination of active employment. Salary shall
include the employee's compensation to which the employee is entitled
for the rendering of services in employment but shall exclude for this
purpose any single sum or extraordinary payments made which are not
directly attributable to active employment during the averaging period,
including but not limited to payment for accumulated sick leave, payment
of a longevity bonus, or payment of a back-pay damage award. Salary shall
not include uniform allowance.
INSURER or INSURANCE COMPANY — A legal reserve life insurance
company authorized to do business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
LATE RETIREMENT DATE — The day next following the date on which the
participant retires from employment which is subsequent to the date on
which the participant attains normal retirement age.
MINIMUM MUNICIPAL OBLIGATION — The minimum obligation of the
municipality as determined by the actuary pursuant to the provisions of the
Act.
NORMAL RETIREMENT AGE — The date on which the participant has
completed 25 years of aggregate service with the employer and has attained
age 55.
NOTICE or ELECTION — A written document prepared in the form
specified by the plan administrator. If such notice or election is to be
service. The amount of participant contributions calculated must be
paid into the plan before the end of the period that begins on the date of
reemployment and ends on the earlier of the date that ends the period
that has a duration of three times the period of qualified military service
or the date that is five years after the date of reemployment.
In the case of each participant who was actively employed in
employment on or before April 1, 2001, "salary" for the purpose of
determining final monthly average salary shall include payments made
for accumulated sick leave, whether as an annual payment during the
averaging period or as a single-sum payment at the time of retirement.
A.
Final monthly average salary shall be calculated by taking into account
only those periods during which an employee receives salary, as that
term is defined in this definition. Therefore, for example, the final
monthly average salary for a participant who is voluntarily or
involuntarily serving in the United States Armed Forces during the final
36 months of aggregate service shall be based on the period during
which the employee last received salary (as defined in the preceding
paragraphs) from the employer.
B.
Salary used to determine final monthly average salary shall be limited
on an annual basis to the amount specified for government plans in
accordance with Code Section 401(a)(17), as adjusted under Code
Section 415(d).
C.
§ 47-131 SHALER CODE § 47-131
1:158
provided by the employer or the plan administrator, it shall be mailed in a
properly addressed envelope, postage prepaid, to the last known address
of the person entitled thereto on or before the last day of the specified
notice or election period. If such notice or election is to be provided to the
employer or the plan administrator, it must be received by the intended
recipient on or before the last day of the specified notice or election period.
PARTICIPANT — An employee who has met the eligibility requirements to
participate in the plan as provided in § 47-132A and who has not for any
reason ceased to be a participant hereunder.
PENSION FUND — The police pension fund administered under the terms
of this plan and which shall include all money, property, investments,
policies and contracts standing in the name of the plan.
PLAN — The plan set forth herein, as amended from time to time, and
designated as the pension plan of the Township of Shaler (Police).
PLAN ADMINISTRATOR — The committee or the individual appointed for
the purpose of supervising and administering the provisions of the plan. In
the event that no such appointment is made, the plan administrator shall be
the Board.
PLAN YEAR — The twelve-month period beginning on January 1 and ending
on December 31 of each year.
POLICY or CONTRACT — A retirement annuity or retirement income
endowment policy (or a combination of both) or any other form of insurance
contract or policy which shall be deemed appropriate in accordance with
the provisions of applicable law.
RESTATEMENT DATE — January 1, 2006, the date upon which this
amendment and restatement of the plan becomes effective.
RETIREMENT DATE — The first day next following the date on which the
participant retires from employment on which the payment of retirement
benefits pursuant to this plan shall commence.
TOTAL AND PERMANENT DISABILITY — A condition of physical or mental
impairment due to which a participant is unable to perform the usual
and customary duties of employment and which is reasonably expected to
continue to be permanent for the remainder of the participant's lifetime.
For purposes of this definition and § 47-135, a condition shall not be treated
as a total and permanent disability unless such condition results from
permanent injuries incurred in service. Therefore, an employee whose
physical or mental impairment does not occur while on duty or which is
the result of alcoholism, addiction to narcotics, perpetration of a felonious
criminal activity or is willfully self-inflicted is not entitled to receive
disability benefits under the plan.
§ 47-132. Participation in plan.
A. Eligibility requirements. Each employee who is employed as a regular,
full-time permanent member of the Police Department of the employer
§ 47-131 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-132
1:159
§ 47-133. Contributions.
shall participate herein as of the date on which such employee's
employment first commences or recommences, provided all
prerequisites to participation under this plan shall have been fulfilled,
including, but not limited to, completion of all forms required by the
plan administrator. Each employee who was a participant in the plan on
the day prior to the restatement date shall continue to be a participant
on and after the restatement date, subject to the terms and conditions
of the plan as set forth herein.
B. Participation requirements. The Board shall furnish the plan
administrator with written notification of the appointment of any new
full-time permanent employee who is eligible for participation
hereunder within 60 days of the date of such appointment. Each
participant hereunder shall be required to make contributions to the
plan, as provided in § 47-133A hereof, and shall execute and complete
any enrollment or application forms as required by the plan
administrator.
C. Designation of beneficiary. Any new, full-time employee who becomes a
participant hereunder shall provide a written notice in the manner
prescribed by the plan administrator which designates a beneficiary at
the time participation commences. The participant's election of any
such beneficiary may be rescinded or changed, without the consent of
the beneficiary, at any time, provided the participant provides the
written notice of the changed designation to the plan administrator in
the manner prescribed by the plan administrator. Any designation of a
beneficiary made in any manner other than one acceptable to the plan
administrator shall be null and void and have no effect under the terms
of this plan.
D. Change in status. A participant who remains in the service of the
employer but ceases to be an employee eligible for participation
hereunder, or ceases or fails to make any contributions which are
required as a condition of participation hereunder, shall have no further
benefit accruals occur until the individual again qualifies as a
participant hereunder eligible to resume such accrual of benefits.
E. Recordkeeping. The employer shall furnish the plan administrator with
such information as will aid the plan administrator in the administration
of the plan. Such information shall include all pertinent data on
employees for purposes of determining their eligibility to participate in
this plan.
A. Participant contributions. Each participant shall, as a requirement of
participation, pay regular contributions to the pension fund in an
amount equal to no less than 5% of the participant's compensation and
no more than 8% of the participant's compensation. Each participant
shall complete the necessary forms to authorize the payment of
participant contributions by way of payroll deduction.
§ 47-132 SHALER CODE § 47-133
1:160
§ 47-134. Retirement benefits.
B. Reduction of participant contributions. Notwithstanding the preceding
Subsection A, if an annual actuarial study performed by the actuary
shows that the condition of the pension fund is such that payments into
the pension fund by participants may be reduced below the minimum
percentages prescribed in Subsection A, or may be eliminated, and that
if such payments are reduced or eliminated, contributions by the
employer will not be required to keep the pension fund actuarially
sound, the employer may, by ordinance or resolution, reduce or
eliminate payments into the pension fund by participants.
C. Employer contributions. The actuary, in accordance with the Act, shall
determine the minimum municipal obligation of the employer. The
employer shall pay into the pension fund, by annual appropriations or
otherwise, the contributions necessary to satisfy the minimum
municipal obligation. Notwithstanding the foregoing, nothing contained
herein shall preclude the employer from contributing an amount in
excess of the minimum municipal obligation.
D. State aid. General municipal pension system state aid, or any other
amount of state aid received by the employer in accordance with the
Act from the commonwealth, may be deposited into the pension fund
governed by this plan in amounts determined by the Board and shall be
used to reduce the amount of the minimum municipal obligation of the
employer.
E. Gifts. The Board is authorized to take by gift, grant, devise or otherwise
any money or property, real or personal, for the benefit of the plan and
cause the same to be held as a part of the pension fund. The care,
management, investment and disposal of such amounts shall be vested
in the Board or its delegate, the plan administrator, subject to the
direction of the donor and not inconsistent with applicable laws and the
terms of the plan.
F. Employer reversion. At no time shall it be possible for the plan assets to
be used for or diverted to any purpose other than for the exclusive
benefit of the participants and their beneficiaries, including payment of
any reasonable plan expenses. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any
contributions made by the employer may be returned to the employer if
the contribution was made due to a mistake and the contribution is
returned within one year of the date on which the discovery of the
mistaken payment of the contribution was made or reasonably should
have been made or the plan is terminated, as provided in § 47-140.
A. Normal retirement. Each participant shall be entitled to a normal
retirement benefit after retirement on or after the participant has
attained normal retirement age.
B. Normal retirement benefit. Each participant who shall become entitled
to a benefit pursuant to Subsection A shall receive a benefit paid
§ 47-133 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-134
1:161
monthly in an amount equal to 50% of the participant's final monthly
average salary as determined herein. The normal retirement benefit
shall be computed as the sum of:
(1) Any pension benefits from pension plans heretofore established by
a private organization or association for the members of the police
force but only to the extent that the commonwealth or any of its
municipalities shall have contributed to such pension plan monies
raised by taxation;
(2) Seventy-five percent of primary social security benefits under the
Federal Social Security Act for which the participant may be
eligible because of age and attributable to employment, in the
event that a participant should be entitled to such benefits in the
future; and
(3) An amount from the plan to the extent necessary to make the total
benefit paid in any given month equal to 50% of final monthly
average salary.
C. Late retirement. A participant may continue in employment beyond the
attainment of normal retirement age subject to the employer's rules
and regulations regarding retirement age. If a participant who has met
the requirements of Subsection A continues in employment beyond
normal retirement age, there shall be no retirement benefits paid until
employment ceases and the participant's retirement actually begins.
The retirement benefit of a participant who retires after attainment of
normal retirement age shall be calculated in accordance with
Subsection B on the basis of the final monthly average salary as of such
participant's actual retirement and shall commence on the participant's
late retirement date.
D. Service increment. Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the
contrary, each participant who shall retire after completing at least 26
years of aggregate service and each participant who shall have retired
after January 1, 1984, and who was disabled for more than 36 months
after completing at least 25 years of active employment, may be
entitled to receive a monthly service increment benefit; provided,
however, that the participant shall have accrued sufficient service
credit pursuant to this Subsection D. Such service increment benefit
shall only be available to a participant whose aggregate service for
purposes of this Subsection D shall only include periods of time when
the participant actively renders service in employment and shall not
include any period of time during which the participant received a
disability benefit under the terms of this plan or was not otherwise in
active employment. Such service increment benefit shall be in an
amount equal to $100 and shall be paid monthly in addition to the
amount of normal retirement benefit calculated pursuant to Subsection
B hereof.
§ 47-134 SHALER CODE § 47-134
1:162
E. Cost-of-living adjustments. Each participant who shall retire after
January 1, 2001, and receive a retirement benefit determined pursuant
to Subsection B hereunder shall be entitled to receive annual cost-ofliving
increases to the amount of benefit payable to such participant
under Subsection B. Such cost-of-living increases shall be determined
by the Board and shall not exceed the following limits:
(1) The percentage increase in the consumer price index from the year
in which the participant was last employed as an employee of the
employer;
(2) The total retirement benefits payable under this plan shall not
exceed 75% of the participant's final monthly average salary;
(3) Effective January 1, 2003, the total cost-of-living increase shall not
exceed 30% of the participant's original retirement benefit under
this plan; and
(4) The cost-of-living increases shall not impair the actuarial
soundness of the pension fund.
F. Payment of benefits. Retirement benefit payments shall be payable as of
the participant's retirement date and the first day of each month
thereafter during the participant's lifetime. The initial payment shall be
prorated based upon the remaining number of days in the then-current
month compared to 30. A participant must complete an application for
benefit in the manner prescribed by the plan administrator and deliver
such application to the plan administrator at least 30 days prior to the
date on which benefit payments shall commence. Notwithstanding
anything contained herein to the contrary, no retirement benefit
payments or any other payments shall be due or payable on or before
the date that is 30 days after the date the plan administrator receives
the application for benefits. Payment of benefits under this section shall
cease as of the date of death of the participant.
G. Maximum benefit limitations. Notwithstanding any provision of this
plan to the contrary, no benefit provided under this plan attributable to
contributions of the employer shall exceed, as an annual amount, the
amount specified in Code Section 415(b)(1)(A) as adjusted pursuant to
Code Section 415(d), assuming the form of benefit shall be a straight
life annuity (with no ancillary benefits). The limitations described in this
Subsection G shall be governed by the following conditions and
definitions:
(1) Benefits paid or payable in a form other than a straight life annuity
(with no ancillary benefits) or where the employee contributes to
the plan or makes rollover contributions shall be adjusted on an
actuarially equivalent basis to determine the limitation contained
herein;
(2) In the case of a benefit which commences prior to the attainment of
age 62 by the participant, the limitation herein shall be adjusted on
§ 47-134 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-134
1:163
an actuarially equivalent basis to the amount determined pursuant
to this section commencing at age 62; however, the reduction shall
not reduce the limitation below $75,000 for a benefit commencing
at or after age 55 or, if the benefit commences prior to attainment
of age 55, the amount which is actuarially equivalent to a benefit of
$75,000 commencing at age 55; however, in the case of a qualified
participant (a participant with respect to whom a period of at least
15 years of service, including applicable military service, as a fulltime
employee of a police or fire department is taken into account
in determining the amount of benefit), the limitation contained
herein shall not reduce the limitation to an amount less than the
amount specified pursuant to Code Section 415(b)(2)(G)(i), and
such amount shall be adjusted pursuant to Code Section 415(d);
(3) In the case of a benefit which commences after attainment of age
65 by the participant, the limitation herein shall be adjusted on an
actuarially equivalent basis to the amount determined herein
commencing at age 65;
(4) Benefits paid to a participant which total less than $10,000 from all
defined benefit plans maintained by the employer expressed as an
annual benefit shall be deemed not to exceed the limitation of this
section, provided that the employer has not at any time maintained
a defined contribution plan in which the participant has
participated; however, in the case of a participant who is not
receiving a disability retirement benefit pursuant to § 47-135B,
with fewer than 10 years of participation, the limitation expressed
in this Subsection G(4) shall be reduced by 1/10 for each year of
participation less than 10, but in no event shall this limitation be
less than $1,000;
(5) The limitations expressed herein shall be based upon plan years for
calculation purposes, shall be applied to all defined benefit plans
maintained by the employer as one defined benefit plan and to all
defined contribution plans maintained by the employer as one
defined contribution plan, and shall be applied and interpreted
consistent with Code Section 415 and regulations thereunder as
applicable to government plans in general and this plan in
particular; and
(6) In the case of a survivor benefit or a disability retirement benefit
under § 47-135B, the adjustment under Subsection G(2) hereof
shall not apply and the applicable limitation shall be the limitation
contained herein without regard to the age of the benefit recipient.
[Amended 4-13-2010 by Ord. No. 188357]
H. Required distributions.
57.Editor's Note: This ordinance shall take effect 4-14-2010.
§ 47-134 SHALER CODE § 47-134
1:164
(1) Notwithstanding any other provision of this plan, the entire benefit
of any participant who becomes entitled to benefits prior to death
shall be distributed either:
(a) Not later than the required beginning date; or
(b) Over a period beginning not later than the required beginning
date and extending over the life of such participant or over the
lives of such participant and a designated beneficiary (or over a
period not extending beyond the life expectancy of such
participant, or the joint life expectancies of such participant
and a designated beneficiary).
(2) If a participant who is entitled to benefits under this plan dies prior
to the date when the entire interest has been distributed after
distribution of the benefits has begun in accordance with
Subsection H(1)(b) above, the remaining portion of such benefit
shall be distributed at least as rapidly as under the method of
distribution being used under Subsection H(1)(b) as of the date of
the death.
(3) If a participant who is entitled to benefits under this plan dies
before distribution of the benefit has begun, the entire interest of
such employee shall be distributed within five years of the death of
such employee, unless the following sentence is applicable. If any
portion of the employee's interest is payable to (or for the benefit
of) a designated beneficiary, such portion shall be distributed over
the life of such designated beneficiary (or over a period not
extending beyond the life expectancy of such beneficiary), and such
distributions begin not later than one year after the date of the
employee's death or such later date as provided by regulations
issued by the Secretary of the Treasury; then for purposes of the
five-year rule set forth in the preceding sentence, the benefit
payable to the beneficiary shall be treated as distributed on the
date on which such distributions begin; provided, however, that
notwithstanding the preceding sentence, if the designated
beneficiary is the surviving spouse of the participant, then the date
on which distributions are required to begin shall not be earlier
than the date upon which the employee would have attained age
70 1/2; and further provided, if the surviving spouse dies before the
distributions to such spouse begin, this subsection shall be applied
as if the surviving spouse were the employee.
(4) For purposes of this section, the following definitions and
procedures shall apply:
(a) Required beginning date shall mean April 1 of the calendar
year following the later of the calendar year in which the
employee attains age 70 1/2 or the calendar year in which the
employee retires.
§ 47-134 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-134
1:165
(b) The phrase "designated beneficiary" shall mean any individual
designated by the employee under this plan according to its
rules.
(c) Any amount paid to a child shall be treated as if it had been
paid to the surviving spouse if such amount will become
payable to the surviving spouse upon such child's reaching
majority (or other designated event permitted under
regulations issued by the Secretary of the Treasury).
(d) For purposes of this section, the life expectancy of an employee
and/or the employee's spouse (other than in the case of a life
annuity) may be recalculated but not more frequently than
annually.
I. Assignment. The pension benefit payments prescribed herein shall not
be subject to attachment, execution, levy, garnishment or other legal
process and shall be payable only to the participant or designated
beneficiary and shall not be subject to assignment or transfer except as
required by an order of court entered by a state or federal court
exercising proper jurisdiction.
J. Retired participants. Any participant who shall have retired prior to the
restatement date shall not have the benefit altered in any way by the
provisions of this amended and restated plan, except where otherwise
expressly provided herein. Such retired participants shall continue to
have their benefits governed by the terms of the plan in effect on the
day preceding the restatement date.
K. Limitation of liability. Nothing contained herein shall obligate the
employer, the plan administrator, any fiduciary or any agent or
representative of any of the foregoing to provide any retirement or
other benefit to any participant or beneficiary which cannot be provided
from the assets available in the pension fund, whether such benefits are
in pay status or otherwise payable under the terms of the plan. The
Board retains the right to amend or terminate this plan consistent with
applicable law at any time, with or without cause and whether or not
such action directly or indirectly results in the suspension, reduction or
termination of any benefit payable under the plan or in pay status, and
without liability to any person for any such action.
L. Personal right of participant. The right to receive any benefits under
this plan is a personal right of the participant and shall expire upon the
death of the participant. No heir, legatee, devisee, beneficiary, assignee
or other person claiming by or through a participant shall have any
interest in any benefits hereunder unless clearly and expressly so
provided by the terms of this plan or the provisions of applicable law. A
participant's election, failure to make an election or revocation of an
election hereunder shall be final and binding on all persons.
M. Nonduplication of benefit. To avoid any duplication of benefits, a
participant who is receiving a retirement benefit under the plan and
§ 47-134 SHALER CODE § 47-134
1:166
who shall resume employment shall have benefit payments suspended
until the first day of the month coincident with or next following the
date such employment shall cease. Upon resumption of benefit
payments, such participant shall receive the greater of the amount
of the suspended benefit or the amount of benefit based upon final
monthly average salary and aggregate service as of the date that such
period of resumed employment shall cease.
N. Direct rollovers.
(1) This subsection applies to distributions made on or after December
31, 2001. Notwithstanding any provision of the plan to the contrary
that would otherwise limit a distributee's election under this
subsection, a distributee may elect, at the time and in the manner
prescribed by the plan administrator, to have any portion of an
eligible rollover distribution that is equal to at least $500 paid
directly to an eligible retirement plan specified by the distributee in
a direct rollover.
(2) For purposes of this subsection, the following definitions shall
apply:
DIRECT ROLLOVER — A payment by the plan to the eligible
retirement plan specified by the distributee.
DISTRIBUTEE — Includes an employee or former employee. In
addition, the employee's or former employee's surviving spouse
and the employee's or former employee's spouse or former spouse
who is the alternate payee under a qualified domestic relations
order, as defined in Code Section 414(p), is a distributee with
regard to the interest of the spouse or former spouse.
ELIGIBLE RETIREMENT PLAN — A qualified trust described in
Code Section 401(a), an individual retirement account described
in Code Section 408(a), an individual retirement annuity described
in Code Section 408(b), an annuity plan described in Code Section
403(a), an annuity contract described in Code Section 403(b), an
eligible plan under Section 457(b) of the Code, which is maintained
by a state, political subdivision of a state, or any agency or
instrumentality of a state or political subdivision of a state and
which agrees to separately account for amounts transferred into
such plan from this plan.
ELIGIBLE ROLLOVER DISTRIBUTION —
Any distribution of all or any portion of the balance to the
credit of the distributee, except that an eligible rollover
distribution does not include any distribution that is one of
a series of substantially equal periodic payments (not less
frequently than annually) made for the life (or life expectancy)
of the distributee or the joint lives (or joint life expectancies)
of the distributee and the distributee's designated beneficiary,
or for a specified period of 10 years or more; any distribution
(a)
§ 47-134 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-134
1:167
§ 47-135. Disability retirement.
to the extent such distribution is required under Code Section
401(a)(9); and the portion of any distribution that is not
includible in gross income (determined without regard to the
exclusion for net unrealized appreciation with respect to
employer securities).
For purposes of the direct rollover provisions in this section
of the plan, a portion of a distribution shall not fail to be
an eligible rollover distribution merely because the portion
consists of after-tax employee contributions that are not
includible in gross income. However, such portion may be paid
only to an individual retirement account or annuity described
in Section 408(a) or (b) of the Code, or to a qualified defined
contribution plan described in Section 401(a) or 403(a) of the
Code that agrees to separately account for amounts so
transferred, including separately accounting for the portion of
such distribution which is includible in gross income and the
portion of such distribution which is not so includible.
(b)
A. Disability retirement. A participant who shall incur a total and
permanent disability before attaining normal retirement age shall be
entitled to a disability retirement benefit as of the disability date.
B. Disability retirement benefit. In accordance with Act 600, a disability
pension shall be calculated at a rate no less than 50% of the member's
salary at the time the disability was incurred, provided that any
member who receives benefits for the same injuries under the Social
Security Act (49 Stat. 620, 42 U.S.C. § 301 et seq.) shall have his/her
disability benefits offset or reduced by the amount of such benefits. A
participant who shall be entitled to a disability retirement benefit under
Subsection A shall receive a monthly benefit in an amount equal to 75%
of the participant's final monthly average salary for the final 36 months
of active service determined as of the disability date. Any such
participant who meets the age and service requirements for a normal
retirement benefit shall not be eligible for a disability retirement
benefit.
C. Payment of disability benefits.
(1) Disability payments shall be made monthly as of the first day of
each month, commencing as of the first day of the month coincident
with or immediately following the participant's disability date and
continuing until the earliest of the death of the participant or
cessation of total and permanent disability.
(2) A participant who shall fail to return within three months to
employment as an employee of the employer upon cessation of total
and permanent disability prior to attainment of normal retirement
age shall be deemed to have terminated employment as of the
§ 47-134 SHALER CODE § 47-135
1:168
§ 47-136. Death benefits.
disability date and shall not be entitled to any distribution of
accumulated contributions pursuant to § 47-137B unless the total
amount of disability payments does not exceed the value of the
participant's accumulated contributions as of the disability date. If
the total amount of disability payments does not exceed the value
of the participant's accumulated contributions as of the disability
date in the case of a participant who shall be deemed to have
terminated employment as of the disability date hereunder, there
shall be payable under § 47-137B an amount equal to the difference
between the value of the participant's accumulated contributions
and the total amount of disability payments.
D. Verification of disability. The plan administrator shall determine
whether a participant shall have incurred a total and permanent
disability and shall rely on the findings of a panel of physicians that
shall be composed of one physician chosen by the employer, one
physician chosen by the employee, and one physician chosen by the
concurrence of the other two. If it shall be determined through this
procedure that a participant who is totally and permanently disabled
has recovered sufficiently to resume active employment as a police
officer or if a participant refuses to undergo a medical examination as
directed by the plan administrator (such a medical examination may not
be required more frequently than once in any given twelve-month
period), the payment of disability retirement benefits shall cease.
E. Cessation of disability. A participant who is receiving payment of
disability retirement benefits under this plan must notify the plan
administrator of any medical change indicating that the participant may
no longer be entitled to receive disability retirement benefits. If a
participant fails to provide prompt notice to the plan administrator of
any such change in status and continues to receive payment of
disability retirement benefits to which the participant is no longer
entitled, then the plan may take whatever action is necessary to recover
any such payments, including legal action or offsetting such amounts
against any future payments of retirement or other benefits under the
plan, including the costs of such actions, provided that an equivalent
position was available to the participant during the period of time when
he or she was no longer entitled to disability retirement benefits.
A. Death of participant. Upon the occurrence of the death of a participant,
there shall be benefits payable in accord with the following subsections
of this section.
B. Survivor benefit.58
58.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, Killed in service, was repealed 4-13-2010 by Ord. No.
1883, effective 4-14-2010. This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former
Subsections C and D as Subsections B and C, respectively.
§ 47-135 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-136
1:169
§ 47-137. Termination of employment.
(1) The surviving spouse of a participant or a participant who retires
on pension who dies, or if no spouse survives or if the spouse
survives and subsequently dies, then the child or children under
the age of 18 years or, if attending college, under or attaining the
age of 23 years, of a participant or a participant who retires on
pension who dies, shall during his/her lifetime in the case of a
surviving spouse or until reaching the age of 18 years or, if
attending college, under or attaining the age of 23 years in the case
of a child or children, be entitled to receive a pension calculated at
50% of the pension the participant was receiving or would have
been receiving had the participant been retired at the time of the
participant's death. The shares payable to the surviving dependent
children shall be adjusted as each child ceases to be eligible to
receive a share of the benefit hereunder. ("Attending college" shall
mean the eligible children are registered at an accredited
institution of higher learning and are carrying a minimum class
load of seven credit hours per semester.)
(2) Instead of and in lieu of the survivor benefit set forth herein, the
surviving spouse of a participant who shall have died prior to the
commencement of payment of a retirement benefit under this plan
shall be permitted to elect to receive a distribution of the
participant's accumulated contributions, and no additional benefits
shall be due and payable under the plan.
C. Death of participant without a survivor benefit. If a participant shall die
before payment of a benefit has commenced and without eligibility for
payment of a survivor benefit, the beneficiary shall be eligible to receive
a distribution in an amount equal to the accumulated contributions of
the participant as of the date of death of the participant. If the
participant has received disability retirement benefits or any other
retirement benefits hereunder, the amount of distribution of
accumulated contributions shall be reduced by the amount of disability
retirement benefits or other retirement benefits which have been paid
hereunder. [Amended 4-13-2010 by Ord. No. 188359]
A. Rights of terminated employees. A participant who shall cease to be an
employee except as otherwise hereinbefore provided shall have all
interest and rights under this plan limited to those contained in the
following sections of this section.
B. Distribution of accumulated contributions. When a participant's
employment with the employer shall terminate for any reason other
than death or total and permanent disability prior to attainment of
normal retirement age, the participant shall be entitled to receive a
distribution of accumulated contributions. Upon receipt of such
59.Editor's Note: This ordinance shall take effect 4-14-2010.
§ 47-136 SHALER CODE § 47-137
1:170
§ 47-138. Administration.
accumulated contributions, said participant and beneficiary shall not be
entitled to any further payments from the plan.
C. Deferred retirement benefit. A participant who shall have completed at
least 12 years of aggregate service and whose employment shall
terminate for any reason other than due to death or total and
permanent disability prior to attainment of normal retirement age shall
be entitled to elect to vest retirement benefits under the plan by filing a
written notice of the intention to vest with the plan administrator within
90 days after the date employment ceases. Such an election to receive a
deferred retirement benefit shall be in lieu of a distribution of
accumulated contributions under Subsection B. Such a deferred
retirement benefit shall be equal to the participant's accrued benefit as
of the date employment terminates and shall commence after
application pursuant to § 47-134F and not earlier than the date which
would be the participant's normal retirement date under the plan if the
participant remained in employment until such date.
A. Plan administrator. The plan administrator shall be the Committee or
the individual appointed by the Board who shall have the power and
authority to do all acts and to execute, acknowledge and deliver all
instruments necessary to implement and effectuate the purpose of this
plan. The plan administrator may delegate authority to act on its behalf
to any persons it deems appropriate. If a plan administrator is not
appointed, the Board shall be the plan administrator.
B. Pension and Insurance Committee. The Board shall appoint a Pension
and Insurance Committee to administer the affairs of the plan. The
Board shall delegate such authority as it shall deem appropriate to the
Committee. The Committee, if one is appointed, shall consist of not less
than five members. Two members of the Committee may be employees,
provided that such employees shall be nonvoting members. Each
member of the Committee shall serve in that capacity until death,
resignation, removal or otherwise. Each member may be removed at
any time, with or without cause, by the Board. Each member may resign
by delivering written notice to the Board and other members of the
Committee. Vacancies on the Committee shall be filled in the same
manner as the position was originally filled by the Board; provided,
however, that the remaining members of the Committee shall have full
power to act pending the filling of such vacancies.
C. Authority and duties of the plan administrator.
(1) The plan administrator shall have full power and authority to do
whatever shall, in its judgment, be reasonably necessary for the
proper administration and operation of the plan. The interpretation
or construction placed upon any term or provision of the plan by
the plan administrator or any action of the plan administrator taken
in good faith shall, upon the Board's review and approval thereof,
§ 47-137 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-138
1:171
be final and conclusive upon all parties hereto, whether employees,
participants or other persons concerned. By way of specification
and not limitation and except as specifically limited hereafter, the
plan administrator is authorized:
(a) To construe this plan;
(b) To determine all questions affecting the eligibility of any
employee to participate herein;
(c) To compute the amount and source of any benefit payable
hereunder to any participant or beneficiary;
(d) To authorize any and all disbursements;
(e) To prescribe any procedure to be followed by any participant
or other person in filing any application or election;
(f) To prepare and distribute, in such manner as may be required
by law or as the plan administrator deems appropriate,
information explaining the plan;
(g) To require from the employer or any participant such
information as shall be necessary for the proper administration
of the plan; and
(h) To appoint and retain any individual to assist in the
administration of the plan, including such legal, clerical,
accounting and actuarial services as may be required by any
applicable law or laws.
(2) The plan administrator shall have no power to add to, subtract from
or modify the terms of the plan or change or add to any benefits
provided by the plan, or to waive or fail to apply any requirements
of eligibility for benefits under the plan. Further, the plan
administrator shall have no power to adopt, amend or terminate
the plan, to select or appoint any trustee or to determine or require
any contributions to the plan, said powers being exclusively
reserved to the Board.
D. Pension and Insurance Committee organization. The Committee may
organize itself in any manner deemed appropriate to effectuate its
purposes hereunder, provided that it shall operate and act by a majority
of its members at the time in office either by vote at a meeting or in
writing without a meeting. The Committee shall appoint a Chairman, a
Secretary who may, but need not, be a Committee member, and such
other agents as it may deem advisable. The Committee may authorize
any one or more of its members to execute any document or documents,
including any application, request, certificate, notice, consent, waiver
or direction, and shall notify the Board, in writing, of each such member
so authorized; however, if no such member is so authorized, the
Chairman shall be deemed to be so authorized. Any trustee or other
§ 47-138 SHALER CODE § 47-138
1:172
fiduciary appointed hereunder shall accept and be fully protected in
relying upon any document executed by the designated members (or
the Chairman in the absence of a designation), as representing a valid
action by the Committee until the Committee shall file with such
fiduciary a written revocation of such designation. The Committee shall
meet at least one time in each plan year, and it shall maintain and
keep such records as are necessary for the efficient operation of the
plan or as may be required by any applicable law, regulation or ruling,
and shall provide for the preparation and filing of such forms, reports
or documents as may be required to be filed with any governmental
agency or department and with the participants or other persons
entitled to benefits under the plan.
E. Plan administrator costs. The plan administrator shall serve without
compensation for services unless otherwise agreed by the Board in
writing. All reasonable expenses incident to the functioning of the plan
administrator, including, but not limited to, fees of accountants,
counsel, actuaries and other specialists, and other costs of
administering the plan, may be paid from the pension fund upon
approval by the Board to the extent permitted under applicable law and
not otherwise paid by the employer.
F. Hold harmless. No member of the Board, the plan administrator, the
enrolled actuary, nor any other person involved in the administration of
the plan shall be liable to any person on account of any act or failure to
act which is taken or omitted to be taken in good faith in performing
their respective duties under the terms of this plan. To the extent
permitted by law, the employer shall, and hereby does agree to,
indemnify and hold harmless the plan administrator and each successor
and each of any such individual's heirs, executors and administrators,
and the delegates and appointees (other than any person, bank, firm or
corporation which is independent of the employer and which renders
services to the plan for a fee) from any and all liability and expenses,
including counsel fees, reasonably incurred in any action, suit or
proceeding to which such person is or may be made a party by reason of
being or having been a member, delegate or appointee of the plan
administrator, except in matters involving criminal liability, intentional
or willful misconduct. If the employer purchases insurance to cover
claims of a nature described above, then there shall be no right of
indemnification except to the extent of any deductible amount under
the insurance coverage or to the extent of the amount the claims exceed
the insured amount.
G. Approval of benefits. The plan administrator shall review and approve
or deny any application for retirement benefits within 30 days following
receipt thereof or within such longer time as may be necessary under
the circumstances. Any denial of an application for retirement benefits
shall be in writing and shall specify the reason for such denial.
H. Appeal procedure. Any person whose application for retirement
benefits is denied, who questions the amount of benefit paid, who
§ 47-138 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-138
1:173
believes a benefit should have commenced which did not so commence
or who has some other claim arising under the plan ("claimant") shall
first seek a resolution of such claim under the procedure hereinafter set
forth.
(1) Any claimant shall file a notice of the claim with the plan
administrator which shall fully describe the nature of the claim.
The plan administrator shall review the claim and make an initial
determination approving or denying the claim.
(2) If the claim is denied in whole or in part, the plan administrator
shall, within 90 days (or such other period as may be established by
applicable law) from the time the application is received, mail
notice of such denial to the claimant. Such ninety-day period may
be extended by the plan administrator if special circumstances so
require for up to 90 additional days by the plan administrator's
delivering notice of such extension to the claimant within the first
ninety-day period. Any notice hereunder shall be written in a
manner calculated to be understood by the claimant and, if a notice
of denial, shall set forth:
(a) The specific plan provisions on which the denial is based;
(b) An explanation of additional material or information, if any,
necessary to perfect such claim and a statement of why such
material or information is necessary; and
(c) An explanation of the review procedure.
(3) Upon receipt of notice denying the claim, the claimant shall have
the right to request a full and fair review by the Board of the initial
determination. Such request for review must be made by notice to
the Board within 60 days of receipt of such notice of denial. During
such review, the claimant or a duly authorized representative shall
have the right to review any pertinent documents and to submit any
issues or comments in writing. The Board shall, within 60 days
after receipt of the notice requesting such review (or in special
circumstances, such as where the Board in its sole discretion holds
a hearing, within 120 days of receipt of such notice), submit its
decision in writing to the person or persons whose claim has been
denied. The decision shall be final, conclusive and binding on all
parties, shall be written in a manner calculated to be understood by
the claimant and shall contain specific references to the pertinent
plan provisions on which the decision is based.
(4) Any notice of a claim questioning the amount of a benefit in pay
status shall be filed within 90 days following the date of the first
payment which would be adjusted if the claim is granted unless the
plan administrator allows a later filing for good cause shown.
(5) A claimant who does not submit a notice of a claim or a notice
requesting a review of a denial of a claim within the time
§ 47-138 SHALER CODE § 47-138
1:174
§ 47-139. Pension fund.
limitations specified above shall be deemed to have waived such
claim or right to review.
(6) Nothing contained herein is intended to abridge any right of a
claimant to appeal any final decision hereunder to a court of
competent jurisdiction under 2 Pa.C.S.A. § 752. No decision
hereunder is a final decision from which such an appeal may be
taken until the entire appeal procedure of this Subsection H of the
plan has been exhausted.
A. Operation of the pension fund.
(1) The Board is hereby authorized to hold and supervise the
investment of the assets of the pension fund, subject to the
provisions of the laws of the commonwealth and of this plan and
any amendment thereto.
(2) The pension fund shall be used to pay benefits as provided in the
plan and, to the extent not paid directly by the employer, to pay the
expenses of administering the plan pursuant to authorization by the
employer.
(3) The employer intends the plan to be permanent and for the
exclusive benefit of its employees. It expects to make the
contributions to the pension fund required under the plan. The
employer shall not be liable in any manner for any insufficiency in
the pension fund; benefits are payable only from the pension fund,
and only to the extent that there are monies available therein. The
pension fund will consist of all funds held by the employer under
the plan, including contributions made pursuant to the provisions
hereof and the investments, reinvestments and proceeds thereof.
The pension fund shall be held, managed and administered
pursuant to the terms of the plan. Except as otherwise expressly
provided in the plan, the employer has exclusive authority and
discretion to manage and control the pension fund assets. The
employer may, however, appoint a trustee, custodian or investment
manager, at its sole discretion.
B. Powers and duties of employer. With respect to the pension fund, the
employer shall have the following powers, rights and duties, in addition
to those vested in it elsewhere in the plan or by law, unless such duties
are delegated:
(1) To retain in cash so much of the pension fund as it deems advisable
and to deposit any cash so retained in any bank or similar financial
institution (including any such institution which may be appointed
to serve as trustee hereunder), without liability for interest
thereon.
§ 47-138 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-139
1:175
(2) To invest and reinvest the principal and income of the fund and
keep said fund invested, without distinction between principal and
income, in securities which are at the time legal investments for
fiduciaries under the Pennsylvania Fiduciaries Investment Act,60 or
as the same may be subsequently modified or amended.
(3) To sell property held in the fund at either public or private sale for
cash or on credit at such times as it may deem appropriate; to
exchange such property; to grant options for the purchase or
exchange thereof.
(4) To consent to and participate in any plan of reorganization,
consolidation, merger, extension or other similar plan affecting
property held in the fund; to consent to any contract, lease,
mortgage, purchase, sale or other action by any corporation
pursuant to any such plan.
(5) To exercise all conversion and subscription rights pertaining to
property held in the fund.
(6) To exercise all voting rights with respect to property held in the
fund and, in connection therewith, to grant proxies, discretionary
or otherwise.
(7) To place money at any time in a deposit bank deemed to be
appropriate for the purposes of this plan no matter where situated,
including, in those cases where a bank has been appointed to serve
as trustee hereunder, the savings department of its own
commercial bank.
(8) In addition to the foregoing powers, the employer shall also have all
of the powers, rights and privileges conferred upon trustees by the
Pennsylvania Fiduciaries Investment Act, or as the same may be
subsequently modified or amended, and the power to do all acts,
take all proceedings and execute all rights and privileges, although
not specifically mentioned herein, as the employer may deem
necessary to administer the pension fund.
(9) To maintain and invest the assets of this plan on a collective and
commingled basis with the assets of other pension plans
maintained by the employer, provided that the assets of each
respective plan shall be accounted for and administered separately.
(10) To invest the assets of the pension fund in any collective
commingled trust fund maintained by a bank or trust company,
including any bank or trust company which may act as a trustee
hereunder. In this connection, the commingling of the assets of this
plan with assets of other eligible, participating plans through such
a medium is hereby specifically authorized. Any assets of the plan
which may be so added to such collective trusts shall be subject to
60.Editor's Note: See 20 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 47-139 SHALER CODE § 47-139
1:176
all of the provisions of the applicable declaration of trust, as
amended from time to time, which declaration, if required by its
terms or by applicable law, is hereby adopted as part of the plan,
to the extent of the participation in such collective or commingled
trust fund by the plan.
(11) To make any payment or distribution required or advisable to carry
out the provisions of the plan, provided that if a trustee is
appointed by the employer, such trustee shall make such
distribution only at the direction of the employer.
(12) To compromise, contest, arbitrate, enforce or abandon claims and
demands with respect to the plan.
(13) To retain any funds or property subject to any dispute without
liability for the payment of interest thereon, and to decline to make
payment or delivery thereof until final adjudication is made by a
court of competent jurisdiction.
(14) To pay, and to deduct from and charge against the pension fund,
any taxes which may be imposed thereon, whether with respect to
the income, property or transfer thereof, or upon or with respect to
the interest of any person therein which the fund is required to pay;
to contest, in its discretion, the validity or amount of any tax,
assessment, claim or demand which may be levied or made against
or in respect of the pension fund, the income, property or transfer
thereof, or in any matter or thing connected therewith.
(15) To appoint any persons or firms (including, but not limited to,
accountants, investment advisors, counsel, actuaries, physicians,
appraisers, consultants, professional plan administrators and other
specialists), or otherwise act to secure specialized advice or
assistance as it deems necessary or desirable in connection with
the management of the fund; to the extent not prohibited by
applicable law, the employer shall be entitled to rely conclusively
upon and shall be fully protected in any action or omission taken by
it in good faith reliance upon the advice or opinion of such persons
or firms, provided such persons or firms were prudently chosen by
the employer, taking into account the interests of the participants
and beneficiaries and with due regard to the ability of the persons
or firms to perform their assigned functions.
(16) To retain the services of one or more persons or firms for the
management of (including the power to acquire and dispose of) all
or any part of the fund assets, provided that each of such persons
or firms is registered as an investment advisor under the
Investment Advisors Act of 1940, is a bank (as defined in that act),
or is an insurance company qualified to manage, acquire or dispose
of pension trust assets under the laws of more than one state; in
such event, the employer shall follow the directions of such
investment manager or managers with respect to the acquisition
§ 47-139 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-139
1:177
§ 47-140. Amendment and termination.
and disposition of fund assets, but shall not be liable for the acts
or omissions of such investment manager or managers, nor shall it
be under any obligation to review or otherwise manage any fund
assets which are subject to the management of such investment
manager or managers. If the employer appoints a trustee, the
trustee shall not be permitted to retain such an investment
manager except with the express written consent of the employer.
C. Common investments. The employer shall not be required to make
separate investments for individual participants or to maintain separate
investments for each participant's account, but may invest
contributions and any profits or gains therefrom in common
investments.
D. Compensation and expenses of appointed trustee. If a trustee is
appointed, the trustee shall be entitled to such reasonable
compensation as shall from time to time be agreed upon by the
employer and the trustee, unless such compensation is prohibited by
law. Such compensation, and all expenses reasonably incurred by the
trustee in carrying out its functions, shall constitute a charge upon the
employer or the pension fund, which may be executed at any time after
30 days' written notice to the employer. The employer shall be under no
obligation to pay such costs and expenses, and in the event of its failure
to do so, the trustee shall be entitled to pay the same or to be
reimbursed for the payment thereof from the pension fund.
E. Periodic accounting. If a trustee is appointed, the pension fund shall be
evaluated annually or at more frequent intervals by the trustee and a
written accounting rendered as of each fiscal year end of the fund and
as of the effective date of any removal or resignation of the trustee, and
such additional dates as requested by the employer, showing the
condition of the fund and all receipts, disbursements and other
transactions effected by the trustee during the period covered by the
accounting, based on fair market values prevailing as of such date.
F. Value of the pension fund. All determinations as to the value of the
assets of the pension fund, and as to the amount of the liabilities
thereof, shall be made by the employer or its appointed trustee, whose
decisions shall be final and conclusive and binding on all parties hereto,
the participants and beneficiaries and their estates. In making any such
determination, the employer or trustee shall be entitled to seek and rely
upon the opinion of or any information furnished by brokers, appraisers
and other experts and shall also be entitled to rely upon reports as to
sales and quotations, both on security exchanges and otherwise as
contained in newspapers and in financial publications.
A. Amendment of the plan. The employer may amend this plan at any time
or from time to time by an instrument in writing executed in the name
of the employer under its Municipal Seal by officers duly authorized to
§ 47-139 SHALER CODE § 47-140
1:178
execute such instrument and delivered to the Board; provided,
however:
(1) That no amendment shall deprive any participant or any
beneficiary of a deceased participant of any of the benefits to which
each is entitled under this plan with respect to contributions
previously made;
(2) That no amendment shall provide for the use of funds or assets held
under this plan other than for the benefit of employees, and no
funds contributed to this plan or assets of this plan shall, except as
provided in Subsection E, ever revert to or be used or enjoyed by
the employer; and
(3) That no amendment to the plan which provides for a benefit
modification shall be made unless the cost estimate described in
§ 47-141C has been prepared and presented to the Board in
accordance with the Act.
B. Termination of the plan. The employer shall have the power to
terminate this plan in its entirety at any time by an instrument in
writing executed in the name of the employer.
C. Automatic termination of contributions. Subject to the provisions of the
Act governing financially distressed municipalities, the liability of the
employer to make contributions to the pension fund shall automatically
terminate upon liquidation or dissolution of the employer, upon its
adjudication as a bankrupt or upon the making of a general assignment
for the benefit of its creditors.
D. Distribution upon termination.
(1) In the event of the termination of the plan, all amounts of vested
benefits accrued by the affected participants as of the date of such
termination, to the extent funded on such date, shall be
nonforfeitable hereunder. In the event of termination of the plan,
the employer shall direct either:
(a) That the plan administrator continue to hold the vested
accrued benefits of participants in the pension fund in
accordance with the provisions of the plan (other than those
provisions related to forfeitures), without regard to such
termination, until all funds have been distributed in
accordance with the provisions; or
(b) That the plan administrator immediately distribute to each
participant an amount equal to the vested accrued benefit to
the date.
(2) If there are insufficient assets in the pension fund to provide for all
vested accrued benefits as of the date of plan termination, priority
shall first be given to the distribution of any amounts attributable to
§ 47-140 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-140
1:179
§ 47-141. Funding standard requirements.
mandatory or voluntary employee contributions before assets are
applied to the distribution of any vested benefits attributable to
other sources hereunder.
(3) All other assets attributable to the terminated plan shall be
distributed and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of
applicable law and the terms of any instrument adopted by the
employer which effects such termination.
E. Residual assets. If all liabilities to vested participants and any others
entitled to receive a benefit under the terms of the plan have been
satisfied and there remain any residual assets in the pension fund, such
residual assets remaining shall be returned to the employer insofar as
such return does not contravene any provision of law, and any
remaining balance, in excess of employer contributions, shall be
returned to the commonwealth.
F. Exclusive benefit rule. In the event of the discontinuance and
termination of the plan as provided herein, the employer shall dispose
of the pension fund in accordance with the terms of the plan and
applicable law; at no time prior to the satisfaction of all liabilities under
the plan shall any part of the corpus or income of the pension fund,
after deducting any administrative or other expenses properly
chargeable to the pension fund, be used for or diverted to purposes
other than for the exclusive benefit of the participants in the plan, their
beneficiaries or their estates.
A. Actuarial valuations.
(1) The plan's actuary shall perform an actuarial valuation at least
biennially unless the employer is applying or has applied for
supplemental state assistance pursuant to Section 603 of the Act61,
whereupon actuarial valuation reports shall be made annually.
(2) Such biennial actuarial valuation report shall be made as of the
beginning of each plan year occurring in an odd-numbered
calendar year, beginning with the year 1985.
(3) Such actuarial valuation shall be prepared and certified by an
approved actuary, as such term is defined in the Act.
(4) The expenses attributable to the preparation of any actuarial
valuation report or investigation required by the Act or any other
expense which is permissible under the terms of the Act and which
are directly associated with administering the plan shall be an
allowable administrative expense payable from the assets of the
pension fund. Such allowable expenses shall include but not be
limited to the following:
61.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 895.603.
§ 47-140 SHALER CODE § 47-141
1:180
§ 47-142. Miscellaneous provisions.
(a) Investment costs associated with obtaining authorized
investments and investment management fees;
(b) Accounting expenses;
(c) Premiums for insurance coverage on fund assets;
(d) Reasonable and necessary counsel fees incurred for advice or
to defend the fund; and
(e) Legitimate travel and education expenses for plan officials;
provided, however, that the municipal officials of the employer,
in their fiduciary role, shall monitor the services provided to
the plan to ensure that the expenses are necessary, reasonable
and benefit the plan; and further provided that the plan
administrator shall document all such expenses item by item
and, where necessary, hour by hour.
B. Duties of chief administrative officer.
(1) Such actuarial reports shall be prepared and filed under the
supervision of the chief administrative officer.
(2) The chief administrative officer of the plan shall determine the
financial requirements of the plan on the basis of the most recent
actuarial report and shall determine the minimum municipal
obligation of the employer with respect to funding the plan for any
given plan year. The chief administrative officer shall submit the
financial requirements of the plan and the minimum municipal
obligation of the employer to the Board annually and shall certify
the accuracy of such calculations and their conformance with the
Act.
C. Benefit plan modifications. Prior to the adoption of any benefit plan
modification by the employer, the chief administrative officer of the plan
shall provide to the Board a cost estimate of the proposed benefit plan
modification. Such estimate shall be prepared by an approved actuary,
which estimate shall disclose to the Board the impact of the proposed
benefit plan modification on the future financial requirements of the
plan and the future minimum municipal obligation of the employer with
respect to the plan.
A. Employment rights. No employee of the employer, nor any other person,
shall have any rights whatsoever against the employer or the plan
administrator as a result of this plan except those expressly granted
hereunder. Participation in this plan shall not give any right to any
employee to be retained in the employ of the employer, nor shall it
interfere with the right of the employer to discharge any employee and
to deal with such employee without regard to the effect such treatment
might have upon participation in this plan.
§ 47-141 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-142
1:181
B. Meaning of certain words. For purposes of this plan, the masculine
gender shall include the feminine gender and the singular shall include
the plural, and vice versa, in all cases wherever the person or context
shall plainly so require. Headings of articles and sections are inserted
only for convenience of reference and are not to be considered in the
construction of the plan.
C. Information to be furnished by the employer. The employer shall furnish
to the plan administrator (and, where applicable, the trustee)
information in the employer's possession as the plan administrator and
the trustee shall require from time to time to perform their duties under
the plan.
D. Severability of provisions. Should any provisions of this plan be held
illegal or invalid for any reason, said illegality or invalidity shall not
affect the remaining parts of this plan, and the plan shall be construed
and enforced as if said illegal and invalid provisions had never been
inserted herein.
E. Incapacity of participant. If any participant shall be physically or
mentally incapable of receiving or acknowledging receipt of any
payment of pension benefits hereunder, the plan administrator, upon
the receipt of satisfactory evidence that such participant is so
incapacitated and that another person or institution is maintaining the
participant and that no guardian or committee has been appointed for
the participant, may provide for such payment of pension benefits
hereunder to such person or institution so maintaining the participant,
and any such payments so made shall be deemed for every purpose to
have been made to such participant.
F. Pension fund for sole benefit of participants. The income and principal
of the pension fund are for the sole use and benefit of the participants
covered hereunder, and to the extent permitted by law shall be free,
clear and discharged from and are not to be in any way liable for debts,
contracts or agreements now contracted or which may hereafter be
contracted and from all claims and liabilities now or hereafter incurred
by any participant or beneficiary.
G. Benefits for a deceased participant. If any benefit shall be payable
under the plan to or on behalf of a participant who has died, if the plan
provides that the payment of such benefits shall be made to the
participant's estate, and if no administration of such participant's estate
is pending in the court of proper jurisdiction, then the plan
administrator, at its sole option, may pay such benefits to the surviving
spouse of such deceased participant or, if there is no surviving spouse,
to such participant's then living issue, per stirpes; provided, however,
that nothing contained herein shall prevent the plan administrator from
insisting upon the commencement of estate administration proceedings
and the delivery of any such benefits to a duly appointed executor or
administrator.
§ 47-142 SHALER CODE § 47-142
1:182
§ 47-143. Compliance with PPA and HEART Act. [Added 12-13-2011
by Ord. No. 1902]
The following provisions are added to the plan. Any prior provisions that are
inconsistent with the provisions in this section are hereby superseded.
H. Assets of the fund. Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to give
any participant or beneficiary any interest in any specific property of
the pension fund or any right except to receive such distributions as are
expressly provided for under the plan.
I. Personal liability. Subject to the provisions of the Act and unless
otherwise specifically required by other applicable laws, no past,
present or future officer or agent of the employer or plan administrator
shall be personally liable to any participant, beneficiary or other person
under any provision of the plan.
J. Construction of document. This plan may be executed and/or
conformed in any number of counterparts, each of which shall be
deemed an original and shall be construed and enforced according to
the laws of the commonwealth, excepting such commonwealth's choice
of law rules.
A. The purpose of this section is to comply with the Pension Protection Act
of 2006 (PPA)62 and the Heroes Earnings Assistance Relief Tax Act
(HEART Act).63 Notwithstanding anything in this plan to the contrary,
this plan shall be interpreted so as to comply with the applicable
required provisions of the PPA and the HEART Act.
B. For the purposes of Code Section 415(b)(1)(A), effective as of January 1,
2008, the "applicable mortality table" and "applicable interest rate" are
found in Rev. Rul. 2007-67. The "applicable mortality table" in Rev. Rul.
2001-62 was effective from December 31, 2002 through December 31,
2007.
C. Section 415(c) compensation. For the purposes of this section,
"compensation" includes only those items specified in Treas. Reg.
§ 1.415(c)-2(b)(1) or (2) and excludes all items listed in Treas. Reg.
§ 1.415(c)-2(c), the terms of which are specifically incorporated herein
by reference. Effective as of January 1, 2009, to the extent required by
the Heroes Earnings Assistance Relief Tax Act of 2008 (HEART Act),
differential wage payments shall be included in compensation.
D. Effective as of January 1, 2007, an "eligible rollover distribution" shall
include any eligible rollover distribution (including distributions
containing after-tax contributions) that is transferred in a direct
trustee-to-trustee transfer to a Section 403(b) annuity contract or a
qualified trust under Code Section 401(a) that agrees to separately
62.Editor's Note: See 29 U.S.C. § 1001 et seq.
63.Editor's Note: See 26 U.S.C. § 1 et seq.
§ 47-142 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-143
1:183
account for amounts so transferred, including separately accounting for
the portion of such distribution which is includible in gross income and
the portion of such distribution which is not so includible.
E. Effective as of January 1, 2008, a Roth IRA is an eligible retirement
plan.
F. Nonspousal rollover. Effective January 1, 2007, if a beneficiary who is
not a surviving spouse is entitled to receive what would otherwise be an
eligible rollover distribution, the beneficiary may, in accordance with
Code Section 402(c)(11), make a trustee-to-trustee transfer of that
amount to an IRA or individual retirement annuity (other than an
endowment contract), provided that:
(1) The transfer is made not later than the end of the fourth year after
the year of the participant's death; and
(2) The account or annuity to which the amount is transferred is
treated as an inherited IRA or individual retirement annuity in
accordance with Code Section 408(d)(3)(C).
G. HEART Act. Effective for participant deaths occurring while performing
qualified military service [as defined in Code Section 414(u)] on or after
January 1, 2007, the plan will provide retirement benefits and service
credit to the extent required by the HEART Act.
§ 47-143 SHALER CODE § 47-143
1:184
Chapter 51
RULES OF ORDER
§ 51-1. Applicability.
The following rules of order and procedure shall govern the deliberations
and meetings of the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Shaler and
of the committees thereof.
§ 51-2. Organizational meetings. [Amended 5-14-1996 by Ord. No.
1739]
§ 51-3. Regular meetings. [Amended 1-27-1998 by Ord. No. 1754;
9-14-2004 by Ord. No. 1827]
Regular meetings of the Board of Commissioners shall be held on the
second Tuesday of each month at 7:00 p.m., prevailing time, in the Township
building. If said second Tuesday is a legal holiday, the meeting shall be held
on the first day following at the same time and place. Said meeting may,
from time to time, be advanced to the first Tuesday or postponed to the
third Tuesday by the President upon five days' written notice delivered to
the home of each Commissioner.
§ 51-4. Special meetings.
A. The Township Commissioners shall organize on the first Monday of
January of each even-numbered year. If the first Monday is a legal
holiday, the meeting shall be held the first day following. They shall
assemble for such purpose at their place of meeting at 7:30 p.m.
B. The Board shall organize by the election of one of its number as
President and one as a Vice President, who, as long as they continue to
be Commissioners, shall hold office until their successors are elected
and qualified. The President or, in his absence, the Vice President shall
preside at all meetings of the Board and shall perform such other duties
as are specified in this chapter or which may be prescribed by
ordinance.
A. Special meetings of the Board of Commissioners may be called at any
time by the President or by any three Commissioners.
(1) At such time, it shall be the duty of the Secretary to call a special
meeting of the Board of Commissioners, to be held in the Township
building, at such time as the Secretary may fix but not less than one
day nor more than three days after the Secretary's receipt of the
request. If the Secretary shall neglect or refuse to issue such call,
the person or persons making the request may do so.
(2) Written notice of all such special meetings, stating the purpose
thereof and the person or persons calling such special meeting,
§ 47-143 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 51-4
1:185
§ 51-5. Quorum.
A majority of the Commissioners in office shall constitute a quorum at all
regular, special and organizational meetings of the Board of Commissioners.
The Commissioners present at a duly organized meeting can continue to
do business until adjournment, notwithstanding the withdrawal of enough
Commissioners to leave less than a quorum.
§ 51-6. Adjournment.
The Board of Commissioners may, by a majority vote of the Commissioners
present at any meeting, adjourn said meeting from time to time to a specific
date and hour.
§ 51-7. Conduct of meetings; order of business.
shall be given to each Commissioner by the person or persons
issuing the call as promptly as possible by delivery of such written
notice to the home of each Commissioner.
(3) Special meetings may be held without such call and written notice
if all Commissioners are present at such special meeting or if all
Commissioners consent to such special meeting in a writing
containing the purpose of such special meeting filed with the
Secretary prior to such special meeting.
B. At all special meetings of the Board of Commissioners, the only
business that may be considered is that stated in the written notice
thereof or in the consent in writing.
A. Organizational meetings of the Board of Commissioners shall be
conducted with the Secretary presiding as Acting Chairman and the
Assistant Secretary as Acting Secretary until such time as the President
and Secretary are elected. The following items of business shall be
taken up in the following order:
(1) Oath of office of newly elected members.
(2) Call to order.
(3) Roll call and announcement of presence of quorum.
(4) Election of President.
(5) Election of Vice President.
(6) Election of Secretary, Manager and Earned Income Tax Collector.
(7) Election of Solicitor.
(8) Election of Township Civil Engineer.
(9) Appointment of Assistant Secretary.
§ 51-4 SHALER CODE § 51-7
1:186
§ 51-8. Presiding officer; duties.
(10) Appointment of Water Engineer.
(11) Selection of official depository.
(12) Selection of official newspaper.
(13) Appointment of standing committees.
(14) Appointments to fill vacancies in various special committees and
commissions of the Township.
B. Regular meetings.
(1) Regular meetings of the Board of Commissioners shall be
conducted in the following order:
(a) Call to order by the President or, in his absence, by the Vice
President.
(b) Roll call of members and announcement of presence of
quorum.
(c) Approval or correction of minutes of previous regular or
special meetings.
(d) Opening of bids.
(e) Petitions and complaints.
(f) Reports of special committees.
(g) Unfinished business.
(h) New business.
(i) Receipts.
(j) Authorizations.
(k) Ordinances.
(l) Resolutions.
(m) Reports of standing committees.
(n) Miscellaneous.
(o) Adjournment.
(2) The foregoing order may be varied from time to time by the
President or, in his absence, the Vice President. [Added
1-13-1976 by Ord. No. 1375]
§ 51-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 51-8
1:187
§ 51-9. Ordinance adoption procedure. [Amended 5-14-1996 by Ord.
No. 1739]
In addition to the provisions of 53 P.S. § 56502, all ordinances shall be
introduced and passed in accordance with the following procedures:
A. The President or, in his absence, the Vice President shall call all
meetings of the Board of Commissioners to order at the stated hour and
preside thereover. He shall preserve order and decorum, decide all
questions of order and precedence of motions and conduct the
meetings in accordance with Robert's Rules of Order Revised, unless
otherwise provided by statute or by these rules. Any Commissioner may
appeal a ruling by the presiding officer immediately after such ruling is
made; this appeal is not subject to debate and may be sustained by a
majority of the Commissioners present.
B. The presiding officer may speak upon any question without vacating the
chair.
C. The presiding officer shall be entitled to vote in all cases where his vote
would change the result. Any Commissioner, including the presiding
officer, upon request, shall be entitled to have a roll-call vote on any
matter to be voted on by the Board of Commissioners. In the absence of
such request, all votes shall be by voice or by roll call as directed by the
presiding officer. [Amended 5-14-1996 by Ord. No. 1739]
A. Regular procedure.
(1) Each ordinance shall be approved as to form by or drafted by the
Solicitor and shall be in writing.
(2) At the time of its introduction at a meeting of the Board of
Commissioners, a brief description of the ordinance and the
reasons for its introduction shall be given the Board.
(3) The proposed ordinance shall thereupon automatically be tabled,
and the Secretary shall assign to it a temporary number, without
the necessity of a tabling motion, until presented for consideration
and passage at the next regular meeting.
(4) As soon as possible after such introduction, but not later than three
days prior to said next regular meeting, each Commissioner shall
be given a copy of such proposed ordinance; and, additionally,
copies shall be kept on file in the Secretary's office for examination
by the public.
(5) At said next regular meeting, any Commissioner may move the
adoption of such proposed ordinance. If such motion for adoption is
seconded by another Commissioner, the presiding officer shall
direct the Secretary to call the roll of the Commissioners and
record their oral vote.
§ 51-8 SHALER CODE § 51-9
1:188
§ 51-10. Committees.
Committees of the Board of Commissioners shall be of three types: standing
committees, special committees and committees of the whole Board.
(6) All ordinances shall be adopted by a majority vote of the
Commissioners present, unless a greater vote is required by law or
other ordinance.
(7) It shall not be necessary to have such proposed ordinance read
prior to its submission to the vote of the Commissioners unless such
reading is requested by one of the Commissioners.
(8) After passage, the ordinance shall be given a permanent number by
the Secretary.
B. Special procedure.
(1) If it is desired to adopt an ordinance at the same meeting at which
it is introduced, the Commissioner introducing the ordinance shall
move its adoption specially, and if such motion receives a second,
said ordinance may be passed by a vote of 2/3 or more of the
Commissioners present.
(2) If said ordinance fails to receive a two-thirds vote, it shall
automatically be tabled, assigned a temporary number and brought
up at the next regular meeting in accordance with the provisions of
Subsection A hereof.
A. Standing committees. [Amended 5-14-1996 by Ord. No. 1739]
(1) The Board of Commissioners shall name such committees as it
deems necessary to carry out the business of the Township.
(2) The following are identified as standing committees:
(a) Public Works.
(b) Public Safety.
(c) Finance.
(d) Water.
(e) Recreation.
(f) Personnel.
(3) The Board of Commissioners shall have the authority to name
additional committees as it deems necessary without amending this
chapter.
B. The Secretary shall cause to be distributed to all Commissioners at
least three days prior to each regular meeting of the Board of
Commissioners minutes of all committee meetings held since the last
§ 51-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 51-10
1:189
§ 51-11. Recommendations to Board of Commissioners.
Any recommendation of a committee requiring action by the Board of
Commissioners shall be submitted to the Board of Commissioners in the
form of a motion made by a Commissioner who is a member of that
committee.
§ 51-12. Deliberations.
The deliberations of the Board of Commissioners shall be conducted in the
following manner:
regular meeting of the Board of Commissioners, minutes of the last
meeting of the Board of Commissioners and a tentative agenda for said
regular meetings.
C. All committee meetings shall be held after notice thereof is filed with
the Secretary, and each meeting shall be open to the public. Any
committee may require a Township officer or employee to attend its
meetings and supply to it information needed in connection with any
matter pending before the committee.
A. Any Commissioner may require the reading in full of any ordinance,
resolution or other matter at any time it is before the Board.
B. No Commissioner shall address the Board until he has been recognized
by the presiding officer. He shall confine his remarks to the question
under discussion and avoid all personalities or offensive remarks.
C. No person other than a Commissioner, the Secretary, the Solicitor or a
person whose business is listed on the agenda for a meeting shall
address the Board except with the consent of the presiding officer.
D. No motion shall be discussed or acted upon unless and until it has been
seconded, unless the rules provide otherwise. No motion shall be
withdrawn or amended without the consent of the Commissioner
making the motion and the Commissioner seconding it.
E. When a question is under discussion, no action shall be in order except
to adjourn, to table, the previous question, to refer to a committee and
to amend. These motions shall have precedence in the order listed.
F. Any Commissioner desirous of terminating the debate may move the
main question, in which event the presiding officer shall announce the
question as "Shall the main question now be put?" If a majority of the
Commissioners present vote in the affirmative, the main question shall
be taken without further debate; the effect of such vote being to end all
debate and bring the Board to an immediate vote, first upon any
pending amendments and then upon the main question.
§ 51-10 SHALER CODE § 51-12
1:190
§ 51-13. Temporary suspension of rules.
These rules may be temporarily suspended in whole or in part by a vote of
2/3 of the Commissioners present at any meeting.
§ 51-14. Discussion of nonagenda items. [Amended 5-14-1996 by
Ord. No. 1739]
The Chair of the Board must refuse to allow an individual to address the
Board at a monthly meeting on a subject not listed in that meeting's agenda
unless that individual has filed a written notice to the Township Manager at
300 Wetzel Road, Glenshaw, Pennsylvania, 15116, at least five days before
the meeting, stating his intention to speak and identifying the subject of his
speech.
§ 51-15. Premeeting question sessions. [Amended 5-14-1996 by
Ord. No. 1739]
The Board will be available 15 minutes prior to each meeting, in the secondfloor
meeting room, to answer any questions by those present on agenda
items.
Chapter 56
SOCIAL SECURITY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Retirement — See Ch. 47.
§ 56-1. Findings.
The extension of the social security system to employees and officers of the
Township of Shaler will be of great benefit, not only to the employees of the
Township by providing that said employees and officers may participate in
the provisions of the Old Age and Survivors Insurance System, but will also
be of great benefit to the Township of Shaler by enabling it to attract and
retain in employment the best of personnel and thus increase the efficiency
of its government.
G. A motion to fix the time at which to adjourn and to adjourn are
privileged motions and always in order. These motions and motions to
lay on the table or the main question are not debatable.
H. It shall be in order for any member voting in the majority on any
particular question, provided that he has not changed his vote after the
result has been announced, to move for a reconsideration of that
question at the meeting at which the vote was taken or at the next
succeeding regular meeting.
§ 51-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 56-2
1:191
§ 56-2. Statutory authorization.
The 1951 Session of the General Assembly of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, in regular session, enacted a statute, known as "Act No.
491,"64 which is the enabling Act provided for in Section 218 of Public
Law 734, 81st Congress, which designated the Secretary of Labor and
Industry of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to act as the state agency to
implement the coverage of employees and officers under said Old Age and
Survivors Insurance System. The Township of Shaler hereby is authorized
to execute and deliver to the state agency a plan or plans and an agreement,
required under Section 6 of said enabling Act and the Social Security Act,65
to extend coverage to employees and officers of the Township of Shaler
and do all other necessary things to effectuate coverage of employees and
officers under the Old Age and Survivors Insurance System.
§ 56-3. Payroll deduction system. [Amended 5-14-1996 by Ord. No.
1739]
The Township Secretary is hereby authorized to establish a system of
payroll deduction to be matched by payments by the Township of Shaler
to be made into the contribution fund of the Social Security Act through
the office of the state agency and to make charges of this tax to the fund
or funds from which wage or salary payments are issued to employees of
the Township of Shaler. Such payments are to be made in accordance with
the provisions of the law and regulations promulgated by the state agency
and the Federal Social Security Administrator. Such payments which are
delinquent shall bear interest at the rate of 1/2 of 1% per month until such
time as payments are made.
§ 56-4. Appropriations; plan and agreement.
Appropriation is hereby made from the proper fund or funds of the
Township of Shaler in the necessary amounts to pay into the contribution
fund, as provided in Section 4 of the enabling Act and in accordance with
the plan or plans and agreement. Authority is given to the President and
Secretary of the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Shaler to
enter into an agreement with the state agency, which agreement shall be in
accordance with Act No. 491 and with Paragraph 218 of the Social Security
Act. Such plan and agreement shall provide that the participation of the
Township of Shaler shall commence as of January 1, 1951.
64.Editor's Note: See 65 P.S. § 201 et seq.
65.Editor's Note: See 65 P.S. § 206 and 42 U.S.C. § 301 et seq., respectively.
§ 56-2 SHALER CODE § 56-4
1:192
Chapter 59
TAX COLLECTOR
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 115. Taxation — See Ch. 201.
§ 59-1. Compensation.
§ 59-2. Oath of office and surety bond required.
A. Collection of current property taxes. The elected Township Tax
Collector shall receive for his duties as Tax Collector of the Township of
Shaler the sum of $10,000 from the Township and such other
compensation as fixed by the Local Tax Collection Law. The Township
Tax Collector shall be allowed such actual printing and postage
expenses as shall be incurred in performing the duties prescribed by
law.
B. Collection of delinquent property taxes.
(1) On or before June 30 of each subsequent tax year, the elected Tax
Collector shall turn over to the Delinquent Tax Collector the
Delinquent Property Tax List.
(2) The elected Tax Collector may collect delinquent property taxes at
any time throughout the year and charge the appropriate penalties
as set forth in Chapter 115 of the Township's Code.
(3) Upon collection by the Tax Collector of the face amount of these
delinquent property taxes plus the appropriate penalties, the
Township shall compensate annually the elected Tax Collector at a
rate of 5% of total penalties collected by the elected Tax Collector,
based upon a report to be submitted annually by the elected Tax
Collector.
C. No compensation from taxes. The elected Tax Collector is prohibited
from deducting any compensation from the taxes collected.
D. This section shall take effect on January 6, 2014.
A. Requirement of oath of office and surety bond. The elected Tax
Collector shall, before he enters upon the duties of his office, take and
subscribe an oath of office and file the same in the Office of the Clerk of
the Court of Common Pleas of the County. He shall enter into one surety
bond to the commonwealth for all taxes to be collected by him, in an
amount to be fixed by the Court of Common Pleas of the County, which
amount shall never exceed the estimated amount of taxes charged in
the duplicates to be delivered to him in one year. Such bond may, at the
§ 56-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 59-2
1:193
Chapter 60
TREASURER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Payment of bills — See Ch. 8. Manager — See Ch. 32.
§ 60-1. Bond. [Amended 5-14-1996 by Ord. No. 1739]
The amount of the bond of the Township Treasurer of the Township of
Shaler for the fiscal year beginning the first Monday of January of 1938
and every year thereafter shall be and the same is hereby fixed at a sum at
least equal to 50% of the probable amount of the Township tax, said bond
amount to be established in accordance with the provisions of the First
Class Township Code.66
Chapter 63
WORKERS' COMPENSATION
§ 63-1. Authorization.
The proper municipal officers are hereby authorized to execute and deliver
the following documents:
option of the Tax Collector, be an annual bond or may cover the full
term of office for which the Tax Collector shall have been elected.
Such bond shall have thereon at least one bonding company, and the
sufficiency of the sureties on the bond shall be approved by the Court
of Common Pleas at any time prior to the delivery of a tax duplicate to
the Tax Collector. The bond shall be filed in the office of the Clerk of the
Court of Common Pleas on or before the 15th day of March of the year
in which the Tax Collector qualifies for office and annually thereafter,
except where the first bond given by the Tax Collector covers the full
term of office for which he was elected.
B. Condition of bond. The condition of the bond shall be that the Collector
as Tax Collector for the Township shall account for and pay over all
taxes, penalties and interest received and collected by him to the taxing
district entitled thereto.
C. Use of Township. The bond given by the Township Tax Collector shall be
for the use of Shaler Township.
A. The Municipal Risk Management Workers' Compensation Pooled Trust
Agreement (hereafter the "Agreement").
66.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 55802-A.
§ 59-2 SHALER CODE § 63-1
1:194
§ 63-2. Term.
The duration of the term of the Agreement is four years from the date of
admission to the Trust as a participant.
§ 63-3. Purpose and objectives.
The purpose and objectives of the Agreement are set forth in Article V of
the Agreement.
§ 63-4. Powers and scope.
The powers and scope of authority delegated are set forth in Article II,
Article V, Article VI, Article VII and Article IX of the Agreement.
§ 63-5. Funds.
The funds for meeting the obligations of the political subdivision under the
Agreement shall be appropriated from the general funds of the political
subdivision.
§ 63-6. Organizational structure.
The organizational structure necessary to implement the Agreement
consists of the Trust, trustees, service agents and fiscal agents created by
the Agreement.
§ 63-7. Acquired property.
Property acquired for purposes of the Trust shall be acquired, managed and
disposed of under the terms of the attached Trust Agreement.68
§ 63-8. Benefits.
The Trust shall be empowered to enter into contracts for policies of group
insurance and employee benefits, including social security for its
employees.
B. The participant application, which documents are attached hereto and
made a part hereof67 and which may be inspected by any interested
citizen at the office of the municipal secretary.
67.Editor's Note: The participant application is on file in the Township offices.
68.Editor's Note: The Trust Agreement is on file in the Township offices.
§ 63-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 63-8
1:195
Part II, General Legislation
Chapter 70
ADVERTISING MATERIALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Littering — See Ch. 149.
Signs — See Ch. 183.
Sign regulations — See Ch. 225, Zoning, Art.
VIII.
§ 63-8 SHALER CODE § 63-8
1:196
ARTICLE I
Posting on Township Property
[Adopted 10-2-1910 by Ord. No. 46]
§ 70-1. Prohibited acts.
On and after the passage of this article, it shall be unlawful for any person
or persons to paste, paint or tack any sign or other advertising matter on or
upon any fence, bridge or other structure within the Township limits built
or maintained by the Township of Shaler.
§ 70-2. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-14-1996 by Ord. No.
1739]
Any person, firm, corporation or group of individuals found in violation
of this article shall, upon conviction thereof before any issuing authority,
be subject to a fine of up to $600 and may be sentenced to a period of
incarceration not exceeding 90 days in the Allegheny County Jail. Each
incident in violation of this article shall be considered a separate offense
and may be punishable as such.
§ 70-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-2
1:197

ARTICLE II
Posting Within Right-of-Way
[Adopted 9-8-1970 by Ord. No. 1243]
§ 70-3. Prohibited acts; exception.
From and after the enactment of this article, it shall be unlawful for any
person or persons, association, partnership or corporation to place or attach
or cause to be placed or attached any posters, signs, cards or advertising
matter whatsoever upon poles or elsewhere within the rights-of-way of
the streets, roads and public ways of the Township of Shaler; provided,
however, that such prohibition shall not apply to any posters or signs placed
which are erected by or required to be erected by any governmental body.
§ 70-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-15-1988 by Ord. No.
1631]
Any person, firm, corporation or group of individuals found in violation
of this article shall, upon conviction thereof before any issuing authority,
be subject to a fine of up to $600 and may be sentenced to a period of
incarceration not exceeding 90 days in the Allegheny County Jail. Each
incident in violation of this article shall be considered a separate offense
and may be punishable as such.
§ 70-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-4
1:199

ARTICLE III
Distribution to Residences
[Adopted 4-8-1975 by Ord. No. 1355]
§ 70-5. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meaning indicated:
COMMERCIAL ADVERTISING MATERIAL — Advertisements for goods or
services unaccompanied by editorial matter.
§ 70-6. Restrictions on use of mailboxes; exception.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to distribute
commercial advertising material at a residence within the Township of
Shaler by placing such material at or on the residence or on the residential
mailbox of the person owning or occupying the residence, unless the
person, firm or corporation distributing such commercial advertising
material does so with the affirmative request or consent of the person
occupying the residence. The foregoing provision shall not apply to the
distribution of commercial advertising material through the United States
Mail service.
§ 70-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-15-1988 by Ord. No.
1631]
Any person, firm, corporation or group of individuals found in violation
of the article shall, upon conviction thereof before any issuing authority,
be subject to a fine of up to $600 and may be sentenced to a period of
incarceration not exceeding 90 days in the Allegheny County Jail. Each
incident in violation of this article shall be considered a separate offense
and may be punishable as such.
§ 70-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-7
1:201
Chapter 74
AIRCRAFT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 225.
§ 74-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AIRCRAFT — Includes airplanes, helicopters, gliders, ultralight aircraft and
all heavier-than-air aircraft as well as all lighter-than-air aircraft.
FOR EDUCATIONAL AND PUBLIC PURPOSES — An undertaking for the
intellectual improvement and cultivation of the mind for which the
community at large has some interest.
§ 74-2. Altitude restriction.
No person shall pilot any aircraft at an altitude of less than 1,000 feet over
the Township of Shaler, or any part thereof, except in an emergency or
for taking off or landing at a landing facility which has been licensed and
approved by the proper authorities of the United States government and/or
the government of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and/or the Township
of Shaler.
§ 74-3. Restrictions on landing certain aircraft.
A. Helicopters and ultralight aircraft shall be permitted to make landings
other than at landing facilities referred to in § 74-2 of this chapter and
emergency landings only in areas within an Industrial District as
defined in the Township of Shaler Zoning Ordinance and as designated
on the Zoning Map of the Township69 when permission of the property
owner is granted, written permission of the Township Manager has
been obtained and such landings are made with proper regard to safe
practices.
B. Helicopters and ultralight aircraft may procure special permission to
make landings other than at facilities referred to in § 74-2 and
Subsection A of this section for educational and public purposes when
adequate safety precautions have been made in advance, which shall be
specifically approved in writing by the Township Manager or the Chief
of Police, the landing is made under strict police supervision and
written permission of the property owner is granted.
69.Editor's Note: See Ch. 225, Zoning. The Zoning Map is on file in the Township offices.
§ 70-7 SHALER CODE § 74-4
1:202
§ 74-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-15-1988 by Ord. No.
1631]
Any person, firm, corporation or group of individuals found in violation of
this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof before any issuing authority,
be subject to a fine of up to $1,000 and may be sentenced to a period
of incarceration not exceeding 90 days in the Allegheny County Jail. Each
incident in violation of this chapter shall be considered a separate offense
and may be punishable as such.
Chapter 78
AMUSEMENTS AND AMUSEMENT DEVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Circuses and carnivals — See Ch. 100.
Dances and dance halls — See Ch. 106.
Racing and endurance feats — See Ch. 174.
Zoning — See Ch. 225.
§ 78-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish the regulation and operation
of amusements and amusement devices in or on any premises or location
within the Township.
§ 78-2. License required.
A. No person shall conduct a place or possess a device of amusement or be
a producer of amusements without obtaining a license from the
Township. Applications for licenses shall be made upon forms to be
supplied by the Township for the purpose of amusement and
amusement devices.
B. No person or entity shall conduct a public exhibition, including a circus,
fair, carnival, rodeo, feat of horsemanship, menagerie, caravan of
animals, animal show, exhibition of any natural or artificial curiosity or
performance or exhibition of such nature within Shaler Township
without first obtaining a license for such performance or exhibition
from the Township.
C. No proprietor shall set up, allow to be set up, establish or cause to be
set up or established, exhibit, display or maintain on the premises of a
business establishment within the Township, for the purpose of gaining
advantage or profit, any mechanical or electronic device, machine or
apparatus of any kind for the playing of games or otherwise used for the
purpose of amusement or entertainment by the insertion therein of any
currency or a coin or any other metal disc, slug or token, without first
obtaining a license from the Township. A license fee shall be paid for
each machine. This provision shall be applicable to proprietors who
§ 74-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 78-2
1:203
§ 78-3. Application for license.
Any person or persons, firm, corporation or other entity desiring to procure
a license as required by this chapter shall apply therefor in writing to the
Township. Said application shall set forth the following:
charge fees for the use of pool tables on their premises although such
pool tables do not operate through the insertion of currency, coin, metal
disc, slug or token. This chapter is not applicable to devices, machines
or apparatus where the cost, price or consideration for playing one
game is less than $0.01. Upon the payment of the license fee provided
by this chapter, and if the application fully complies with this chapter,
the Township shall issue a placard setting forth the number of
machines/devices licensed by the Township. Said placard shall be
displayed in a clearly observable and readable location at the place
where the machines/devices are installed and used. All placards issued
by the Township for video and mechanical amusement devices shall
clearly state that the video or mechanical devices are for amusement
purposes only, that they are not gambling devices, and that only games
and not money may be won on the machines/devices.
D. No person or persons, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity
shall at any time have in his, its or their possession within the Township
of Shaler any amusement device without first having procured a license
therefor as hereinafter provided in this chapter. Said amusement
devices include, by way of illustration and not limitation, such devices
as arcade games, pinball machines, claw machines, jukeboxes, video
games and brain teasers.
E. Applications shall be filed at least three weeks before the effective date
of the license.
A. The name, address and telephone number of the vendor of each
amusement device/amusement to be licensed.
B. The name, address and telephone number of all proprietors of the
business establishment in which each amusement device/amusement is
to be located, used or installed.
C. The name of the owner of the premises upon which the machines are to
be used and installed.
D. If the owner of the premises is not the applicant, the length of the time
for which the premises has been leased.
E. Citizenship status of the applicant.
F. Present and previous occupations of the applicant or applicants.
G. Length of residence at the present address and each previous place of
residence for the past 10 years.
§ 78-2 SHALER CODE § 78-3
1:204
§ 78-4. Affirmation.
The information required in 78-3 hereof shall be furnished over the
signature of the applicant or applicants and shall be made under oath or
affirmation.
§ 78-5. Conditions for issuance.
No license shall be granted until a period of 10 days shall have elapsed
from the date of application, during which time the Township may, at its
discretion, investigate the facts set forth in the application, and no license
shall be granted to any person not a citizen of the United States.
§ 78-6. Construction of provisions.
Nothing in this chapter shall in any way be construed to authorize, license
or permit any gambling devices whatsoever or any mechanism that has
been judicially determined to be a gambling device or in any way contrary
to law or that may be contrary to any future laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or the United States of America.
H. The location and description of each amusement device to be displayed
or operated on the premises.
I. The manufacturer, serial number and nature of the machines to be
installed and used.
J. The name and address of the owner of the machines to be installed.
K. A verification by the vendor and proprietor that the facts set forth in the
application are true and correct to the vendor's and proprietor's
personal knowledge, information or belief, and that any false
statements therein are made subject to the penalties of the Crimes
Code, 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 4904, relating to unsworn falsification to
authorities.
L. That the vendor and proprietor have been provided a copy of this
chapter and that he/she/they have read and agree to be bound by all
terms and provisions hereof.
M. That a license does not sanction or condone the use or possession of any
illegal gambling device, whether illegal per se or as modified.
N. That the illegal use or possession of an illegal gambling device, either
per se or as modified, may result in a criminal prosecution by law
enforcement officials.
O. The number of pieces of equipment for music and all loudspeaker
devices and other devices for amplification of sound.
P. State the anticipated hours of operation.
Q. State the number of people expected to attend, where applicable.
§ 78-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 78-7
1:205
§ 78-7. License fees and costs of police details.
§ 78-8. Investigation of applicants; issuance of license.
Upon presentation of an application as provided herein, the Township may
conduct an investigation as to the truth of the statements contained therein
and as to any or all other matters which might tend to aid the Township
in determining whether or not a license should be granted. The Township
A. No license shall be issued until an annual fee therefor shall have been
paid the Township in the sum established by the Township for each and
every device so installed and used under the terms of this chapter in the
Township of Shaler, which amount paid as aforesaid shall be a license
fee until December 31 of each year. However, should any such device be
installed after July 1 of any year and application therefor be made after
said date, then, in such event, the license fee for that particular year
shall be the sum established by the Township for each device to
December 31 and the sum established by the Township for every other
type device regulated hereunder to December 31.
B. Where the Township determines that police officers shall be specially
detailed to any event licensed under this chapter, the owner or operator
of a place of amusement or producer of the event shall pay the
Township for all the police so detailed. The Township shall consider the
following factors to determine the need for specially detailed police:
(1) The estimated number of persons attending an event;
(2) The type of amusement being engaged in;
(3) The traffic situation at the particular place of amusement; and
(4) Past experience in similar types of events.
C. The Township shall collect additional fees after the event licensed has
occurred unless the owner, operator or producer operates on a season
schedule.
D. A producer of a non-season-scheduled event shall be required to deposit
a fee in advance of the scheduled event to cover the estimated cost of
police protection. Where the deposit is more than the cost of specified
police protection, a refund shall be made upon application to the
Township. The Township shall bill the applicable person for any
underpayment for special police protection.
E. For amusements which are licensed by the State Athletic Commission
(boxing, kickboxing and wrestling), the producer is required to have
paramedics and an ambulance specially detailed to the event, and in
such cases, the producer must present sufficient evidence (that the
producer obtained paramedics and an ambulance) before obtaining a
permit. The producer is responsible for the cost of paramedics and an
ambulance covering the event.
§ 78-7 SHALER CODE § 78-8
1:206
may consider among other things the effect of the amusement or exhibition
upon the peace, welfare and good order of the Township when granting a
license; the Township may approve or disapprove each particular exhibition
and may also approve or disapprove any lighting system or device emitting
or amplifying sound used at any exhibition, as well as impose further
conditions, the violation of which shall constitute a violation of this chapter
and shall subject the violator, upon conviction, to the penalties provided for
offenses against this chapter.
§ 78-9. Insurance.
Before any license shall be issued for any exhibition or event hereunder, the
applicant shall be required to secure a public liability insurance policy in
such principal sum as the Township may deem sufficient to protect members
of the public and the Township and naming the Township as an additional
insured. Said policy shall be issued by an insurance company authorized to
do business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 78-10. Rules of conduct.
Licensees shall not permit gambling at any licensed exhibition or event
nor on any licensed premises, except as may be permitted by any local
ordinance which has been or may have been or may hereafter be enacted by
the Township. No licensee shall permit the giving of any performance of a
lewd, suggestive, vulgar or immoral type or the use therein of any indecent
or obscene language or any behavior tending to corrupt the public morals
or incite the public to break any law or ordinance.
§ 78-11. Posting of license; transfer, replacement or change of
licenses and amusement devices.
A. Transfer of licenses:
(1) Licensees shall post their licenses conspicuously at the location of
the licensed exhibition or on the premises licensed.
(2) Licensees desiring to transfer their licenses to new locations within
the Township shall submit an application for such relocation,
change or revision to the Township. No refund of any license fee
shall be made if an application for relocation, change or revision is
disapproved.
(3) No license shall be transferable from an approved applicant to
another person or entity.
B. Transfer, removal, replacement or change of amusement devices:
(1) Any amusement device licensed under this chapter may not be
transferred or moved to another location within the Township for
use thereon unless a new license is obtained.
§ 78-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 78-11
1:207
§ 78-12. Issuance of certificate and display.
Upon the payment of the license fee provided by this chapter, the Township
shall issue a certificate in the form of a paper certificate, disk, plate or
sticker, setting forth the number of the license for each machine so licensed,
which said certificate, disk, plate or sticker shall be attached and fastened
to the respective machine or device so that the same may be clearly
observable and readable. The certificate shall state that the amusement
device is for amusement purposes only, that it is not an illegal gambling
device and that only games and not money may be won on the machine or
device.
§ 78-13. Inspection.
Any agent of the Township may conduct inspections of any business
establishment where any amusement device licensed under this chapter is
located, installed, placed or used to ensure compliance with this chapter.
§ 78-14. Prohibited devices.
No person shall permit any mechanical or other means of amusement to be
located on the premises of any amusement arcade if such amusement device
shows any specified sexually explicit area or specified sexual activity as set
forth in the Township Code.
§ 78-15. Responsibility.
(2) Prior to transferring, moving, replacing or changing any
amusement device, the licensee shall notify the Township in writing
of such proposed transfer, removal, replacement or change and
shall return to the Township with such notification the paper
certificate, disk, plate or sticker issued by the Township for such
amusement device, and if such amusement device is being replaced
or changed, the Township shall issue to the licensee a new paper
certificate, disk, plate or sticker for such replacement amusement
device.
A. The responsibility to ensure that each premises containing the devices
is licensed shall be joint and severable. Where the owner of the
premises or the proprietor of the business establishment fails to acquire
the proper license, the owner of the device shall bear the responsibility
to either acquire the proper license or remove the device.
B. The owner of each device shall prominently display on each device,
through a decal or other method, their company name and business
address.
C. The licensee, upon applying for and being granted such license, thereby
permits all Township inspectors the right to inspect the premises for
violation of any law, statute or ordinance.
§ 78-11 SHALER CODE § 78-16
1:208
§ 78-16. Revocation, debarment and contraband declaration.
§ 78-17. Violation and penalties.
Any person, persons, firm, partnership or corporation violating any of the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof before any
Magisterial District Judge be sentenced to pay a fine of not more $600 plus
costs of prosecution and may be sentenced to a period of incarceration not
exceeding 90 days, or both. Each and every day that any machine or device
is used and operated in violation hereof shall constitute a separate and
distinct summary offense under this chapter and shall be subject to separate
and distinct penalties.
A. In the event an owner of a device, or person listed pursuant to the
requirements of this chapter, or owner of the premises, or applicant/
proprietor of the business establishment is convicted of having a
mechanical or electronic device that is in violation of any gambling laws
of Pennsylvania, the Township shall revoke each Township license
which had been issued to such person and each Township license for
machines owned by such person. In addition, the person shall be
debarred for three years from being eligible for the Township license.
B. In the event a mechanical device in a business establishment is found in
a court of law to be in violation of any gambling laws of Pennsylvania,
any mechanical device found on the premises for a period of three years
shall be declared contraband and shall be confiscated by the Township.
C. The licensing officer shall not issue a license to any applicant, owner or
proprietor, who:
(1) Is not a citizen of the United States of America;
(2) Is not 21 years of age; or
(3) Has been found guilty of or accepted accelerated rehabilitative
disposition for possessing or using a video or mechanical
amusement device in violation of the Crimes Code of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania within three years of the date of
application.
D. In the event any applicant, vendor or proprietor falsifies any
information on an application for a license of amusement devices or
violates this chapter, the Township shall immediately revoke all licenses
issued under this chapter to such applicant, vendor or proprietor.
Moreover, in the event the Township becomes aware that an applicant,
vendor or proprietor is convicted of possessing or using an illegal
gambling device, the Township shall revoke all licenses issued to such
applicant, vendor or proprietor.
§ 78-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 78-17
1:209
Chapter 80
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Beekeeping — See Ch. 84.
§ 78-17 SHALER CODE § 78-17
1:210
ARTICLE I
Dogs Running at Large
§ 80-1. Prohibited action.
It is hereby made unlawful for any owner, custodian or keeper to allow or
permit any dog to run at large upon the highways, roads, public or private
property of persons other than the owner within the Township of Shaler.
§ 80-2. Seizure and redemption.
Any dog found upon the Township highways, roads or on public or private
property in violation hereof may be seized or detained by any police officer
of the Township and notice given to said owner, custodian or keeper. A copy
of the notice shall also be sent to the Code Enforcement Officer. Any dog
so sighted and kept within the care of the Township may be released to
the owner upon payment of costs of seizure or detention, provided that the
owner, custodian or keeper claims the dog within seven days after notice,
or it may be turned over to the appropriate authorities for safekeeping or
disposal.
§ 80-3. Violations and penalties.
If said owner, custodian or keeper of said dog, having been notified as
per the provisions of this article, shall further allow the dog to be on said
highways, roads or public or private property in violation of § 80-1 of this
article, said owner, custodian or keeper so offending shall, upon conviction
thereof by any issuing authority, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than
$600 and may be sentenced to a period of incarceration not exceeding 90
days in the Allegheny County Jail, at the discretion of the issuing authority;
if the dog is not seized, the owner, custodian or keeper shall be notified that
the dog is at large in violation of § 80-1 hereof. Each incident in violation of
this article shall be considered as a separate offense and shall be punishable
as such.
§ 80-4. Construal of notice.
For the purpose of this article, written notice left with any adult at the
residence shall be good and valid notice.
§ 80-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-4
1:211

ARTICLE II
Nuisances
§ 80-5. Enumeration of animal nuisances.
Any dog, cat, fowl or other animal which fulfills any of the following
conditions is hereby declared to be a nuisance:
§ 80-6. Prohibitions.
No person shall keep or harbor a dog, cat, fowl or other animal in a manner
which constitutes a nuisance. No person shall permit a dog, cat, fowl or
other animal to commit a nuisance upon any school grounds or other public
property or upon any private property other than that of the owner or
person in charge of such animal; provided, however, that, if the owner or
person in charge of such animal immediately removes all feces deposited
by such animal and disposes of same in a sanitary manner, such type of
nuisance shall be considered abated, providing said occurrence does not
happen on a continued, habitual basis. A continued, habitual nuisance shall
be defined as an instance that occurs two times or more, inclusive of verbal
and/or written notification from the homeowner to the animal owner and
with notice to the Code Enforcement Officer, requesting that said nuisance
activity cease.
§ 80-7. Exemptions.
Any person with a trained service animal who relies upon the service animal
specifically trained for such purposes shall be exempt from compliance with
this article.
§ 80-8. Animal structures and runs.
A. The animal or fowl is kept in a manner so as to create offensive odors or
unsanitary conditions which are a menace to the health, comfort or
safety of the public;
B. The animal or fowl habitually barks, howls, screeches, yelps, crows or
bays thereby disturbing the quiet of any person or the community;
C. The animal scratches, digs or defecates upon any lawn, tree, shrub,
plant, building or any other public or private property other than the
property of the owner or person in charge or control of such animal; or
D. The animal bites, chases, leaps at or jumps upon or otherwise harasses
bicyclists, motor vehicles and/or pedestrians passing through a public
right-of-way.
A. Animal structures and runs. A structure and associated run shall
provide accommodation, environment and security of animals at a
standard that ensures their safety and well-being. Animal runs must be
kept clean and cannot drain onto premises other than that of the owner
or person in charge or control of such animal(s).
§ 80-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-8
1:213
§ 80-9. Violations and penalties.
If any owner, custodian or keeper of any dog, cat, fowl or other animal
having been notified as per the provisions of this article shall further allow
the dog, cat, fowl or other animal to be a nuisance in violation of § 80-6
of this article, said owner, custodian or keeper so offending shall, upon
conviction thereof by any issuing authority, be sentenced to pay a fine of
not more than $600 and may be sentenced to a period of incarceration
not exceeding 90 days in the Allegheny County Jail, at the discretion of
the issuing authority. Each incident in violation of this article shall be
considered as a separate offense and shall be punishable as such.
B. Food storage. Animal food shall be secured in a manner not to attract
rodents.
§ 80-8 SHALER CODE § 80-9
1:214
ARTICLE III
Wild and Dangerous Animals
§ 80-10. Statement of policy and intent.
It is recognized that the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the
Township of Shaler must be protected to the maximum extent possible
and legally permissible. It is further recognized that the keeping of certain
animals poses a serious danger to the health, safety and welfare of the
residents of the Township of Shaler due to both the nature of certain
animals and the demographics and environment of the Township.
§ 80-11. Prohibition.
It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, association, firm or
corporation to keep, maintain or have in his or its possession or under
his or its control within the Township of Shaler any poisonous reptile or
any other dangerous or carnivorous wild animal or reptile, including any
nonpoisonous snake not native to the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as
well as any vicious or dangerous domesticated animal or any other animal
or reptile of wild, vicious or dangerous propensities.
§ 80-12. Classification.
It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, association, firm or
corporation to keep, maintain or have in his or its possession or under his
or its control within the Township of Shaler any of the following animals:
All poisonous animals, including rear-fang snakes.
Apes: chimpanzees (Pan), gibbons (Hylobates), gorillas (Gorilla),
orangutans (Pongo) and siamangs (Symphalangus)
Baboons (Papoi, Mandrillus)
Bears (Ursidae)
Bison (Bison)
Cheetahs (Acinonyx jubatus)
Crocodilians (Crocodilia)
Coyotes (Canis latrans)
Deer (Cervidae): includes all members of the deer family, for example,
white-tailed deer, elk, antelope and moose
Elephants (Elephas and Loxodonta)
Game cocks and other fighting birds
Hippopotami (Hipopotamidae)
Hyenas (Hyaenidae)
Jaguars (Panthera onca)
Leopards (Panthera pardus)
§ 80-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-12
1:215
Lions (Panthera leo)
Lynxes (Lynx)
Ostriches (Struthio)
Pumas (Felis concolor) also known as "cougars," "mountain lions" and
"panthers"
Rhinoceroses (Rhinocero tidae)
Snakes, constrictor and pythons (Python molurus bivittatus); (Pythonidae
family)
Snow leopards (Panthera uncia)
Swine (Suidae)
Tigers (Panthera tigris)
Wolves (Canis lupus)
§ 80-13. Exceptions.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to the display of wild or exotic
animals by institutions accredited by the American Zoological Association
(ASA) or by the Association of Sanctuaries.
§ 80-14. Violations and penalties.
Any person, persons, firm, partnership or corporation violating any of the
provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof before any
Magisterial District Judge, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more $600
plus costs of prosecution and may be sentenced to a period of incarceration
not exceeding 90 days, or both. Each and every day that a violation hereof
continues shall constitute a separate and distinct summary offense under
this article and shall be subject to separate and distinct penalties.
§ 80-12 SHALER CODE § 80-14
1:216
Chapter 82
ASSEMBLIES, MASS PUBLIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Circuses and carnivals — See Ch. 100.
Noise — See Ch. 158.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 167.
Racing and endurance feats — See Ch. 174.
§ 82-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CHIEF OF POLICE — The Chief of Police of the Township of Shaler.
LOUDSPEAKER — Any sound truck, loudspeaker, sound amplifier or any
instrument of any character whatsoever which emits therefrom loud and
raucous noises.
PARADE — Any parade, demonstration, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant
or procession of any kind or any similar display or assembly in or upon any
street, park or other public place in the Township.
PERMIT — A permit as required by this chapter.
PERSON — A person, firm or partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Shaler.
§ 82-2. Permit required.
No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any parade or
use a loudspeaker unless a permit shall have been obtained from the Chief
of Police, except that no permit shall be required of funeral processions,
students going to and from school classes or participating in educational
activities under the direction and supervision of the proper school
authorities, or a governmental agency acting within its scope.
§ 82-3. Application for permit; fee.
A person seeking issuance of a permit shall file an application with the
Chief of Police for a permit not less than five days and not more than 30
days before the date on which it is proposed to conduct a parade or use
a loudspeaker, stating the character, object, time, route of the parade or
loudspeaker, and the names and addresses of the persons having charge
thereof. There shall be paid at the time of filing an application for a parade
permit a fee of $5.
§ 80-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-4
1:217
§ 82-4. Conditions for issuance.
The Chief of Police shall issue a permit as provided for hereunder if the
conduct of the parade or the use of the loudspeaker will not substantially
interfere with the safe and orderly movement of traffic contiguous to its
route and the movement of emergency fire or police equipment or if it is
not reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or property or to provoke
disorderly conduct or create a disturbance.
§ 82-5. Time limit for processing application.
The Chief of Police shall act upon the application for a permit within three
days after the filing thereof.
§ 82-6. Denial of permit; appeals.
If the Chief of Police disapproves the application, he shall mail to the
applicant, within three days after the date upon which the application is
filed, a notice of his action, stating the reasons for his denial of the permit.
Any person aggrieved shall have the right, within three days after notice, to
appeal the denial of a permit to the Commissioners of the Township.
§ 82-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-15-1988 by Ord. No.
1631]
Any person, firm, corporation or group of individuals found in violation of
this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof before any issuing authority,
be subject to a fine of up to $600 and may be sentenced to a period of
incarceration not exceeding 90 days in the Allegheny County Jail. Each
incident in violation of the chapter shall be considered a separate offense
and may be punishable as such. This penalty shall not preclude the
Township from seeking further relief in law or equity in a court of competent
jurisdiction in this commonwealth.
Chapter 84
BEEKEEPING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 80. Zoning — See Ch. 225.
§ 84-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings ascribed in this section unless the context of their usage clearly
indicates another meaning:
APIARY — Any place where one or more colonies or nuclei of bees are kept.
§ 82-4 SHALER CODE § 84-1
1:218
BEE — Any stage of the common hive or honeybee (Apis mellifera) or other
species of the genus Apis.
BEEKEEPER — An owner of an apiary or a person who has charge of an
apiary or one or more colonies of bees in Shaler Township.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs) — The policies, procedures and
methods contained in the compliance agreement for beekeepers who are
certified by the Pennsylvania Department of Agriculture.
COLONY — An aggregate of bees consisting principally of workers, but
having, when perfect, one queen and at times many drones, including
brood, combs, honey and the receptacle inhabited by the bees.
DEPARTMENT — The Pennsylvania Department of Agriculture.
HIVE — Any frame hive, box hive, box, barrel, log, gum, skep or other
receptacle or container, natural or artificial, or any part thereof, which may
be used or employed as a domicile for bees.
OWNER OF AN APIARY — Includes all colonies owned by an individual and
located in any permanent location or locations within Shaler Township.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Shaler.
TRACT — A contiguous parcel of land under common ownership.
UNDEVELOPED PROPERTY — Any idle land that is not improved or actually
in the process of being improved with residential, commercial, industrial,
church, park, school or governmental facilities or other structures or
improvements intended for human use or occupancy and the grounds
maintained in association therewith. The term shall be deemed to include
property developed exclusively as a street or highway or property used for
commercial agricultural purposes.
§ 84-2. Purpose; certain conduct declared illegal.
§ 84-3. Hive registration; best management practices.
A. The purpose of this chapter is to avoid problems that may otherwise be
associated with the keeping of bees in populated areas.
B. Notwithstanding compliance with the various requirements of this
chapter, it shall be unlawful for any beekeepers to keep any colony or
colonies in such a manner or of such disposition as to cause any
unhealthy condition, interfere with the normal use and enjoyment of
human or animal life of others, or interfere with the normal use and
enjoyment of any public property or property of others.
A. All beekeepers owning or maintaining an apiary in the Township shall
register all bee apiaries with the Department as required by the
Pennsylvania Bee Law.70
70.Editor's Note: See 3 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 2101 to 2117.
§ 84-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 84-3
1:219
§ 84-4. Fencing of flyways.
In each instance in which any colony is situated within 25 feet of a public
or private property line of the tract upon which the apiary is situated,
as measured from the nearest point on the hive to the property line, all
beekeepers shall establish and maintain a flyway barrier at least six feet in
height, consisting of a solid wall, fence, dense vegetation or combination
thereof that is parallel to the property line and extends 20 feet beyond the
colony in each direction so that all bees are forced to fly at an elevation of
at least six feet above ground level over the property lines in the vicinity of
the apiary.
§ 84-5. Water.
All beekeepers in Shaler Township shall ensure that a convenient source of
fresh water is available to the bees at all times during the year so that the
bees will not congregate at swimming pools, pet watering bowls, bird baths
or other water sources where they may cause human, bird or domestic pet
contact.
§ 84-6. Violation and penalties.
Any person who shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any of the terms
or provisions of this chapter or any regulation or requirement pursuant
thereto and authorized thereby or who shall fail, neglect or refuse to remove
any unlawful colony or colonies without unnecessary delay shall, upon
conviction before any Magisterial District Judge, be sentenced to pay a fine
of $600 per day for each and every offense as well as costs of prosecution
and, in default of payment thereof, to imprisonment for a term not to exceed
10 days. Whenever such person shall have been notified that he or she is
committing such a violation of this chapter, each day that he or she shall
continue such violation after such notification shall constitute a separate
offense punishable by a like fine or penalty.
B. All beekeepers owning or maintaining an apiary in the Township shall
also register all bee apiaries located in Shaler Township with the
Township Zoning Officer.
C. All beekeepers owning or maintaining an apiary in the Township shall
practice those best management practices as set forth by the
Department.
D. It shall be unlawful to maintain or to be the owner of an apiary located
in the Township without first obtaining from the Department a best
management certification and executing the Department's Compliance
Agreement for Beekeepers.
E. All beekeepers owning or maintaining an apiary in the Township shall
promptly notify the Township Zoning Officer without unnecessary delay
and in no event longer than 48 hours if the Department revokes such
beekeeper's best management certification.
§ 84-3 SHALER CODE § 84-6
1:220
Chapter 87
BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Outdoor burning — See Ch. 95.
Fences, walls and hedges — See Ch. 118.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 171.
§ 87-1. Restriction on growth. [Amended 5-14-1996 by Ord. No.
1739]
From and after the passage and approval of this chapter, no person, firm or
corporation shall permit grass, weeds or other rank vegetation to grow to a
height greater than six inches on any land in the Township of Shaler in any
recorded plan of lots or in primarily residential areas and which is owned,
leased or occupied by said person, firm or corporation.
§ 87-2. Declaration of nuisance.
The growth of grass, weeds or other rank vegetation above the height of six
inches or the accumulation of other debris or the nonremoval of the same
from all property in a recorded plan of lots within Shaler Township is hereby
declared to be a nuisance.
§ 87-3. Notice to remove.
Whenever it shall be reported to the Building Inspector that any owner of
any real estate in a recorded plan of lots in Shaler Township has failed
or neglected to comply with any of the terms of this chapter, the Building
Inspector shall cause a written notice to be served upon the owner, by
personal service or by United States Mail, directing the owner to comply
with all the terms of this chapter within five days. If the premises shall be
vacant, service of such notice shall be made by posting a copy thereof in
a conspicuous place on the premises and mailing a copy of such notice by
certified mail to the owner or owners of such premises at the owner's last
known post office address.
§ 87-4. Performance of work by Township; assessment of costs and
charges.
In the event of the failure of the owner or holder of said real estate within
the Township of Shaler to cut and destroy said grass, weeds or other rank
vegetation or have the same cut and removed within five days after being
notified to do so, the Township of Shaler shall have said grass, weeds or
other rank vegetation cut and destroyed and bill the owner or holder for the
actual cost thereof, together with a charge of $10.
§ 84-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-5
1:221
§ 87-5. Other remedies.
In addition to the other penalties provided by this chapter, the Township of
Shaler may institute proceedings in courts of equity to require owners of
real estate in any recorded plans of lots in the Township of Shaler to comply
with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 87-6. Costs and charges as lien.
The cost of removal, fine and penalties hereinabove mentioned may be
entered by the Township of Shaler as a lien against the property in
accordance with existing provisions of law.
§ 87-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-15-1988 by Ord. No.
1631]
Any person, firm, corporation or group of individuals found in violation of
this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof before any issuing authority,
be subject to a fine of up to $1,000 and may be sentenced to a period
of incarceration not exceeding 90 days in the Allegheny County Jail. Each
incident in violation of this chapter shall be considered a separate offense
and may be punishable as such.
Chapter 90
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 171.
Sewers — See Ch. 181.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 195.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 199.
Zoning — See Ch. 225.
§ 87-5 SHALER CODE § 87-7
1:222
ARTICLE I
International One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code
[Adopted 4-13-1999 by Ord. No. 176571]
§ 90-1. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Shaler Township One- and Two-Family
Dwelling Code Ordinance."
§ 90-2. Amendment of Code.
The Township Code is amended to include Chapter 90, Building
Construction, Article I, entitled the "International One- and Two-Family
Dwelling Code," which code is incorporated herein by reference as if more
fully set forth herein at length, with the additions, insertions, deletions and
changes, if any, prescribed in § 90-4 of this article.
§ 90-3. Adoption of standards by reference.
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the offices of the
Building Inspector/Zoning Compliance Officer and the Township of Shaler,
being marked and designated as the International One- and Two-Family
Dwelling Code, 1998, as published by the International Code Council, be
and is hereby formally adopted as the code of the Township of Shaler
for regulating the design, construction, quality of materials, erection,
installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement and
addition to, use or maintenance of building, mechanical, plumbing and
electrical systems in the Township of Shaler and providing for the issuance
of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the
regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of such International One- and
Two-Family Dwelling Code, 1998 edition, published by the International
Code Council, on file in the office of the Township of Shaler, are hereby
referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this article.
§ 90-4. Revisions.
The following sections of the International One- and Two-Family Dwelling
Code 1998, as published by the International Code Council, are hereby
revised as follows:
A. Section 101.1, Title, is amended by inserting "the Township of Shaler."
B. Section 106.4, Penalty, is amended to read as follows:
Section 106.4 Penalty: Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or
organization who or which violates any of the provisions of this article,
upon conviction in a summary proceeding, shall be sentenced to pay
a fine of not less than $300 nor more than $1,000 and, in default of
the payment of the fine and costs, shall be committed to the Allegheny
71.Editor's Note: This article also provided that it would be effective May 1, 1999.
§ 90-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-4
1:223
County Jail for a period not to exceed 30 days. Each twenty-fourhour
period during which failure to comply continues shall constitute a
separate offense. Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to preclude
the Township to seek other relief or avail itself of any remedy that may
be available at law or in equity to prevent continuing violations of the
terms of this article.
C. Section 108.1, Alternate materials, methods and equipment, is
amended by inserting "the 1996 BOCA National Code."
D. Table 301.2(1), Climatic and Geographic Design Criteria, is amended to
include the following criteria:
(1) Roof snow load: 20 pounds per square foot.
(2) Wind pressure: 70 miles per hour.
(3) Seismic condition: 0.
(4) Weathering: Severe.
(5) Frost line depth: 36 inches.
(6) Termite: Moderate to heavy.
(7) Decay: Slight to moderate.
(8) Winter design temperature for heating: Per manufacturer's
specifications.
(9) Radon-resistant construction: Zone 1.
§ 90-4 SHALER CODE § 90-4
1:224
ARTICLE II
BOCA National Code
[Adopted 5-11-1999 by Ord. No. 176672]
§ 90-5. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Shaler Township BOCA Code Ordinance."
§ 90-6. Amendment of Code.
Chapter 90 of the Township Code, Building Construction, is amended to
include an Article II, entitled the "BOCA National Code," which code is
incorporated herein by reference as if more fully set forth herein at length,
with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in
§ 90-8 of this article.
§ 90-7. Adoption of standards by reference.
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of
the Building Inspector/Zoning Compliance Officer and the Township of
Shaler, being marked and designated as the BOCA National Building Code,
Thirteenth Edition, 1996, as published by the Building Officials and Code
Administrators International, Inc., be and is hereby formally adopted as the
building code of the Township of Shaler, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, for
the control of buildings and structures as herein provided, and each and all
of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said BOCA
National Building Code are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part
hereof as if more fully set out in this article.
§ 90-8. Revisions.
The following sections of the BOCA National Building Code, Thirteenth
Edition, 1996, as published by the Building Officials and Code
Administrators International, Inc., are hereby revised as follows:
A. Section 101.1, Title, is amended by inserting "the Township of Shaler."
B. Section 112.3.1, Fee schedule, is amended by adding the following:
(1) Sheds and demolition permits: $10.
(2) Building permits: $20 initial fee and $5 per thousand dollars of
actual construction.
(3) Occupancy permits: $30, residential or commercial.
C. Section 116.4, Violation penalties, is amended to read as follows:
Section 116.4 Violation and penalties: Any person, firm,
partnership, corporation or organization who or which violates any
72.Editor's Note: This article also repealed Ord. No. 1352, adopted 3-11-1975.
§ 90-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-8
1:225
of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction in a summary
proceeding, be fined not less than $300 nor more than $1,000 and,
in default of the payment of the fine and costs, shall be committed to
the Allegheny County Jail for a period not to exceed 30 days. Each
twenty-four-hour period during which failure to comply continues shall
constitute a separate offense. Nothing contained herein shall be
deemed to preclude the Township to seek other relief or avail itself
of any remedy that may be available at law or in equity to prevent
continuing violations of the terms of this article.
D. Section 117.2, Unlawful continuance, is amended to read as follows:
Section 117.2 Unlawful continuance. Any person, firm, partnership,
corporation or organization who or which shall continue any work in or
about the structure after having been served with a stop order, except
such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation
or unsafe condition, shall, upon conviction in a summary proceeding,
be fined not less than $300 nor more than $1,000 and, in default of
the payment of the fine and costs, shall be committed to the Allegheny
County Jail for a period not to exceed 30 days. Each twenty-four-hour
period during which any work shall continue shall constitute a separate
offense. Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to preclude the
Township to seek other relief or avail itself of any remedy that may
be available at law or in equity to prevent continuing violations of the
terms of this article.
E. Section 3408.2, Applicability, is amended by inserting "June 1, 1999."
§ 90-8 SHALER CODE § 90-8
1:226
ARTICLE III
BOCA National Fire Prevention Code
[Adopted 8-10-1999 by Ord. No. 177073]
§ 90-9. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Shaler Township BOCA Fire Prevention
Code Ordinance."
§ 90-10. Amendment of Code.
Chapter 90 of the Township Code, Building Construction, is amended to
include an Article III, entitled the "BOCA National Fire Prevention Code,"
which code is incorporated herein by reference as if more fully set forth
herein at length, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if
any, prescribed in § 90-12 of this article.
§ 90-11. Adoption of standards by reference.
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of
the Building Inspector/Zoning Compliance Officer and the Township of
Shaler, being marked and designated as the BOCA National Fire Prevention
Code, Tenth Edition, 1996, as published by the Building Officials and Code
Administrators International, Inc., be and is hereby formally adopted as
the Fire Prevention Code of the Township of Shaler, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, for the control of buildings and structures as herein provided,
and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and
terms of said BOCA National Fire Prevention Code are hereby referred to,
adopted and made a part hereof as if more fully set out in this article, with
the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in § 90-12
of this article.
§ 90-12. Revisions.
The following sections of the BOCA National Fire Prevention Code, Tenth
Edition, 1996, as published by the Building Officials and Code
Administrators International, Inc., are hereby added, inserted, changed or
revised as follows:
A. Section 7-101.1, Title, is amended by inserting "the Township of
Shaler."
B. Section F-107.2.3, Permit Requirements Table, is amended by inserting
the following:
(1) F-403.4, Open burning: authorized only if approved Allegheny
County permit held; no Township permit required.
(2) F-3001.2, Blasting/Explosives: permit required.
73.Editor's Note: This article also repealed Ord. No. 1668, adopted 10-8-1991.
§ 90-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-12
1:227
(3) F-3101.2, Fireworks: permit required.
C. Section 7-111.2, Unlawful continuance, is amended to read as follows:
Section F-111.2 Unlawful Continuance: Any person, firm,
partnership, corporation or organization who or which shall refuse to
leave, interfere with the evacuation of other occupants or continues
any operation after having been given an evacuation order, except
such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation
or unsafe condition, shall, upon conviction in a summary proceeding,
be fined up to $1,000 and, in default of the payment of the fine and
costs, shall be committed to the Allegheny County Jail for a period
not to exceed 30 days. Each twenty-four-hour period during which any
violation shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. Nothing
contained herein shall be deemed to preclude the Township to seek
other relief or avail itself of any remedy that may be at law or in equity
to prevent continuing violations of the terms of this article.
D. Section 7-112.3, Penalty for violations, is amended to read as follows:
Section F-112.3 Penalty for Violations: Any person, firm,
partnership, corporation or organization who or which violates any
of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction in a summary
proceeding, be fined up to $1,000 and, in default of the payment of
the fine and costs, shall be committed to the Allegheny County Jail for
a period not to exceed 30 days. Each twenty-four-hour period that a
violation continues after due notice has been served shall constitute a
separate offense. Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to preclude
the Township to seek other relief or avail itself of any remedy that may
be at law or in equity to prevent continuing violations of the terms of
this article.
E. Section F-403.3, Allowable burning, shall not be construed to prevent
the burning of other combustible materials, such as brush, tree limbs
and demolition materials, in open fires under permit from the Bureau of
Air Pollution Control of the Allegheny County Health Department, as
provided for in the Allegheny County Health Department Rules and
Regulations, Article XIII, Section 1309.4(b)(3). See § 95-4 of the
Township Code.
F. Section F-3001.1, Scope, is amended by adding the following new
language and sections:
Blasting is prohibited in the Township of Shaler unless all of the
following conditions are met:
(1) The person intending to blast in the Township shall possess an
explosives permit issued by the Department of Environmental
Protection and shall comply with all requirements of the
Department as set forth in the Pennsylvania Code, 25 Pa. Code
§ 211.1-211.88.
§ 90-12 SHALER CODE § 90-12
1:228
(2) The person intending to blast in the Township shall submit an
explosives blasting plan to the Township Board of Commissioners,
which plan shall be approved by the Township Engineer and shall
be reviewed and approved by an expert retained by the Township.
(3) The person intending to blast in the Township shall provide the
Township with the indemnification, insurance and security
mandated by Section F-3001.3(1), (2) and (3).
G. F-3001.3, Bond required for blasting, is amended by adding the
following new language and Sections (1), (2) and (3):
Moreover, before approval to do blasting is issued, the permittee shall
provide the Township with the following indemnification, insurance
and security:
(1) Indemnification. Indemnification of the Township for property and
personal injury will be governed as follows:
(a) The permittee shall indemnify fully and, if requested, defend
the Township from liability, loss, injury or damage to persons
or property which the Township, its officers, agents and
employees individually may suffer as a result of claims,
demands, costs or judgments arising against it as a result of
the granting of the blasting permit to the permittee, including
claims, demands, costs or judgments arising as a result of
activities of the permittee, its agents, employees or others at
the permit site or work or other actions taken by one or more
of them under or in violation of the permit; or as a result of the
failure of one or more of them to conform to pertinent statutes,
ordinances, regulations or other requirements or other
requirements of a governmental authority in connection with
the permit.
(b) The permittee and its contractors shall add the Township as
an additional insured to their insurance policies to secure
the permittee's indemnification of the Township for property
damage and personal injury under this subsection.
(c) The amount of insurance shall be at least $250,000 per person
and at least $1,000,000 per occurrence or other statutory
limitations on damages as the General Assembly of the
Commonwealth may establish. A policy shall guarantee
coverage for damages and injury which occur during the time
the permit is in effect and which are the result of the granting
of the permit to the permittee.
(d) Upon request, the permittee shall deliver to the Township
certificates of insurance evidencing that the coverage required
under this subsection has been obtained.
§ 90-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-12
1:229
(2) Insurance. The permittee shall obtain, prior to blasting under
the permit, a policy of insurance, issued by an insurer having a
certificate of authority and a licensed agent authorized to transact
the business of insurance in this commonwealth, to cover a loss
that may arise out of operations under the permit.
(a) The permittee and its contractors shall obtain insurance for
public liability and property damage, in a form satisfactory to
the Township, to cover a loss that may arise out of operations
under the permit.
(b) The amount of insurance shall be at least $250,000 per person
and at least $1,000,000 per occurrence. A policy shall
guarantee coverage for damages and injury which occur
during the time the permit is in effect and which are the result
of the granting of the permit to the permittee.
(c) Upon request, the permittee shall deliver to the Township
certificates of insurance evidencing that the coverage required
under this subsection has been obtained.
(d) The permittee's obligations to indemnify the Township and
to obtain insurance to secure indemnification as required in
Subsection G(1) herein and its obligation to obtain security
under Subsection G(3) herein are separate from the
obligations to obtain insurance for the purposes required
under Subsection G(2). Obtaining insurance under this
Subsection G(2) does not relieve the permittee of its
obligations under Subsection G(1) and (3).
(3) Security. The Township may require the applicant to execute an
agreement or provide security, or both, as a prerequisite to
issuance of the permit. The Township's determination as to the
necessity and the amount of security will be based on the totality
of the circumstances existing concerning the blasting. If security
is required, it shall be delivered to the Township Treasurer in the
form and amount acceptable to the Township and shall guarantee
restoration of all property damaged by operations under the
permit for at least one year after the expiration of the permit.
If the security is executed by a corporate surety registered and
authorized to do business in this commonwealth, the following are
acceptable forms of security:
(a) An individual or blanket bond.
(b) An irrevocable letter of credit in a form acceptable to the
Township, signed by a bank officer and naming the Township
as sole beneficiary, to be honored on presentment.
H. F-3101.2 Approval required, is deleted in its entirety and the following
is substituted in its place:
F-3101.2 Approval required: A permit is required for the public
display of fireworks and shall first be obtained from the Secretary
§ 90-12 SHALER CODE § 90-12
1:230
and Township Manager of the Township as set forth in § 127-2 of the
Township Code.
I. F-3003.2, Establishment of Limits. The limitations referred to in Section
F-3003.2 of the BOCA National Fire Prevention Code, 1996, in which
the storage of explosive materials is prohibited, are hereby established
as follows: The storage of explosive materials is prohibited in the
Township of Shaler unless all of the following conditions are met:
(1) The person intending to store explosive materials in the Township
shall have a license issued by the Department of Environmental
Protection for each magazine used for the storage of the explosives.
(2) The person intending to store explosive materials in the Township
shall comply with all requirements of the Department of
Environmental Protection for the storage, handling and use of
explosives, as set forth in 25 Pa. Code §§ 211.1 to 211.88.
(3) The person intending to store explosive materials in the Township
shall obtain the prior approval of the Township Board of
Commissioners.
§ 90-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-12
1:231

ARTICLE IV
Uniform Construction Codes
[Adopted 6-8-2004 by Ord. No. 1824; amended in its entirety
9-14-2004 by Ord. No. 182874]
§ 90-13. Administration and enforcement.
The Township of Shaler hereby elects to administer and enforce the
provisions of the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, Act 45 of 1999, 35
P.S. §§ 7210.101 through 7210.1103, as amended from time to time, and its
regulations.
§ 90-14. Adoption of standards.
The Uniform Construction Code, contained in 34 Pa. Code, Chapters 401
through 405, as amended from time to time, is hereby adopted and
incorporated herein by reference as the municipal building code of Shaler
Township.
§ 90-15. Process for administration and enforcement.
Administration and enforcement of the code within the Township of Shaler
shall be undertaken in any of the following ways, as determined by the
Board of Commissioners of Shaler Township from time to time by resolution:
§ 90-16. Board of Appeals. [Amended 7-10-2012 by Ord. No. 1910]
A. By the designation of an employee of Shaler Township to serve as the
municipal code official to act on behalf of Shaler Township.
B. By the retention of one or more construction code officials or thirdparty
agencies to act on behalf of Shaler Township.
C. By agreement with one or more other municipalities for the joint
administration and enforcement of the Uniform Construction Code
through an intermunicipal agreement.
D. By entering into a contract with another municipality for the
administration and enforcement of the Uniform Construction Code on
behalf of Shaler Township.
E. By entering into an agreement with the Pennsylvania Department of
Labor and Industry for plan review, inspections and enforcement of
structures other than one-family or two-family dwelling units and utility
and miscellaneous use structures.
A. Establishment of Municipal Appeals Board. A Shaler Township Uniform
Construction Code Municipal Appeals Board (hereinafter "Municipal
Appeals Board" or "Board of Appeals"), for the administration and
enforcement of the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code, is hereby
74.Editor's Note: This article also provided that it shall be effective 7-1-2004.
§ 90-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-16
1:233
established as provided in Chapter 1 of the 1999 BOCA National
Building Code, 14th Edition, to hear appeals from decisions of the
Township UCC Code Administrator.
B. Composition of Municipal Appeals Board.
(1) Membership of the Board. The Municipal Appeals Board shall
consist of five members appointed by the Board of Commissioners,
as follows:
(a) One for five years, one for four years, one for three years, one
for two years, and one for one year.
(b) Thereafter, each new member shall serve for five years or until
a successor has been appointed.
(c) A member of the Board of Appeals may not be an employee of
the Township. Members of the Township's governing body and
its code administrators may not serve on the Board of Appeals.
(2) Alternate members. The Board of Commissioners shall appoint two
or more alternate members who shall be called by the Board
Chairman to hear appeals during the absence or disqualification of
a member. Alternate members shall possess the qualifications
required for Board membership and shall be appointed for five
years, or until a successor has been appointed.
C. Qualifications and filling of positions on the Municipal Appeals Board.
(1) Qualifications. A member of the Board of Appeals shall be qualified
by training or experience to pass on matters pertaining to building
construction. Training and experience may consist of licensure as
an architect or engineer, experience in the construction industry,
and training or experience as an inspector or plan reviewer.
(2) Filling positions on Municipal Appeals Board. The Township may fill
a position on the Municipal Appeals Board with a qualified person
who resides outside of the Township when it cannot find a person
within the Township who satisfies the requirements of this section.
(3) Members serve at pleasure of Board of Commissioners. A member
appointed to the Municipal Appeals Board holds office at the
pleasure of the Township Board of Commissioners appointing such
member.
D. Organization, compensation and conflicts of interest.
(1) Organization. The Board shall annually organize by the election of
one of its number as the chairperson and one as a vice chairperson,
who shall hold office until their successors are elected and
qualified. The Township Manager shall designate a qualified clerk
to serve as secretary to the Board. The secretary shall file a
§ 90-16 SHALER CODE § 90-16
1:234
detailed record of all proceedings in the office of the Township
Manager.
(2) Compensation of Board members for hearings attended.
Compensation of members shall be set by the Board of
Commissioners as determined by law.
(3) Disqualification of member and conflicts of interest. A Municipal
Appeals Board member may not participate in a hearing on any
appeal in which the member has a personal, professional or
financial interest. If a question arises concerning whether or not a
Municipal Appeals Board member has a personal, professional or
financial interest, the Board member may consult with the Appeals
Board Solicitor, and the Solicitor shall render a legal opinion
concerning whether or not the member has a personal, professional
or financial conflict of interest.
E. Means of appeal; application for appeal. Any person directly affected by
a decision of the Code Administrator shall have the right to appeal the
decision of the Code Administrator to the Shaler Township Municipal
Appeals Board, provided that the written application for appeal is filed
within 20 days after the day of the decision, order or notice was served.
An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent
of the Act or the UCC has been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of
the Act or the UCC do not fully apply or an equivalent form of
construction is to be used. An application for appeal shall be filed with
the UCC Code Administrator and the Township Manager.
F. Appeals, variances and extensions of time.
(1) Application. An owner or owner's agent may seek a variance or
extension of time or appeal a Code Administrator's decision by
filing an application with the Code Administrator and the Township
Manager.
(2) Filing date. The postmark date or the date of personal service shall
establish the filing date of the appeal and request for variance or
extension of time.
(3) Automatic suspension of order to correct. An appeal to the
Municipal Appeals Board will automatically suspend an action to
enforce an order to correct until the matter is resolved.
(4) No stay of unsafe building, structure or equipment. An action under
34 Pa. Code § 403.84 (relating to unsafe building, structure or
equipment) may not be stayed.
(5) Appeals without a request for a hearing. The Municipal Appeals
Board shall decide an appeal by reviewing documents and a written
brief or argument, unless the owner or owner's agent requests a
hearing.
§ 90-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-16
1:235
(6) Appeals with a request for a hearing. If the owner or owner's agent
requests a hearing, the Municipal Appeals Board shall schedule a
hearing and notify the owner or owner's agent and the Building
Code Administrator of the date, time and place of the hearing.
(7) Notice of meeting. The Board shall meet upon notice from the
Chairperson, within 10 days of the filing of an appeal or at stated
periodic meetings.
(8) Fees. The fee for an appeal to the Board of Appeals for
administering and enforcing this section shall not exceed actual
costs of the public notice of the hearing, appearance fee for the
court reporter and administrative fees as necessary.
G. Hearings and meetings.
(1) Notice. The Municipal Appeals Board shall schedule meetings and
hearings as well as provide notice of the meetings and hearings in
accordance with the Pennsylvania Sunshine Act, 65 P.S. §§ 701
through 716.
(2) Hearings on appeals within 45 days. The Municipal Appeals Board
shall convene a hearing within 45 days from the date of an
applicant's request unless the applicant agrees, in writing, to an
extension of time. The Board of Appeals shall render a written
decision to the parties within 45 days of the last hearing. If the
Board of Appeals fails to act within this time period, the appeal
shall be deemed granted.
(3) Hearings on appeals involving one-family and two-family
residential buildings. In the case of an appeal or request for
variance or extension of time involving the construction of a onefamily
or two-family residential building, the Board of Appeals shall
convene a hearing within 30 days of the appeal. The Board of
Appeals shall render a written decision to the parties within five
business days of the last hearing. If the Board of Appeals fails to act
within this time period, the appeal shall be deemed granted.
(4) Open hearing. All hearings before the Board shall be open to the
public. The appellant, the appellant's representative, the Code
Administrator and any person whose interests are affected shall be
given an opportunity to be heard.
(5) Procedure. The Municipal Appeals Board is authorized to establish
policies and procedures necessary to carry out its duties and under
which a hearing will be conducted. The policies and procedures,
which shall be made available to the public, shall not require
compliance with strict rules of evidence, but shall mandate that
only relevant information be received.
§ 90-16 SHALER CODE § 90-16
1:236
(6) Stenographic record. A stenographic record shall be made of the
hearing. The appearance fee for a stenographer shall be paid by the
person appealing and requesting the hearing.
(7) Written materials, plans and maps. The appellant shall submit to
the Municipal Appeals Board all written materials, drawings, plot
plans and maps not less than 14 days prior to the scheduled date of
the municipal appeal hearing in such format as requested by the
Board.
(8) Quorum to convene a meeting or hearing. A quorum of the
Municipal Appeals Board shall consist of any combination of three
members. Five voting members shall be the maximum number of
members permitted to hear any appeal hearing.
(9) Postponed hearings. When five members of the Board are not
present to hear an appeal, either the appellant or the appellant's
representative shall have the right to request a postponement of
the hearing.
(10) Board decision. The Board shall modify or reverse the decision of
the Code Administrator by a concurring vote of 2/3 of its members
present at the hearing. The Municipal Appeals Board may:
(a) Deny the request in whole or in part.
(b) Grant the request in whole or in part.
(c) Grant the request upon certain conditions being satisfied.
(11) Factors to be considered in deciding an appeal. The Municipal
Appeals Board shall only consider the following factors when
deciding an appeal under Section 501(c)(2) of the Act:
(a) The true intent of the Act adopting the Uniform Construction
Code was incorrectly interpreted.
(b) The provisions of the Act do not apply.
(c) An equivalent form of construction is to be used.
(12) Factors to be considered when ruling upon a request for extension
of time or request for variance. The Municipal Appeals Board may
consider the following factors when ruling upon a request for
extension of time or a request for a variance:
(a) The reasonableness of the Uniform Construction Code's
application in a particular case.
(b) The extent to which the granting of a variance or an extension
of time will pose a violation of the Uniform Construction Code
or an unsafe condition.
§ 90-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-16
1:237
§ 90-17. Effect on other ordinances.
(c) The availability of professional or technical personnel needed
to come into compliance.
(d) The availability of materials and equipment needed to come
into compliance.
(e) The efforts being made to come into compliance as quickly as
possible.
(f) Compensatory features that will provide an equivalent degree
of protection to the Uniform Construction Code.
(13) Interpretation of the Uniform Construction Code. In interpreting a
provision of a code adopted by regulation of the Department as part
of the Uniform Construction Code, a construction code official, a
board of appeal and a court shall consider and may rely upon
relevant written interpretations of the ICC (International Code
Council) or any organization whose referenced standard is relevant
and listed in the Uniform Construction Code or the regulations
promulgated under this Act or any municipal code construction
ordinance.
(14) Records and copies. The decision of the Board shall be recorded
and copies shall be furnished to the appellant and to the Code
Administrator.
(15) Administration. The Code Administrator shall take immediate
action in accordance with the decision of the Board.
H. Accessibility. The Board of Appeals may not act upon appeals, requests
for variances or requests for extension of time relating to accessibility
under the Act. An owner or applicant shall file an appeal for variances
and request for extension of time relating to accessibility with the
Accessibility Advisory Board under 34 Pa. Code § 403.142 (relating to
Accessibility Advisory Board).
A. All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which were
adopted by Shaler Township on or before July 1, 1999, and which equal
or exceed the requirements of the code, shall continue in full force and
effect until such time as such provisions fail to equal or exceed the
minimum requirements of the code, as amended from time to time.
B. All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which are in
effect as of the effective date of this article and whose requirements are
less than the minimum requirements of the Code are hereby amended
to conform with the comparable provisions of the code.
C. All relevant ordinances, regulations and policies of Shaler Township not
governed by the code shall remain in full force and effect.
§ 90-16 SHALER CODE § 90-18
1:238
§ 90-18. Fees.
Fees assessable by Shaler Township for the administration and enforcement
undertaken pursuant to this article and the code shall be established by the
Board of Commissioners by resolution from time to time.
§ 90-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-18
1:239
Chapter 93
BUILDINGS, UNSAFE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 90.
§ 93-1. Enumeration of unsafe conditions.
All buildings or structures which have any of the following defects shall be
deemed to be unsafe buildings:
§ 93-2. Notice of unsafe conditions.
Whenever any building, structure or part thereof or appurtenance thereto
is found to be an unsafe building, the Township Building Inspector shall
give written notice to the owner, lessee, tenant, occupant and/or agent,
describing the unsafe condition and ordering the abatement thereof within
the period specified in the notice. Failure to comply with the order
contained in the notice within the time period specified shall be deemed a
violation of this chapter.
A. Buildings or structures whose interior walls or other vertical structural
members list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a block line passing
through the center of gravity falls outside of the middle third of its base.
B. Buildings or structures which, exclusive of the foundation, show 30% or
more of damage or deterioration of the supporting member or members
or 50% or more of damage or deterioration of the nonsupporting
interior or outside walls or covering.
C. Buildings or structures which have improperly distributed loads upon
the floors or roofs or in which the same are overloaded or which have
insufficient strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose used.
D. Buildings or structures which have been damaged by fire, wind or other
causes so as to have become dangerous to life or safety of the occupants
or to others in the vicinity.
E. Buildings or structures which have become or are so dilapidated,
decayed or unsafe that they are unfit for human habitation or are likely
to cause injury to occupants or to others in the vicinity.
F. Buildings or structures having inadequate facilities for egress in case of
fire or panic or those having insufficient stairways, fire escapes or other
means of access and egress.
G. Buildings or structures, parts of which are so attached that they may
fall and injure members of the public or cause damage to property.
§ 90-18 SHALER CODE § 93-3
1:240
§ 93-3. Declaration of nuisance; methods of abatement.
All unsafe buildings, as herein defined, are declared to be public nuisances
and shall be repaired, vacated and/or demolished pursuant to the notice
and order of the Building Inspector under § 93-2 or 93-4A of this chapter,
in accordance with the following standards or as otherwise provided in this
chapter:
§ 93-4. Notice of condemnation.
§ 93-5. Time limit for compliance.
The time limits in §§ 93-2 and 93-4A for the abatement of the unsafe
condition shall be 30 days, except that when, in the opinion of the Building
Inspector, the hazard to life, limb or property warrants such action, he shall
have authority to order such abatement within a shorter period of time.
A. If the unsafe building can reasonably be repaired so that it will no
longer exist in violation of the terms of this chapter, it shall be ordered
to be repaired.
B. If the unsafe building is in such condition as to make it dangerous to
health, safety, morals or general welfare of the occupants of the
building or structure, it shall be ordered to be vacated.
C. If the unsafe building is 50% damaged, decayed or deteriorated from its
original value or if it cannot be repaired so that it will no longer exist in
violation of the provisions of this chapter or if it is a fire hazard existing
or erected in violation of the provisions of this chapter, it shall be
ordered to be demolished.
D. If a vacant, unused building is so dilapidated or in such a state of
disrepair that it constitutes a danger to the safety of children, the
morals of the community or the general welfare of the neighborhood, it
shall be ordered to be demolished.
A. In the event of failure to comply with the notice and order of the
Building Inspector under § 93-2 of this chapter or in the event that an
unsafe building under § 93-1 of this chapter constitutes an immediate
hazard to life, limb or property or that the building comes within the
provisions of § 93-3 of this chapter, the Building Inspector shall prepare
a notice of condemnation, describing the unsafe conditions which have
caused the building or structure to become an unsafe or otherwise
dangerous building and ordering the abatement of such conditions in
accordance with § 93-3.
B. Such notice of condemnation shall be sent to the owner or the owner's
agent by registered mail or served personally on said owner or agent. A
copy of said notice shall be served personally on the occupant of said
building and at least one copy thereof posted on the premises affected
by the condemnation.
§ 93-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 93-6
1:241
§ 93-6. Discontinuance of occupancy.
After issuance of a notice of condemnation, the Building Inspector shall
have authority to order the discontinuance of any or all occupancies in said
building or structure. After notice ordering the discontinuance of occupancy
or copies of such notice have been sent to the owner, lessee, tenant,
occupant or agent of said building or structure, the continued occupancy of
the building or structure shall be a violation of this chapter, and the owner
and all occupants shall be in violation thereof.
§ 93-7. Unsafe exits.
If any condemned portion of a building constitutes or contains an exit which
is required by law or ordinance or, in the opinion of the Building Inspector,
is a necessary means of egress, the continued occupancy of said building
after issuance of an order to discontinue the occupancy shall be in violation
of the chapter, whether or not any other portion of said building is in unsafe
condition.
§ 93-8. Abatement by Township; recovery of costs.
A. If after expiration of the time specified in the notice of condemnation
the owner, agent of person in charge or control has not abated the
unsafe condition described in said notice and has not appealed to the
Court of Common Pleas, as provided for by law, the Building Inspector
shall have the authority to abate said unsafe condition by repairing,
removing or demolishing said building, structure, part thereof or
appurtenance thereto at the expense of the Township of Shaler, the cost
thereof to be recovered by the Township from said owner in an action of
law in the Court of Common Pleas. When such suit with statement of
claim and description of the premises is filed by the Township, the
Prothonotary shall index it upon the judgment docket, and the Township
shall have a lien for the amount of said claim against said premises.
B. In abating any dangerous condition cited in a notice of condemnation,
the Building Inspector shall have the authority to decide whether the
building, structure, part thereof or appurtenance thereto shall be
repaired, removed or razed. If he shall decide to raze said building or
structure and the owner thereof has not, within 30 days after
condemnation, notified the Building Inspector in writing that he desires
to have all parts, appurtenances and materials removed therefrom to be
placed on the lot, the Building Inspector shall have authority to allow
the person, firm or corporation performing the work of demolition to
retain any or all such parts, appurtenances and materials as payment or
part payment for the razing of the building or structure. If such parts,
appurtenances and materials are placed on the lot, the owner shall be
required to use or dispose of them within 90 days after completion of
the demolition and shall be responsible for any unsafe condition arising
from their storage on the lot.
§ 93-6 SHALER CODE § 93-9
1:242
§ 93-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-15-1988 by Ord. No.
1631]
Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of § 93-2 or 93-4
of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof before any issuing authority,
forfeit and pay a fine of not more than $1,000 for each offense and may
be sentenced to a period of incarceration not exceeding 90 days in the
Allegheny County Jail. Each incident in violation of this chapter shall be
considered a separate offense and may be punishable as such.
Chapter 95
BURNING, OUTDOOR
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 125. Solid waste — See Ch. 187.
§ 95-1. Purpose.
This chapter is intended to promote the public health, safety and welfare
and to safeguard the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the
Township of Shaler, Pennsylvania, by regulating the air pollution and fire
hazards of outdoor open burning.
§ 95-2. Applicability.
§ 95-3. Compliance required.
It shall be unlawful for a person, firm or corporation to burn or cause to
be burned any papers, leaves, wood or other combustible materials upon
any lot, yard, sidewalk, street or alley in any portion of the Township of
Shaler designated as a residential, commercial or industrial district except
in accordance with this chapter.
A. This chapter applies to all open burning within the Township of Shaler,
Pennsylvania.
B. This chapter does not apply to grilling or cooking food using charcoal,
clean wood, propane or natural gas in cooking or grilling appliances.
C. This chapter does not apply to burning for the purpose of generating
heat in a stove, furnace, fireplace or other heating device within a
building used for human or animal habitation.
D. This chapter does not apply to the use of propane, acetylene, natural
gas, gasoline or kerosene in a device intended for heating, construction
or maintenance activities.
§ 93-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 95-4
1:243
§ 95-4. Open burning without permit.
Open burning in the Township shall be permitted without a permit, if and
only if:
§ 95-5. Supervision of open burning.
All open burning shall be constantly attended and supervised by a
competent person until the fire is extinguished and is cold. The supervising
person shall:
A. For recreational fires, ceremonial fires, camping and cookouts:
(1) Only dry clean wood products or other clean-burning fuels are
burned;
(2) Only smokeless fuels, if any, are used to start the fire;
(3) The pile of material being burned is no larger than nine square feet
by two feet high;
(4) The fire is at least 15 feet from the nearest structure, inhabited
area, roadway, property line or utility; and
(5) The fire is attended at all times and completely extinguished when
not attended.
B. For warmth of work crews and if:
(1) The burning is conducted in a noncombustible container no larger
than a fifty-five-gallon drum;
(2) The material being burned is clean dry wood and is completely
contained by the container;
(3) Only one container is used for each work crew; and
(4) The outside temperature is less than 40° F.
C. Within a contained patio wood-burning unit and if:
(1) The contained patio wood-burning unit is located at least 25 feet
from the nearest structure which is not on the same property as the
patio wood-burning unit; and
(2) Only dry, clean wood products or other clean-burning fuels are
burned.
A. Be a competent person of at least 18 years of age;
B. Have fire-extinguishing equipment readily available for use as may be
necessary for the total control of the fire;
C. Be in supervision of only one fire at any given time; and
§ 95-4 SHALER CODE § 95-5
1:244
§ 95-6. Limitations and regulations.
§ 95-7. Burning ban.
§ 95-8. Liability.
Any person utilizing or maintaining an outdoor fire shall be responsible
for any and all fire-suppression costs and any other liability resulting from
damage caused by the fire.
§ 95-9. Right of entry and inspection.
Upon probable cause of a possible violation of this chapter, the Township
Code Enforcement Officer, Fire Marshal or any other law enforcement
officer of the Township of Shaler may inspect any property for the purpose
of ascertaining compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
D. Be free from the effects of alcohol and/or illegally used controlled
substances and/or over-the-counter medicines and/or prescribed
medications that may impair proper judgment.
A. Open burning shall not create a visibility hazard on roadways, railroads
or airfields;
B. Open burning shall be conducted in conformance with all local and
state fire protection regulations;
C. Open burning creating an air pollution problem, a nuisance or a fire
hazard, as deemed by the Township Code Enforcement Officer, Fire
Marshal or other law enforcement officer, shall be extinguished;
D. Hot ashes, cinders or smoldering coals subject to spontaneous ignition
shall be deposited in a noncombustible container and placed at least
two feet from any combustible material, floor or ground surface;
E. No open burning shall be conducted during unfavorable weather
conditions such as high winds or extremely dry conditions; and
F. One portable fire extinguisher with a minimum rating of 4-A or other
on-site fire-extinguishing equipment such as a connected garden hose
shall be immediately available at a maximum distance of 25 feet from
the open burning.
A. Except for barbecue, gas and charcoal grills, no open burning shall be
undertaken during periods when a burning ban applicable to Shaler
Township has been issued by any state or county official.
B. The Board of Commissioners has the authority to implement a
temporary burning ban due to environmental conditions, including but
not limited to high winds or extreme dry conditions.
§ 95-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 95-10
1:245
§ 95-10. Construal of provisions.
This chapter shall not be construed to prevent the burning of other
combustible materials, such as brush, tree limbs and demolition materials,
in open fires under permit from the Bureau of Air Pollution Control of
the Allegheny County Health Department, as provided for in the Allegheny
County Health Department Rules and Regulations, Article XIII, Section
1309.4(b)3 and/or Article XXI, Section 2105.50, as amended, or to permit
a violation of any Allegheny County Health Department Rules and
Regulations.
§ 95-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or group of individuals violating
any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof before
any Magisterial District Judge, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
$1,000 and may be sentenced to a period of incarceration not exceeding 90
days, or both. Each incident in violation of this chapter shall be considered
a separate offense and may be punishable as such.
Chapter 97
CABLE TELEVISION
§ 95-10 SHALER CODE § 95-11
1:246
ARTICLE I
Authority; Franchising; Regulations
[Adopted 10-12-1993 by Ord. No. 1694]
§ 97-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BASIC SERVICE TIER — At a minimum, includes all signals of domestic
television broadcast stations provided to any subscriber [except a signal
secondarily transmitted by satellite carrier beyond the local service area
of such station, regardless of how such signal is ultimately received by the
cable operator(s)], any public, educational and governmental programming
required by the franchise agreement75 to be carried on the basic tier and
any additional video programming signals or service added to the basic tier
by the cable operator(s).
CABLE ACT OF 1992 — Cable Television Consumer Protection and
Competition Act, Public Law No. 102-385, 106 Stat. 1460 (1992).
CABLE OPERATORS — All cable television operators who are party to a
current franchise agreement with the franchising authority.
CABLE PROGRAMMING SERVICE — Any video programming provided over
a cable television system, regardless of service tier, including installation or
rental of equipment used for the receipt of such video programming, other
than:
CERTIFICATION — The certification received by the franchising authority
from the FCC, empowering the franchising authority to regulate certain
cable television rates.
COST-OF-SERVICE RATE APPLICATION — A rate application filed in the
manner prescribed and on the forms adopted by the FCC. A cost-of-service
"rate application" may be submitted by a cable operator(s), in its sole
discretion, in support of its current rates or a proposed rate increase.
CURRENT RATES — Those rates in effect for the basic service tier and
for the equipment and installation necessary to receive the basic service
A. Video programming carried on the basic service tier;
Video programming offered on a pay-per-channel or pay-per-program
basis; or
B.
A combination of multiple channels of pay-per-channel or pay-perprogram
video programming offered on a multiplexed or time-shifted
basis, so long as the combined service consists of commonly identified
video programming and is not bundled with any regulated tier of
service.
C.
75.Editor's Note: Franchise agreements are on file in the Township offices.
§ 97-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-1
1:247
tier, existing on the date when the franchising authority notifies the cable
operator(s) that it has received certification.
CUSTOMER SERVICE STANDARDS — Those standards governing customer
service which are prescribed by the FCC and may be enforced by the
franchising authority.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
FRANCHISE AGREEMENT — The agreement between one or more cable
operator(s) and the franchising authority pursuant to which the cable
operator(s) was granted a franchise to offer cable television services to
subscribers.
FRANCHISING AUTHORITY — The Board of Commissioners of Shaler
Township, Allegheny County, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
MAXIMUM PERMITTED RATES — Those rates against which all rate
applications shall be measured. The maximum permitted rates shall be
determined consistent with the rules adopted by the FCC.
OPINION — An opinion issued by the franchising authority in response to
any rate application.
ORDER — An order issued by the franchising authority, advising the cable
operator(s) and other interested parties of the franchising authority's intent
to take additional time to review and approve or disprove any rate
application.
PRESCRIBED RATE — The rate prescribed by the franchising authority for
the basic service tier and/or for the equipment and installation necessary
to receive the basic service tier, which may differ from the proposed rate
submitted by the cable operator(s) in a rate application.
PROSPECTIVE RATE ADJUSTMENT — A reduction by the franchising
authority in the current rates charged by a cable operator(s).
RATE APPLICATION — An application, on the form adopted by the FCC, to
be submitted by the cable operator(s) for approval of its current rates and/
or any proposed increase in the rates for the basic service tier and/or for
the equipment and installation necessary to receive the basic service tier.
REFUND — Any refund ordered by the franchising authority of rates
charged for the basic service tier and/or the rates for the equipment and
installation necessary to receive the basic service tier pursuant to the terms
contained in § 97-4D(2).
SUBSCRIBER — A customer of the cable operator(s) receiving cable
television service within the geographic boundaries of the franchising
authority.
§ 97-2. Obtaining certification.
A. The motion approved by the franchising authority on September 14,
1993,76 authorizing and empowering the franchising authority to seek
certification as a franchising authority by filing FCC Form 328, is
§ 97-1 SHALER CODE § 97-2
1:248
§ 97-3. Regulatory authority.
Pursuant to the power and authority granted to the franchising authority
under the Cable Act of 1992, its certification by the FCC for regulating
rates for the basic service tier and rates for the equipment and installation
necessary to receive the basic service tier and other charges which may be
regulated by the franchising authority pursuant to the regulations adopted
by the FCC under the Cable Act of 1992, the franchising authority shall
exercise regulatory power over the rates charged or to be charged to a
subscriber for the basic service tier and for the equipment and installation
necessary to receive the basic service tier applicable to those subscribers of
the cable operator(s).
§ 97-4. Rate applications.
hereby formally ratified and adopted, and the franchising authority
shall make application for certification with the Federal
Communications Commission to regulate cable television rates for the
basic service tier, the equipment and installation necessary to receive
the basic service tier and to provide notice to the cable operator(s)
of its application for certification. Application shall be made in the
manner and on the forms adopted by the FCC, and notice shall be
provided to the cable operator(s) before or on the same day of filing of
the application. In the event that the franchising authority has already
made application for certification to the FCC without providing the
cable operators such notice, the franchising authority is hereby
authorized to refile such application for certification, provided that the
franchising authority provides the cable operator(s) notice before or on
the same day of filing of the application.
B. Upon the effective date of certification, the franchising authority shall
provide notice to the cable operator(s) of its certification, its intention
to regulate rates for the basic service tier, the equipment and
installation necessary to receive the basic service tier and its intention
to enforce customer service standards.
C. In the event that the franchising authority shall not obtain certification
or that its certification shall be reconsidered and revoked, the
franchising authority is hereby authorized to continue to enforce
customer service standards and to take such steps as are necessary to
receive certification.
A. Initial procedures.
(1) The cable operator(s) shall give notice to its subscribers within 90
days (or three billing cycles) of the effective date of the rules
adopted by the franchising authority and all new subscribers at the
time of installation of the availability of the basic service tier.
76.Editor's Note: The motion approved by the franchising authority is on file in the Township
offices.
§ 97-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-4
1:249
(2) Each cable operator shall submit a rate application to the
franchising authority for approval of that cable operator's current
rates for the basic service tier and for approval of its rates for the
equipment and installation necessary to receive the basic service
tier and for approval of any proposed rate increase.
(a) The rate application for approval of current rates for the basic
service tier and the rates for the equipment and installation
necessary to receive the basic service tier shall be filed within
30 days of notice from the franchising authority to the cable
operator(s) that the franchising authority has been certified by
the FCC and has adopted the regulations required by the FCC
for rate regulation.
(b) The rate application for any proposed increase in rates for the
basic service tier or for the equipment and installation
necessary to receive the basic service tier shall be filed a
minimum of 30 days before the effective date of the proposed
increase.
(c) Included in a rate application shall be such information as is
set forth in the application form adopted by the FCC.
(d) The cable operator(s) shall submit any relevant information as
is permitted by FCC rules, as contained on the application and
worksheets adopted by the FCC for rate applications, and
which the cable operator(s) would like the franchising
authority to consider in evaluating the current rates for the
basic service tier and/or for the equipment and installation
necessary to receive the basic service tier and/or in evaluating
any proposed rate increase of those same items.
(e) If the current rates for the basic service tier and/or for the
equipment and installation necessary to receive the basic
service tier or any proposed rate increase exceeds the
maximum permitted rates, the cable operator(s) may submit a
cost-of-service rate application in conformity with FCC rules.
Only the cable operator(s) may decide whether to submit a
cost-of-service rate application.
(3) The cable operator shall give written notice to its subscribers that a
rate application has been filed at least 30 days prior to the effective
date of any proposed rate increase. Said notice shall provide the
name and address of the franchising authority before whom the
rate application is pending.
(4) The cable operator(s) bear the burden of proof that their current
rates or any proposed rate increase complies with the statutes of
the United States and the regulations of the FCC.
(5) Within 10 days of receipt of a rate application, the franchising
authority shall provide notice in a newspaper of general circulation
§ 97-4 SHALER CODE § 97-4
1:250
within the jurisdiction of the franchising authority, which notice
shall contain at a minimum:
(a) The rate application has been received by the cable
operator(s);
(b) The manner in which interested parties may review and/or
obtain copies of the rate application;
(c) The effective date of the proposed rate increase, if that is the
subject of the rate application;
(d) The manner in which interested parties may offer their
comments regarding the rate application;
(e) The date all comments must be received by the franchising
authority; and
(f) The date on which the franchising authority must act on the
rate application or the rate application shall have become
effective without action.
(6) Within 30 days of receipt of the rate application the franchising
authority shall:
(a) Review the rate application and documentation submitted by
the cable operator(s);
(b) Compare the current rates or the proposed rate increase
submitted by the cable operator(s) with the maximum
permitted rates or with such other applicable standards as
have been adopted and/or approved by the FCC;
(c) Consider any public input on the rate application which may
have been provided; and
(d) Approve, disapprove or seek additional time to consider the
rate application.
(7) If the franchising authority shall fail to either approve, disapprove
or seek additional time to consider the rate application within said
30 days, the rate application shall be deemed approved on the 30th
day after submission.
B. Request for additional time.
(1) Rate application. If the franchising authority is unable to determine
from the rate application, including any supporting documentation
submitted by the cable operator(s), whether the current rates for
the basic service tier and/or for the equipment and installation
necessary to receive the basic service tier and/or the proposed rate
increase are within the maximum permitted rates, the franchising
authority may, in cases not involving cost-of-service showings, take
an additional 90 days to consider the rate application.
§ 97-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-4
1:251
(a) The franchising authority shall issue an order and serve the
same upon the cable operator(s), indicating that additional
time is required to consider the rate application. The order
shall be issued prior to the expiration of the 30 days during
which the franchising authority may consider the rate
application. Within seven days of issuance of such order, the
franchising authority shall publish notice in a newspaper of
general circulation within the jurisdiction of the franchising
authority, which notice shall contain a summary of the order,
including the additional time requested and the reason for
requesting such additional time.
(b) The cable operator may submit such additional information as
it believes will cure any deficiencies in the rate application
during the additional time.
(c) The franchising authority may require the cable operator(s) to
furnish additional specified information, including proprietary
information, when the current rate or proposed rate increase is
in excess of the maximum permitted rate. When the current
rate is equal to or below the maximum permitted rate, the
franchising authority may only require furnishing of
documentation that the rate is within the maximum permitted
rate. Any proprietary information furnished to the franchising
authority shall be retained as confidential in conformity with
regulations adopted by the FCC in this regard, a copy of which
regulations are on file with and available for review upon
request to the franchising authority.
(d) If no decision is issued by the franchising authority at the
expiration of the additional time, the current rates or proposed
rate increase shall become effective, subject to any later
refund order adopted by the franchising authority.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the franchising authority, in
order to later order a refund, must, within the text of the order,
direct the cable operator(s) to keep an accurate account of all
amounts received by reason of the rate in issue and on whose
behalf such amounts were paid.
(2) Cost-of-service rate application. If the cable operator(s) has
submitted a cost-of-service rate application and the franchising
authority is unable to determine whether the cable rates for the
basic service tier and/or for the equipment and installation
necessary to receive the basic service tier and/or the proposed rate
increase are within the maximum permitted rates, the franchising
authority may take an additional 150 days to consider the cost-ofservice
rate application.
(a) The franchising authority shall issue an order and serve the
same upon the cable operator(s) indicating that additional time
is required to consider the rate application because it is a cost-
§ 97-4 SHALER CODE § 97-4
1:252
of-service rate application. The order shall be issued prior to
the expiration of the 30 days during which the franchising
authority may consider the rate application. Within seven days
of issuance of such order, the franchising authority shall
publish notice in a newspaper of general circulation within
the jurisdiction of the franchising authority, which notice shall
contain a summary of the order, including the additional time
requested and the reason for requesting such additional time.
(b) The franchising authority may require the cable operator(s) to
furnish additional specified information, including proprietary
information, when the current rate or proposed rate increase is
in excess of the maximum permitted rate. When the current
rate is equal to or below the maximum permitted rate, the
franchising authority may only require furnishing of
documentation that the rate is within the maximum permitted
rate. Any proprietary information furnished to the franchising
authority shall be retained as confidential in conformity with
regulations adopted by the FCC in this regard, a copy of which
regulations are on file with and available for review upon
request to the franchising authority.
(c) If no decision is issued by the franchising authority at the
expiration of the additional time, the current rates or proposed
rate increase shall become effective, subject to any later
refund order adopted by the franchising authority.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the franchising authority, in
order to later order a refund, must, within the text of the order,
direct the cable operator(s) to keep an accurate account of all
amounts received by reason of the rate in issue and on whose
behalf such amounts were paid.
C. Decision of the franchising authority.
(1) The franchising authority shall issue a written opinion when:
(a) The rate application is not approved, in whole or in part, by the
franchising authority.
(b) The rate application is approved by the franchising authority
over the objection(s) of any interested party.
(2) The franchising authority may, but is not required to, issue a
written opinion when the rate application is approved and there
have been no objections filed.
(3) Within seven days of issuance of an opinion, the franchising
authority shall provide notice in a newspaper of general circulation
within the jurisdiction of the franchising authority, which notice
shall contain, at a minimum, that:
§ 97-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-4
1:253
(a) The franchising authority has reached a decision on the rate
application and announcing that decision;
(b) The manner in which interested parties may review and/or
obtain copies of the opinion;
(c) The right of interested parties to take an appeal from the
opinion of the franchising authority; and
(d) The deadline for taking any such appeal.
(4) Notice of the opinion of the franchising authority shall be provided
to the cable operator(s) by mail within seven days of issuance.
D. Disapproval of the rate application.
(1) Rate reduction.
(a) Current rates. If the franchising authority shall issue an
opinion disapproving the current rates of the cable operator(s)
for the basic service tier or for rates for the equipment and
installation necessary to receive the basic service tier, the
franchising authority may order a reduction in the current
rates for the basic service tier and/or for the equipment and
installation necessary to receive the basic service tier. The
prospective rate adjustment may be set at:
[1] A level consistent with the FCC-adopted maximum
permitted rates;
[2] Another rate, based on review of a cost-of-service rate
application; or
[3] Another rate consistent with FCC rules.
(b) Proposed rates. If the franchising authority shall issue an
opinion disapproving of any proposed rate increase, the
franchising authority may:
[1] Prescribe a reasonable rate to be charged by the cable
operator(s) instead of the proposed rate. The prescribed
rate may not be lower than the maximum permitted rate
unless a cost-of-service rate application has been
submitted by the cable operator(s) and the franchising
authority determines that the cost-of-service analysis
justifies a lower rate; or
[2] Advise the cable operator(s) of a rate level to which it
would not object if a modified rate application were
resubmitted.
(2) Refunds. The franchising authority may order a refund if:
§ 97-4 SHALER CODE § 97-4
1:254
§ 97-5. Customer service standards.
(a) The cable operator failed to comply with a rate decision by the
franchising authority. The refund period may be retroactive to
the effective date of the rate order issued by the franchising
authority.
(b) The franchising authority determines in its initial review of the
current rates that they exceed the maximum permitted rates
and are unsupported by a cost-of-service rate application. In
such instance, the refund period may be retroactive to
September 1, 1993, or one year prior to the date on which the
cable operator(s) implement(s) the prospective rate
adjustment, whichever is shorter.
(c) The franchising authority has issued an order permitting it to
take an additional 90 days or 150 days to consider a rate
application and has directed the cable operator(s) to keep an
accurate account of all amounts received by reason of the rate
in issue and on whose behalf such amounts were paid but failed
to issue an opinion during the time period, causing the rates to
become provisionally effective, and the franchising authority
later finds all or a portion of the rates to be unreasonable. In
such instance, the refund period may be retroactive to the date
of the order and ending on the date on which the cable
operator(s) implements the prospective rate reduction or one
year, whichever is shorter.
(3) Before any refund order shall become effective, the franchising
authority must send notice to the cable operator(s), and provide
said cable operator(s) a maximum of 30 days to submit additional
information to the franchising authority as to why the refund
should not be ordered. At the end of said period, the franchising
authority shall either confirm, amend or rescind said refund order.
(4) Refunds shall include interest computed at applicable rates
published by the Internal Revenue Service for tax refunds and
additional tax payments.
(5) If any proposed rate increase has gone into effect due to inaction of
the franchising authority or the failure of the franchising authority
to issue an order stating a need for additional time, the franchising
authority has no right to order a refund.
(6) Any violation of any order issued hereunder shall be considered a
violation of this article.
A. Within 90 days of receipt by the cable operator(s) of written notice from
the franchising authority of the franchising authority's intention to
monitor and enforce the customer service standards adopted by the
FCC, a copy of which are attached hereto as Exhibit A77 and
§ 97-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-5
1:255
§ 97-6. Enforcement.
§ 97-7. Ratemaking appeals.
Appeals of all ratemaking decisions by the franchising authority may be
taken to the FCC by the cable operator(s), subscribers or other interested
parties.
incorporated herein by reference, the cable operator(s) shall comply
with said standards.
B. At the next billing cycle after receipt of said notice, as to its existing
subscribers, and at the time of installation for new subscribers, the
cable operator(s) shall provide its subscribers with notice of its
customer service standards and shall provide said subscribers with the
name of the franchising authority or contact person for such
franchising authority that the subscriber should contact to report any
violation or alleged violation of said customer service standards.
C. The franchising authority, upon receipt of a complaint of an alleged
violation of the customer service standards by the cable operator(s) or
upon discovery of a violation of its own accord shall provide notice of
the same to the cable operator(s), who may respond thereto within 10
days of said notice.
D. Any failure of the cable operator(s) to cure a violation of the customer
service standards within such time as shall be set by the franchising
authority or to timely respond to a notice from the franchising authority
regarding a violation shall be a violation of this article.
A. Cumulative remedies. Where this article provides alternative penalties
or remedies, they shall be cumulative, and the imposition of one penalty
or remedy shall not prevent the franchising authority from invoking any
other penalty or remedy provided herein.
B. In addition to all other rights and remedies provided herein, the
franchising authority shall have all rights and remedies afforded under
the franchise agreement.
C. Unless otherwise provided, any person convicted of violating any
provision of this article, including any order issued or any rule or
regulation promulgated hereunder, shall, upon conviction, be fined not
more than $300 and costs for each offense and, in default of payment
thereof, may be imprisoned for not more than 90 days. Each day of a
continuing violation shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
A. Appeals must be filed within 30 days of the date of public release of the
franchising authority's opinion.
77.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Township offices.
§ 97-5 SHALER CODE § 97-7
1:256
§ 97-8. Other matters.
§ 97-9. Authority; severability.
This article is adopted pursuant to Pennsylvania law and the authority given
to the franchising authority under the Cable Act of 1992 and the regulations
adopted by the FCC thereunder. If any portion of this article shall become
invalid or unenforceable as a result of any subsequent federal legislation
or FCC regulation, such invalidity and/or unenforceability shall not affect
the validity and enforceability of the remainder of this article, and the same
shall be interpreted as if the invalid or unenforceable provision were not a
part hereof.
B. Oppositions to an appeal must be filed within 15 days after the filing of
the appeal and must be served on the party appealing.
C. Replies to oppositions shall be filed within seven days of the filing of an
opposition and served on all parties.
A. Cable programming service rates.
(1) The franchising authority is hereby authorized to file complaints
with the FCC on behalf of itself and/or any subscriber(s) who files a
complaint with the franchising authority for those cable
programming service rates solely regulated by the FCC.
(2) The decision to file a complaint with the FCC by the franchising
authority shall be in the sole discretion of the franchising authority.
(3) Any such complaint filed by the franchising authority shall be in
conformity with the rules of the FCC.
(4) The franchising authority, if it chooses not to file a complaint, may
but is not required to assist a subscriber in filing a complaint.
(5) No formal review or adjudication by the franchising authority of
any such complaint is permitted.
B. Information to be included in billing.
(1) A cable operator(s) shall provide the following information to
subscribers on monthly bills:
(a) The name and mailing address of the franchising authority;
and
(b) The FCC community unit identifier for the cable system.
(2) A cable operator(s) shall provide notice to the franchising authority
at least 30 days in advance of any change in rates for cable
programming service or associated equipment.
§ 97-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-9
1:257

ARTICLE II
Verizon Franchise Agreement
[Adopted 10-9-2007 by Ord. No. 1857]
§ 97-10. Grant of franchise; execution of franchise agreement.
The Township hereby grants Verizon a nonexclusive cable franchise subject
to and in accordance with the terms and conditions of the cable franchise
agreement between the Township and Verizon (the "Verizon Franchise
Agreement"). A copy of the Verizon Franchise Agreement is attached hereto
and made a part hereof as Exhibit A.78
§ 97-11. Other franchises unaffected.
Nothing in this article, including the Verizon Franchise Agreement, shall
alter the terms of any other franchise, franchise agreement or franchise
license previously granted by the Township, each of which shall remain in
effect according to its particular terms and conditions.
§ 97-12. Authorization to execute franchise agreement.
The proper officers of the Township are hereby authorized to execute the
Verizon Franchise Agreement, which is attached hereto as Exhibit A.
78.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Township offices.
§ 97-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-12
1:259
Chapter 100
CIRCUSES AND CARNIVALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusements and amusement devices — See
Ch. 78.
Dance and dance halls — See Ch. 106.
Noise — See Ch. 158.
Racing and endurance feats — See Ch. 174.
Zoning — See Ch. 225.
§ 100-1. Permit required; prohibited acts. [Amended 5-25-1937 by
Ord. No. 328]
No person or persons, firm or corporation, except as hereinafter provided,
shall conduct, exhibit or produce any show, circus, panorama, concert or
picnic, or run or operate any riding gallery (commonly called "merry-goround"),
roller coaster, chute-the-chute, miniature golf course or driving
range, shooting gallery, nickelodeon, moving-picture show, dancing
platform or pavilion, or any similar or like concern, device or entertainment
for which an admission charge is made or for which money or any valuable
thing is demanded or received, within the Township of Shaler, without
a license or permit for that purpose first had and obtained from the
Committee on Public Safety of said Township and subject to the restrictions
and regulations of this chapter, which license or permit shall express for
what it is granted and the time it is to continue.
§ 100-2. License fees. [Amended 5-25-1937 by Ord. No. 328;
6-14-1938 by Ord. No. 336; 4-11-1939 by Ord. No. 342; 5-10-1947 by
Ord. No. 461]
No license for any such riding gallery (commonly called "merry-go-round"),
roller coaster, chute-the-chute, shooting gallery, dancing platform,
poolroom or pavilion or any similar or like concern, device or entertainment
within said Township shall be granted without the payment of a license
fee of $5 per day for each and every day that such merry-go-round, roller
coaster, chute-the-chute, shooting gallery, dancing platform, poolroom or
pavilion or any similar or like concern, device or entertainment shall be
operated. No permit or license to operate a miniature golf course, driving
range, moving-picture show or nickelodeon shall be granted without
payment of a license fee of $50 per year. No permit or license for picnics
shall be granted without the payment of a license fee of $2.50 per day for
each and every day such picnic shall be conducted, except Sundays and
holidays, when said license fee shall be $5 per day. No license for any boxing
bout, boxing exhibition or prizefight or wrestling match shall be granted
without the payment of a license fee of $50 for each and every boxing bout,
boxing exhibition, prizefight or wrestling match; the license to pay for the
services of 10 police officers at the rate of $4 per officer for each boxing or
§ 97-12 SHALER CODE § 100-2
1:260
wrestling show held; provided, however, that where any entertainment or
amusement of any kind is held or given by any civic, religious or patriotic
organization of the Township of Shaler for the sole benefit of such civic,
religious or patriotic organization, the permit for same shall be granted
without the payment of any license fees whatsoever.
§ 100-3. Application for license.
Before any license or permit will be granted for any merry-go-round, roller
coaster, chute-the-chute, miniature golf course or driving range, shooting
gallery, nickelodeon, dancing platform, poolroom or pavilion or any similar
or like concern device or entertainment of any and all kinds whatsoever,
an application for such license or permit must be made to the Committee
on Public Safety at least three days before the time for holding such
entertainment, etc. The application shall state the names and addresses
of the person or persons, firm or corporation desiring to operate said
amusement or said devices and shall also state specifically the nature of the
amusement and the time and place when the same is to be operated or held.
The application shall be accompanied by the necessary license fees as fixed
by the provisions of this chapter.
§ 100-4. Granting of license.
The Committee on Public Safety, if satisfied that the purpose of said
entertainment, show, etc., is proper and that the same will not be offensive
to the peace and good order of the community in which it is to be held,
shall grant a permit or license for such purpose according to the terms and
provisions of this chapter.
§ 100-5. Deposit of funds; return of fees for refusal.
All fees for licenses or permits which shall be granted by the Committee
on Public Safety shall be paid into the Township treasury. If a license or
permit is refused, all money accompanying the application for such license
or permit shall be returned forthwith to the applicant.
§ 100-6. Prohibited acts.
No person or persons, firm or corporation shall act, exhibit or cause to be
acted, exhibited, shown or performed or be in any way concerned in the
acting, exhibiting, showing or performing of any indecent or blasphemous
play, farce, opera, public exhibition, show or entertainment of any kind
whatsoever within the bounds of said Township.
§ 100-7. Lotteries and other games of chance.
No person or persons, firm or corporation shall sell, give or distribute
by lottery or by any scheme of chance any personal or real property to
or among any person or persons attending or proposing to attend any
performance or amusement place mentioned in this chapter, nor shall any
§ 100-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-7
1:261
game of chance of any kind whatsoever or lottery of any kind be run or
permitted to be run within the bounds of said Township.
§ 100-8. Closing by police.
Should any public merry-go-round, roller coaster, chute-the-chute,
miniature golf course or driving range, shooting gallery, nickelodeon,
moving-picture show, dancing platform or pavilion or any similar or like
concern, device or entertainment become offensive to the community in
which it is located by reason of loud, boisterous, profane language and
actions on the part of those attending said place of amusement, the same
may forthwith be closed by the police of said Township upon orders received
from the Committee on Public Safety.
§ 100-9. Exceptions; additional fees.
The provisions of this chapter requiring the payment of a license fee of
$5 per day shall not apply to such hotels, restaurants, tearooms and other
places which are open for business during the entire year and which permit
their patrons to use the hotel, restaurant or tearoom premises for the
purpose of dancing before, at or after meal time. All such hotels, restaurants
and tearooms shall make application for an annual license as provided
in § 100-3 of this chapter, and if the Committee on Public Safety shall
be satisfied that such hotel, restaurant or tearoom is properly conducted
and that the use of such hotel, restaurant or tearoom premises for the
purpose of dancing will not be offensive to the peace and good order of the
community in which such hotel, restaurant or tearoom is located, an annual
license shall be granted to such hotel, restaurant or tearoom, permitting
dancing upon said premises, upon the payment of an annual license fee of
$50 where the music for dancing is obtained from a player piano or other
mechanical device and an annual license fee of $100 where the music for
dancing is obtained from a piano, organ or orchestra of any number of
pieces. Said license fees shall be paid to the Treasurer of the Township.
The annual license fee for miniature golf courses or driving ranges and for
skating ponds or rinks shall be $50 per year.
§ 100-10. Revocation.
Said annual license granted to such hotel, restaurant, tearoom, miniature
golf course, driving range or skating rink as described in § 100-9 of this
chapter may be revoked at any time by the Committee on Public Safety for
any of the causes set forth in § 100-8 of this chapter. All other provisions
of this chapter shall apply to such hotels, restaurants, tearooms, miniature
golf course, driving ranges and skating rinks.
§ 100-11. Private clubs and institutions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not extend to any private club or
institution which holds dances or other forms of amusement solely for its
own members and their guests.79
§ 100-7 SHALER CODE § 100-12
1:262
§ 100-12. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-15-1988 by Ord.
No. 1631]
Any person or persons, firm or corporation violating any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, pay a fine in a sum not exceeding
$600, the same to be recovered according to law, and in default of the
payment of any such fine, to undergo an imprisonment not exceeding 90
days in the Allegheny County Jail.
Chapter 106
DANCES AND DANCE HALLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peace and good order — See Ch. 167.
§ 106-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PRIVATE DANCE — Any dance that is incidental to or which may be
permitted on the premises usually and commonly devoted to some other
type of lawful business, trade, occupation or other lawful endeavor or to
which the general public is excluded or dances for which no charge is made
or for which tickets are not sold or in which no solicitation of the public is
made.
§ 106-2. Closing hours.
From and after the effective date of the chapter, the closing hour of all
private dances held in hotels, restaurants, roadhouses, private clubs or the
lodge rooms of any fraternal organization or any other such type of similar
institution in the Township of Shaler shall be 2:00 a.m. from Monday to
Friday of each week, and the closing hour for any such type of dance held
in such type of places as enumerated on Saturdays shall be 2:00 a.m. the
following day or Sunday.
§ 106-3. Permit required; term.
No such private dance may be conducted in said Township until a permit for
conducting or holding such dance or dances shall have been first obtained
and issued by said Township for conducting the same. Said permits may be
issued for each such dance or for longer periods not exceeding one month
and may be revoked at any time by said Township.
79.Editor's Note: See Ch. 106, Dances and Dance Halls.
§ 100-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 106-4
1:263
§ 106-4. Permit fee. [Added 5-14-1996 by Ord. No. 1739]
The fee for such a permit shall be $100.
§ 106-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-15-1988 by Ord. No.
1631]
Any person, firm, corporation or group of individuals found in violation of
this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof before any issuing authority,
be subject to a fine of up to $600 and may be sentenced to a period of
incarceration not exceeding 90 days in the Allegheny County Jail. Each
incident in violation of this chapter shall be considered a separate offense
and may be punishable as such.
§ 106-6. Exceptions.
The Board of Commissioners of said Township may, in its discretion and
upon a special permit or certificate issued by its authority, make exceptions
to the above regulations concerning dances held by and for the benefit of
any charitable institution or organization or society which is classified as
being of a nonprofit, charitable or eleemosynary character.
Chapter 115
FEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Taxation — See Ch. 201.
§ 106-4 SHALER CODE § 106-6
1:264
ARTICLE I
Municipal Claim Attorneys' Fees and Servicing Charges
[Adopted 9-14-2010 by Ord. No. 188580]
§ 115-1. Short title.
This article shall be known as the "Tax, Tax Claim, Tax Lien, Municipal Claim
and Municipal Lien Attorney Fees and Servicing Charges, Expenses and
Fees Ordinance."
§ 115-2. Expenses approved.
§ 115-3. Attorneys' fees approved.
A. Title search. In any enforcement proceeding, the actual cost of a title
search, in an amount not to exceed $250, shall constitute a reasonable
expense for each title search necessary for the initiation of each
proceeding and compliance with Pa. R.C.P. § 3129. The sum, not to
exceed $50, shall constitute a reasonable expense for each bring-down
or update of the title search in connection with entry of judgment,
issuance of execution, listing for sale, or other action.
B. Actual out-of-pocket expenses in connection with any enforcement
action, such as for postage, non-Sheriff's service of process,
investigation of the whereabouts of interested parties and other
necessary expenses, shall constitute reimbursable expenses as part of
each claim recovered.
A. Flat fee matters. The following schedule of attorneys' fees is hereby
adopted and approved as reasonable attorneys' fees pursuant to Act 1
and Act 2081 for all matters described, which fees shall be awarded to
the municipality, its agents, counsel or assigns in each action initiated
pursuant to the Act for the collection of unpaid claims. The property
owner's obligation to pay the full amount of the flat fee for each phase
of each action shall accrue upon the initiation of any aspect of each
phase. The full amount of each flat fee for each prior phase of the
proceeding shall carry over and be due on a cumulative basis, together
with the flat fee, for each subsequent phase.
(1) Filing of municipal claim. The sum of $150 shall constitute
reasonable attorneys' fees for the preparation and filing of a
municipal claim as defined under the Act.
(2) Preparation and service of writ of scire facias or complaint in
assumpsit as provided in the Act. The sum of $450 shall constitute
reasonable attorneys' fees for the initiation of each proceeding and
shall include preparation and filing of the praecipe for writ of scire
80.Editor's Note: This article superseded former Ch. 115, Art. I, Municipal Claim Attorney
Fees and Servicing Charges, adopted 2-10-2004 by Ord. No. 1821.
81.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 7106.
§ 115-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 115-3
1:265
facias or complaint in civil action, Sheriff's direction for service,
notice pursuant to Pa. R.C.P. § 237.1 and the preparation and filing
of the praecipe to settle and discontinue the proceeding. The above
does not include:
(a) Federal tax liens, judgments and mortgages. Where there are
federal tax liens, federal judgments, federal mortgages or
other record federal interests, the sum of $200 shall constitute
reasonable attorneys' fees for all matters necessary to properly
notify and serve the United States with all required additional
notice and the presentation of related motions to court.
(b) Alternative service of legal pleadings. In the event that a
special order of court is necessary to serve original process or
any other pleading, notice, court order or other document, the
following amounts shall constitute reasonable attorneys' fees
as follows:
[1] Investigation of whereabouts of defendant(s) and
preparation of affidavit of diligent search: $100.
[2] Preparation and presentation of motion for alternative
service, and delivery of the order of court, along with
appropriate directions to the Sheriff for service: $200.
(3) Entry of judgment. The sum of $225 shall constitute reasonable
attorneys' fees in connection with entry of judgment, which shall
include preparation and filing of the praecipe to enter judgment,
notices of judgment, affidavit of nonmilitary status, and the
praecipe to satisfy judgment.
(4) Writ of execution; Sheriff's sale of property or execution upon
assumpsit judgment. The sum of $700 shall constitute reasonable
attorneys' fees for preparation of all documents necessary for each
execution upon any judgment pursuant to the Act. This sum shall
include the preparation and filing of the praecipe for writ of
execution, all Sheriff's documents, preparation and service of
notices of Sheriff's sale, staying the writ of execution, and
attendance at one Sheriff's sale.
(a) Postponements. The sum of $100 shall constitute reasonable
attorneys' fees for each continuance of Sheriff's sale at the
request of the defendant.
(5) Sale pursuant to § 31 of the Act, 53 P.S. § 7281. The sum of $700
shall constitute reasonable attorneys' fees for the sale of property
pursuant to § 31 of the Act, 53 P.S. § 7281, including preparation
and service of necessary documents, court appearances,
attendance at sale and preparation of proposed schedule of
distribution of the proceeds realized from such sale.
§ 115-3 SHALER CODE § 115-3
1:266
§ 115-4. Procedure.
(6) Sale pursuant to § 31.1 of the Act, 53 P.S. § 7282. The sum of $500
shall constitute reasonable attorneys' fees for a sale of property
pursuant to § 31.1 of the Act, 53 P.S. § 7282, including the
preparation of necessary documents, service, court appearances,
and the preparation of proposed Sheriff's schedule of distribution.
(7) Installment payment agreement. The sum of $150 shall constitute
reasonable attorneys' fees for the preparation of each written
installment payment agreement.
(8) Motions. The sum of $200 shall constitute reasonable attorneys'
fees for the preparation, filing and presentation of motions, other
than for alternative service, which shall include, but are not limited
to, motions to reassess damages, motions to amend caption, and
motions to continue the Sheriff's sale.
B. Hourly rate matters. The following schedule of attorneys' fees is hereby
adopted and approved as reasonable attorneys' fees pursuant to Act 1
and Act 20,82 which fees shall be awarded to the municipality, its
agents, counsel or assigns as compensation in all contested matters and
in all other matters not specifically referenced in § 151-3A above,
undertaken in connection with the collection of claims: senior attorneys
(practicing law for 10 years or more): $185 per hour; junior attorneys
(practicing law for less than 10 years): $160 per hour; paralegals: $100
per hour; law clerks: $65 per hour, each as recorded and charged in
units of 1/10 of an hour for all time devoted to enforcement and
collection of the municipality's claims. Counsel, whether duly employed
or duly appointed by the municipality, its agents or assigns, shall not
deviate from this fee schedule absent a subsequent ordinance
amending the same. Hourly rate matters include, but are not limited to,
any matters where any defense, objection, motion, petition or
appearance is entered in any phase of any proceeding by or on behalf of
any defendant or other interested party.
A. Required notice. The notice required by the Act, as amended, 53 P.S.
§ 7106, shall be provided in accordance therewith and shall be
incorporated into an appropriate delinquency notice or notices sent by
the municipality, its agent, counsel or assigns.
B. Fees to be accrued and claims to be filed. Fees shall accrue for all
efforts in collection after the 30th day after the notice, or after the 10th
day of any required second notice under the Act, as amended, 53 P.S.
§ 7106, on all accounts referred to counsel for enforcement. Fees
accumulated as a result of enforced collection shall be certified by duly
appointed counsel for the municipality authorized to pursue collection
of claims pursuant to the Act, or by counsel for the municipality's
agents or assigns and, if not collected in due course with the debt as by
82.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 7106.
§ 115-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 115-4
1:267
§ 115-5. Servicing charges, expenses and fees approved.
voluntary payment, shall be included in any claims filed on behalf of the
municipality or by its agents or assigns in the course of enforcement
including any claims originally filed with the Prothonotary, any claims
filed with the Sheriff or in any other claims filed or statements provided
where attorneys' fees are due.
C. The amount of fees determined as set forth above shall be added to and
become part of the claim or claims in each proceeding as provided by
the Act and as provided herein.
A. The following schedule of charges, expenses and fees (hereinafter
collectively referred to as "servicing fees") is hereby approved and
adopted by the municipality pursuant to § 1, § 2 and § 3 of the Act of
May 16, 1923, as amended, 53 P.S. §§ 7101, 7103 and 7106, which
amounts are the direct result of each person's or property's failure to
pay claims promptly. The servicing fees established, assessed and
collected hereunder shall be in addition to the record costs, the § 115-3
attorneys' fees and § 115-2, expenses associated with legal proceedings
initiated by or on behalf of the municipality to collect its claims.
B. Servicing of a claim or claims may result in voluntary payment without
the initiation of enforcement proceedings. It is the intent of this § 115-5
to pass the cost of servicing on to the delinquent person or property as
part of each claim. The recovery of servicing fees established herein
shall not be contingent upon the initiation of enforcement proceedings.
However, such servicing fees are due even where enforcement
proceedings are initiated. The purpose of this section is to pass the cost
and expense associated with delinquent collection on to the delinquent
person or property and to make the municipality whole on all claims
collected.
C. Schedule: The following schedule of fees shall constitute reasonable
and appropriate servicing fees for each indicated service. The servicing
fees shall be added to and become part of the municipality's claims,
together with the face, penalties, interest, costs and attorneys' fees,
and shall be payable in full before the discharge or satisfaction of any
claim. The schedule of fees is separate and distinct from any amounts
imposed by the Sheriff, Prothonotary, court or any other public office in
connection with the collection of the municipality's claims.
(1) Assignments: $5 per claim.
(2) Filing tax liens: $5.50 per item.
(3) Satisfactions: $10 per claim.
(4) Tax claim revivals (i.e., S&A): $15 per claim.
(5) Act 1/Act 2083 compliance: $35 per case.
§ 115-4 SHALER CODE § 115-5
1:268
§ 115-6. Effective date; retroactivity.
(6) Filing municipal claim and filing municipal claim revivals: $20 per
claim.
(7) Municipal claim/short title examination: $40 per claim.
(8) Sheriff's sale claim certificates: $65 per case.
(9) Claim certifications: $10 per year.
(10) Postage and court costs: actual cost.
(11) Servicing, including staffing, computers, office space, telephones,
equipment and materials: For all delinquent and liened taxes, tax
liens, municipal claims (filed or unfiled) and municipal liens, 5% of
gross collections $100.01 and over; 10% of gross collections $100
and under.
A. This article shall take effect on the date of enactment set forth below
and, with respect to attorneys' fees pursuant to §§ 115-3 and 115-4,
shall apply to all taxes, tax claims, tax liens, municipal claims, municipal
liens, writs of scire facias, judgments or executions filed on or after
December 19, 1990, or as otherwise provided by law.
B. In no event shall the municipality's right to charge and collect
reasonable attorneys' fees pursuant to § 115-3 of this article be
impaired by the fact that any claim may also include an attorney
commission of 5% for claims filed prior to December 19, 1990. Any
attorneys' fees assessed and collected under this or any prior
ordinances pursuant to Act 184 shall be in addition to any five-percent
commission previously included in any claim or judgment thereon.
C. Attorneys' fees and expenses incurred in pending enforcement
proceedings prior to the effective date of this article, pursuant to a prior
ordinances adopted under Act 1,85 but not collected, shall remain due
and owing in accordance therewith and shall be incorporated in any
future statement, claim, pleading, judgment or execution. Attorneys'
fees and expenses in any pending or new action incurred after the
effective date of this article shall be incurred, charged and collected in
accordance with the schedules and procedures set forth in this article.
D. The charges, expenses and fees set forth in § 115-5 of this article relate
to all unpaid claims in favor of the municipality, its agents and assigns,
and shall be retroactive to the date of each claim.
83.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 7106.
84.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 7106.
85.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 7106.
§ 115-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 115-7
1:269
§ 115-7. Assignment.
The municipality assigns the provisions of this article to any assignee of
its claims unless the assignment limits the assignee's ability to collect
such amounts. The municipality and its duly authorized agents and their
counsel shall retain all rights to charge reasonable attorneys' fees, charges,
expenses and fees in accordance with the provisions of this article in actions
commenced under the Act and for servicing any claims retained by the
municipality.
§ 115-7 SHALER CODE § 115-7
1:270
ARTICLE II
Tax Certification Fee
[Adopted 3-9-2010 by Ord. No. 1881]
§ 115-8. Fee established.
A tax certification fee in the amount of $25 is hereby established for the
Township Tax Collector to provide a certification of taxes paid on Township
real estate involved in a sale.
§ 115-9. Authorization to collect.
The Township Tax Collector is hereby authorized to collect the tax
certification fee in the amount of $25 to provide a certification of taxes paid
on Township real estate involved in a sale, and such tax certification fee
shall be paid when the tax certification is provided.
§ 115-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 115-9
1:271

ARTICLE III
Duplicate Tax Bill Fee
[Adopted 4-10-2012 by Ord. No. 1906]
§ 115-10. Fee established.
A duplicate tax bill fee in the amount of $10 is hereby established for
the Township Tax Collector to provide duplicate tax bills on Township real
estate.
§ 115-11. Authorization to collect.
The Township Tax Collector is hereby authorized to collect the duplicate
tax bill fee in the amount of $10 to provide a duplicate tax bill for Shaler
Township taxes on Township real estate. Such duplicate tax bill fee shall be
paid when the duplicate tax bill is provided.
§ 115-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 115-11
1:273
Chapter 118
FENCES, WALLS AND HEDGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass or weeds — See Ch. 87.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 130.
Grading excavating and fill — See Ch. 140.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 171.
Rights-of-way — See Ch. 176.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 199.
Zoning — See Ch. 225.
§ 118-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FENCE — A barrier of wooden posts, wire, iron or other material erected
for the purpose of enclosing a piece of land or to divide a piece of land into
distinct portions or to separate two contiguous estates or which is used as
a boundary or means of protection or confinement.
HEDGE — A screen or barrier made of living plants; any self-supporting
barrier of living vegetation that encloses, screens or separates areas. A
dense row of bushes, shrubs or small trees planted close together, forming
a fence or boundary.
HEIGHT — In the case of buildings, the vertical distance from the mean
level of the ground surrounding the building to the top of the highest roof
beams of a flat roof or the mean level of the highest gable or slope of a hip
roof. When the building faces on more than one street, the height shall be
measured from the average of the grades at the center of each street front.
Retaining walls shall be measured from the lowest level of grade to the
top of the wall. In case of other structures, the height shall be the vertical
distance from the mean level of the ground surrounding the structure to the
highest point of the structure.
SIGHT-OBSCURING — Opaque or having such qualities as to constitute
a complete visual barrier to persons outside the perimeter of the sightobscuring
object. A fence which partially obscures sight shall not be
considered sight-obscuring if the distance or open space between boards,
slats, rails, stanchions or balusters (which shall not exceed four inches in
width) equals or exceeds the width of said boards, slats, etc., measured at
90° angles.
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary
location on or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the land.
VISIBILITY TRIANGLE or CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE — An imaginary area
created by measuring back from the intersecting point of the two property
lines parallel to the intersecting streets a minimum distance of 20 feet and
§ 115-11 SHALER CODE § 118-1
1:274
drawing an imaginary line across these two points, for the purpose of traffic
safety, and on which all landscape plantings, structural barriers, shrubs,
trees, fences, walls, structures or other objects, temporary or permanent,
shall permit completely unobstructed vision within a clear sight triangular
area between the heights of 2 1/2 feet and nine feet above the crown of the
streets, drives or driveways. The visibility triangle or clear sight triangle
shall provide a clear sight triangle of at least 20 feet as measured along
the center line from the intersecting roads or such greater distance as
determined by the Township Engineer and the Township Code Enforcement
Officer contingent on unusual site topography, proposed site design features
and other unique circumstances pertaining solely to the site and
surrounding properties so as not to constitute a traffic or pedestrian safety
hazard.
WALL — A continuous, vertical, linear, unroofed structure, usually
constructed of wood, stone, concrete or masonry, that encloses or divides an
area for the purpose of delineating a boundary or functioning as a barrier,
including but not limited to enclosure walls and retaining walls. An upright
structure, raised to some height and intended for purposes of providing
protection, security or enclosure.
§ 118-2. Prohibited fences and walls.
§ 118-3. Encroachment on public right-of-way; license agreement
required.
A. It is unlawful for any person to erect, maintain or permit any fence or
wall to exist that is electrically charged in any manner, or that has
barbed, concertina or razor wire in or on it, in any residential zoning
district.
B. It is unlawful for any person to erect, maintain or permit a fence or wall
to exist that has in it or on it barbs, projections, broken glass, any other
hazardous or dangerous materials or anything reasonably capable of
causing harm to persons or animals.
C. It is unlawful for any person to erect, maintain or permit any fence or
wall to exist that obstructs access to a utility box, manhole or other
public apparatus for maintaining utilities, and the owner shall be
required to remove such obstructing fence or wall at his expense.
A. No person shall install, place, construct, erect, maintain or allow the
installation, planting, placing, constructing, erecting or maintaining of
any wall, deck or swimming pool upon, on or protruding over any public
§ 118-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 118-3
1:275
§ 118-4. Fences, walls and hedges not to create traffic hazard.
No person shall install, plant, place, construct, erect, maintain or allow the
installation, planting, placing, constructing, erecting or maintaining of any
fence, wall, hedge, vegetation or other planting or structure on any lot in
such a manner as to create a traffic hazard. Failure of the owner, agent or
occupant to remove such traffic hazard within seven days after receipt of
notice to do so is a violation of this chapter.
§ 118-5. Visibility at intersections.
It shall be unlawful to install, plant, place, erect, maintain or to allow the
installation, planting, placing, erecting or maintaining of any fence, wall,
hedge or other structure or planting in any clear sight triangle or visibility
triangle, which by obstructing the view of any driver constitutes a traffic
hazard, and it is the duty of the owner of any real property to remove
from the property any tree, plant, shrub, fence, wall, hedge or other similar
obstruction, or part thereof, which by obstructing the view of any driver
constitutes the traffic hazard. See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 6112.
§ 118-6. Required removal of fences or walls and trimming of
hedges.
Upon request by the Township, all fences or walls constituting a safety
hazard shall be removed and all trees, shrubs and hedges shall be removed
or trimmed by the owner or occupant of building, lot or premises so that
right-of-way or public property that the Township owns or has an
easement over, under, around or through, except after entering into a
license agreement with the Township, approved by the Township Board
of Commissioners and recorded in the Department of Real Estate of
Allegheny County.
B. Where a wall, deck or swimming pool is to be placed upon, on or over
such a utility easement containing underground utilities, the owner or
occupant shall agree to release and indemnify the Township from any
damages for removal of the wall, deck or swimming pool as a result of
the need to repair or replace said utilities. The owner shall remove and
rebuild the wall, deck or swimming pool at the owner's expense.
C. The owner of a wall, deck or swimming pool shall be responsible for the
design, construction and maintenance of the wall, deck or swimming
pool, and such construction shall not interfere with any utility line or
normal drainage.
D. Permission to build, construct or erect a wall, deck or swimming pool
upon, on or over a utility easement does not remove the obligation of
the owner to remove such wall, deck or swimming pool upon demand of
the Township or a utility company. The owner shall remove and rebuild
the wall, deck or swimming pool at the owner's expense.
§ 118-3 SHALER CODE § 118-6
1:276
the fence, wall, tree, shrub or hedge does not materially restrict the line of
sight of drivers or constitute a traffic hazard.
§ 118-7. Authority to remove and correct.
§ 118-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
subject to a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $600, plus the costs
of proceedings for each offense, the same to be collected in the name of
the Township of Shaler by summary proceeding, and in default of payment
of the fine and costs, such person shall be committed to the Allegheny
County Jail for a period not to exceed 90 days. The continuance of any
violation of this chapter for each period of 24 hours after notice of the same
by the Administrator shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense for
each twenty-four-hour period. Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to
preclude the Township of Shaler to seek other relief or avail itself of any
remedy that may be at law or in equity to prevent continuing violation of the
terms of this chapter or to restrain or abate such violation.
Chapter 121
FIREARMS AND WEAPONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 80. Peace and good order — See Ch. 167.
A. From and after the effective date of this chapter, the Board of
Commissioners of the Township of Shaler may order the removal of
existing or future fences, trees, shrubbery, underbrush, posts or any
other obstruction or structure within the legal right-of-way of any public
street or highway situate within the Township of Shaler deemed by the
Board of Commissioners of the Township of Shaler to be necessary in
order to provide for easy and convenient traveling upon the public
street or highway of the Township of Shaler. Such removal shall be in
accordance with Section 2070 of the First Class Township Code, Act of
June 24, 1931, P.L. 1206, Art. XX, as amended, 53 P.S. § 57070.
B. Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any owner or occupant so notified
to correct the thing, hazard or condition which may have a tendency to
imperil the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the Township
within seven days after receipt of the written notice provided for in
Subsection A above, or three days after the date of such notice in the
event that the same is returned unserved, said Township Code
Enforcement Officer or his designee is hereby authorized and
empowered to order the correction of such condition, using Township
funds or Township personnel to accomplish such correction, and may
charge the costs thereof to the violator. Collection of such costs by the
Township may be made by lien or otherwise as authorized by law.
§ 118-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 118-8
1:277

ARTICLE I
Discharge
[Adopted 6-13-1967 by Ord. No. 1141]
§ 121-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOW — Includes any implement which impels with force any arrow or
dart.86
FIREARM — Includes any rifle, shotgun, revolver, pistol or any implement
which impels with force a metal pellet of any kind.
TARGET, SKEET, TRAP AND ARCHERY RANGES — Includes any shooting
range where firearms or bows are used and the only object fired upon is
inanimate.
§ 121-2. Restrictions. [Amended 5-14-1996 by Ord. No. 1739]
The use or discharge of any firearm or bow in the Township within 2,000
feet of any building is hereby prohibited except by duly authorized law
enforcement officers in the performance of their duties or by persons in
defense of their property.87
§ 121-3. Operation of target, skeet, trap or archery ranges.
It shall be illegal to operate a target, skeet, trap or archery range in the
Township except with a permit obtained as follows:
§ 121-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-15-1988 by Ord. No.
1631]
Any person, firm, corporation or group of individuals found in violation
of this article shall, upon conviction thereof before any issuing authority,
be subject to a fine of up to $1,000 and may be sentenced to a period
of incarceration not exceeding 90 days in the Allegheny County Jail. Each
A. The person or organization proposing to operate said range shall make
written application to the Township for a permit.
B. Upon application, the Township shall inspect the range or site selected
to determine both the safety of the facilities and adequacy of the
supervision provided.
C. Upon completion of the inspection, the Township may issue a permit for
the use of said range or site.
86.Editor's Note: Former Sec. 1(c), which contained a definition of "hunting" and which
immediately followed this definition, was repealed 5-14-1996 by Ord. No. 1739.
87.Editor's Note: Former Sec. 3, which dealt with hunting and which immediately followed
this section, was repealed 5-14-1996 by Ord. No. 1739.
§ 121-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 121-4
1:279
incident in violation of this article shall be considered a separate offense
and may be punishable as such. This penalty clause shall not preclude the
Township from seeking further relief in law or equity in a court of competent
jurisdiction in this commonwealth.
§ 121-4 SHALER CODE § 121-4
1:280
ARTICLE II
Bird Sanctuary
[Adopted 5-8-1973 by Ord. No. 1310]
§ 121-5. Designation.
The entire area embraced within the corporate limits of the Township of
Shaler be and the same is hereby designated as a bird sanctuary.
§ 121-6. Restricted actions.
It shall be unlawful to trap, hunt, shoot, attempt to shoot or molest in any
manner any bird or wild fowl or to rob bird nests or wild fowl nests.
§ 121-7. Violations and penalties.
Violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be punishable by a fine
of not more that $100 or imprisonment not exceeding 30 days.
§ 121-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 121-7
1:281
Chapter 121A
FIRE HYDRANTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Lanes — See Ch. 123
§ 121A-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and designated as the "Fire Hydrant
Obstruction Ordinance of the Township of Shaler."
§ 121A-2. Obstructions to fire hydrants and other fire protection
equipment prohibited.
Posts, fences, vehicles, certain plants, trees, growth, trash, landscaping
materials, rock materials, storage and other materials, structures or objects
shall not be placed or kept near fire hydrants, fire department inlet
connections or fire protection system control valves (collectively referred
to as "fire hydrants" or "fire protection equipment") in a manner that
would prevent fire hydrants or other fire protection equipment from being
immediately discernible or readily accessible. The Fire Department shall
not be deterred nor hindered from gaining immediate and safe access to
any such fire hydrants or other fire protection equipment.
§ 121A-3. Buffer area around fire hydrants and other fire protection
equipment.
A three-foot clear space shall be maintained around the circumference
of fire hydrants and other fire protection equipment except as otherwise
required or approved by the Commissioners upon the recommendation of
the Chief of Police and/or Fire Marshal. No grass, plants or other objects
within this three-foot radius shall exceed six inches in height. No loose rocks
or any other objects which may pose a tripping hazard shall be permitted
within the foregoing radius. In conjunction with the three-foot radius, all
fire hydrants and other fire protection equipment must have an unimpeded
view range of at least two feet to each side along the roadway.
§ 121A-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000, plus costs,
and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment
not to exceed 30 days. Each violation of any provision of this chapter
shall constitute a separate offense. In addition, in any civil enforcement
action brought by the Township to collect unpaid fines or penalties imposed
pursuant to this chapter, the Township shall also be entitled to collect all
costs, expenses, and attorneys fees associated with such action.
§ 121-7 SHALER CODE § 121A-5
1:282
§ 121A-5. Right to enter and remove obstructions; liens.
In addition to any other penalties and remedies provided herein or
otherwise available under law, upon the failure of the owner or person
in charge of or in possession of the property to remove any offending
obstruction in violation of this chapter after receiving a notice of violation,
any duly authorized employee or contractor of the Township, water
authority, water company, or other entity having jurisdiction or control over
the fire hydrant or the premises upon which the fire hydrant is located
may, without further notice to the owner or persons in charge or possession
of such property, enter upon the premises and cause the removal of all
offending obstructions to the fire hydrant or other fire protection
equipment. The costs of any such action to remove the offending obstruction
shall be charged against the owner(s) or other person(s) in charge of said
premises and shall also be charged against the real estate upon which the
fire hydrant and the offending obstructions are located and shall be a lien
upon such real estate.
§ 121A-6. Township reservation of right to enter upon lands to
maintain fire hydrants.
Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted as limiting in any manner the
right of the Township, water authority, water company, or any other entity
having jurisdiction or control over any fire hydrant to entering upon any
right-of-way, easement or other premises upon which any fire hydrant or
other fire protection equipment is located to cause the removal of any and
all obstructions or other objects or structure whose presence is inconsistent
with the right to gain unfettered access to and to maintain such fire hydrant
or other fire protection equipment and/or appurtenant rights-of-way,
easements or other premises upon which such fire protection equipment
is located. Nor shall any person be entitled to the return of, or to any
compensation for, any offending obstructions removed or for any damages
caused to any such obstructions or to the premises by or as a result of the
entry and removal of such obstructions.
§ 121A-7. Severability.
In the event that any section or sections of this chapter, or parts of the same,
shall be declared to be invalid by any court of competent authority, the
remaining provisions of this chapter shall continue in full force and effect
notwithstanding.
§ 121A-8. Repealer.
Any other ordinance or part(s) of any ordinance(s) which conflicts with the
terms and provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed insofar as the
same affects this chapter.
§ 121A-9. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect immediately as provided under law.
§ 121A-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 121A-9
1:283
Chapter 122
FIRE INSURANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 125.
§ 122-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Township of Shaler Fire Escrow
Ordinance."
§ 122-2. Purpose; intent.
This chapter is adopted to manage fire-blighted properties, to discourage
the abandonment of properties, to prevent urban blight and deterioration
and to discourage arson and related crimes in the Township of Shaler.
§ 122-3. Rules of construction.
In the construction of this chapter, the rules and definitions contained in
this section shall be observed and applied, except when the context clearly
indicates otherwise:
§ 122-4. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUILDING INSPECTOR — The person authorized to act as the building
official, or any assistant to such person, who enforces the provisions of the
Township Zoning Ordinance.88
FIRE DAMAGE — Includes loss by explosion or lightning.
INSURANCE COMPANY — Includes any company, association or exchange
authorized by the Insurance Commissioner to transact the business of
insurance in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and empowered to issue
policies of insurance against loss by the perils of fire or explosion.
A. Words used in the singular shall include the plural and the plural the
singular.
B. Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense.
C. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary.
D. The word "may" is permissive.
88.Editor's Note: See Ch. 255, Zoning.
§ 121A-9 SHALER CODE § 122-4
1:284
MUNICIPAL CERTIFICATE — The certificate furnished to a named insured
by the Township under this chapter.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Shaler.
TOWNSHIP MANAGER — The Manager of the Township of Shaler.
TOWNSHIP TREASURER — The elected Treasurer of the Township of
Shaler or other appropriate municipal officer authorized to collect real
property taxes.
§ 122-5. Municipal certificate required.
A. Compliance with procedures. No insurance company, association or
exchange doing business in this commonwealth shall pay a claim of a
named insured for fire damage to a structure located within the
Township of Shaler where the amount recoverable for the fire loss to
the structure under all policies exceeds $7,500 unless the insurance
company, association or exchange is furnished with a certificate
pursuant to Subsection B of this section and unless there is compliance
with the procedures set forth in Subsections C and D of this section.
B. Written request by named insured for certificate.
(1) Issuance of certificate by Treasurer.
(a) The Township Treasurer shall, upon the written request of the
name insured specifying the tax description of the property,
name and address of the insurance company, association or
exchange and the date agreed upon by the insurance company,
association or exchange and the named insured as the date of
the receipt of a proof of loss report of the claim, furnish the
named insured's insurance company, association or exchange
either of the following, which shall then be supplied by the
named insured to the company, association or exchange within
14 working days of the request:
[1] No delinquent taxes or assessments: a certificate or, at the
discretion of the municipality, a verbal notification, which
shall be confirmed in writing by the insured, to the effect
that, as of the date specified in the request, that there are
no delinquent taxes, assessments, penalties or user
charges against the property and that, as of the date of the
Treasurer's certificate or verbal notification, the Township
has not certified any amount as total costs incurred by the
Township for the removal, repair or securing of a building
or other structure on the property; or
[2] Delinquent taxes or assessments: a certificate and bill
showing the amount of delinquent taxes, assessments,
penalties and user charges against the property as of the
date specified in the request that have not been paid as of
the date of the certificate and also showing, as of the date
§ 122-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 122-5
1:285
of the Treasurer's certificate, the amount of the total costs,
if any, certified to the Treasurer that have been incurred
by the Township for the removal, repair or securing of
a building or other structure on the property. For the
purposes of this subsection, the Township shall certify to
the Treasurer the total amount, if any, of such costs. A tax,
assessment, penalty or user charge becomes delinquent
at the time and on the date a lien could otherwise have
been filed against the property by the Township under
applicable law.
(b) Administrative fee must accompany written request. All
written requests by a named insured for a certificate shall be
accompanied with a fee of $25 to cover the direct and indirect
costs incurred by the Township in processing said request. The
Board of Commissioners may, from time to time by resolution,
either increase or decrease said fee.
(2) Receipt of certificate by insurance company.
(a) Payment of claim to named insured. Upon the receipt of a
certificate pursuant to Subsection B(1)(a)[1] of this section, the
insurance company, association or exchange shall pay the
claim of the named insured in accordance with the policy
terms, unless the loss agreed to between the named insured
and the company, association or exchange equals or exceeds
60% of the aggregate limits of liability on all fire policies
covering the building or other structure. In the case of such a
loss, the insurance company, association or exchange, the
insured property owner and the Township shall follow the
procedures set forth in Subsections C and D of this section.
(b) Payment of bill to Township. Upon the receipt of a certificate
and bill pursuant to Subsection B(1)(a)[2] of this section, the
insurance company, association or exchange shall return the
bill to the Treasurer and transfer to the Treasurer an amount
from the insurance proceeds necessary to pay the taxes,
assessments, penalties, charges and costs as shown on the bill.
The Township shall receive the amount and apply or credit it to
payment of the items shown in the bill.
C. Procedure when loss equals or exceeds 60% of aggregate limits of
liability.
(1) Payment to designated officer. When the loss agreed to between the
named insured and the company, association or exchange equals or
exceeds 60% of the aggregate limits of liability on all fire policies
covering the building or other structure, the insurance company,
association or exchange shall transfer from the insurance proceeds
to the Manager of the Township, in the aggregate, $2,000 for each
$15,000 and each fraction of that amount of a claim or, if at the
§ 122-5 SHALER CODE § 122-5
1:286
time of proof of loss agreed to between the named insured and the
insurance company, association or exchange loss report the named
insured has submitted a contractor's signed estimate of the costs
of removing, repairing or securing the building or other structure
in an amount less than the amount calculated under the foregoing
transfer formula, the insurance company, association or exchange
shall transfer from the insurance proceeds the amount specified in
the estimate.
(2) Designation of officer to receive insurance proceeds. The Manager
of Shaler Township shall receive all insurance proceeds and
manage all escrow funds received under this chapter and shall be
authorized to carry out the duties of this section.
(3) Pro rata transfer of proceeds. Transfer of proceeds shall be on a
pro rata basis by all companies, associations or exchanges insuring
the building or other structure.
(4) Policy proceeds remaining. Policy proceeds remaining after the
transfer to the Township shall be on a pro rata basis by all
companies, associations or exchanges insuring the building or
other structure.
(5) Disbursement of excess funds. Policy proceeds remaining after the
transfer to the Township shall be disbursed in accordance with the
policy terms.
(6) Contractor's estimate of repairs or removal. The named insured
may submit a contractor's signed estimate of the costs of removing,
repairing or securing the building or other structure after the
transfer, and the Manager shall return the amount of the fund in
excess of the estimate to the named insured if the Township has not
commenced to remove, repair or secure the building or other
structure.
(7) Application of subsection. This subsection only applies to fire losses
that occur after the adoption of this chapter.
D. Receipt of proceeds by Township.
(1) Establishment of separate escrow funds. The Township Manager
shall establish separate escrow funds to be held by the Township to
carry out the purposes of this chapter.
(2) Receipt of proceeds by the Township. Upon receipt of proceeds by
the Township as authorized by this section, the Manager shall place
the proceeds in a separate fund to be used solely as security
against the total cost of removing, repairing or securing incurred
by the Township.
(3) Transferring of funds. When transferring the funds as required in
Subsection C of this section, an insurance company, association or
§ 122-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 122-5
1:287
exchange shall provide the Township with the name and address
of the named insured, whereupon the Township shall contact the
named insured, certify that the proceeds have been received by the
Township, and notify the named insured that the procedures under
this subsection shall be followed.
(4) Inspection of property. After the named insured repairs, demolishes
or secures the property, the Building Inspector shall inspect the
property prior to the Township releasing any escrow funds. If the
named insured properly repairs, demolishes or secures the
property, the Building Inspector shall notify the Manager of such
completion. If the named insured fails to properly repair, demolish
or secure the property, the Township may choose to do so, and the
funds escrowed shall be applied to the Township costs incurred.
(5) Completion of repairs or removal without cost to the Township. The
fund shall be returned to the named insured when repairs, removal
or securing of the building or other structure have been completed
and the required proof received by the Manager, if the Township
has not incurred any costs for repairs, removal or securing.
(6) Payment of costs to the Township from funds when Township has
incurred costs. If the Township has incurred costs for repairs,
removal or securing of the building or other structure, the costs
shall be paid from the funds, and if excess funds remain, the
Township shall transfer the remaining funds to the named insured.
(7) Insufficient funds to pay Township costs. Nothing in this chapter
shall be construed to limit the ability of the Township to recover any
deficiency.
(8) Other reasonable dispositions permitted. Nothing in this
Subsection D shall be construed to prohibit the Township and the
named insured from entering into an agreement that permits the
transfer of funds to the named insured if some other reasonable
disposition of the damaged property has been negotiated.
E. Discharge of insurance obligation. Proof of payment by the insurance
company, association or exchange of proceeds under a policy in
accordance with Subsection C of this section is conclusive evidence of
the discharge of its obligation to the insured under the policy to the
extent of the payment and of compliance by the company, association or
exchange with Subsection C of this section.
F. No additional obligations created. Nothing in this chapter shall be
construed to make an insurance company, association or exchange
liable for any amount in excess of proceeds payable under its insurance
policy or for any other act performed pursuant to this chapter or to
make the Township or public official an insured under a policy of
insurance or to create an obligation to pay delinquent property taxes or
unpaid removal liens or expenses other than as provided in this chapter.
§ 122-5 SHALER CODE § 122-5
1:288
§ 122-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person, partnership or corporation who violates any of the provisions of
this chapter shall, upon conviction in a summary proceeding, be fined not
less than $300 and, in default of the payment of the fine and costs, shall be
committed to the Allegheny County Jail for a period not to exceed 30 days.
Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to preclude the Township to seek
other relief or avail itself of any remedy that may be at law or in equity to
prevent continuing violations of the terms of this chapter.
§ 122-7. Filing of copies.
The Township Manager shall file an exact copy of this chapter with the
Department of Community Affairs, together with the name, position and
phone number of the municipal officer responsible for compliance with this
chapter.
Chapter 123
FIRE LANES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 22. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 212.
G. Full benefit of payment. An insurance company, association or exchange
making payments of policy proceeds under this chapter for delinquent
taxes or structure removal liens or removal expenses incurred by the
Township shall have a full benefit of such payment, including all rights
of subrogation and of assignment.
H. Liberal construction. This chapter shall be liberally construed to
accomplish its purpose to deter the commission of arson and related
crimes, to discourage the abandonment of property and to prevent
urban blight and deterioration.
§ 122-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 122-7
1:289

ARTICLE I
Designation by Board of Commissioners
[Adopted 1-13-1970 by Ord. No. 1220]
§ 123-1. Power of Board; restricted parking; signs.
The Board of Commissioners of the Township of Shaler may, from time
to time, by resolution, designate certain streets and specified areas of
private property in the Township as fire and police lanes, and no parking
or stopping of motor vehicles shall be permitted thereon. The streets and
areas so designated shall be marked with appropriate signs prohibiting the
parking of motor vehicles thereon.
§ 123-2. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-15-1988 by Ord. No.
1631; 5-14-1996 by Ord. No. 1739]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any regulation or restriction
hereafter adopted by resolution pursuant hereto shall, upon conviction
thereof in any summary proceeding before a Magisterial District Judge in
the Township of Shaler, be sentenced to pay a fine of $10, together with
costs of prosecution.
§ 123-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 123-2
1:291

ARTICLE II
Designation by Fire Official
[Adopted 11-12-1985 by Ord. No. 1581]
§ 123-3. Intent.
It is the intent, purpose and scope of this article to provide for the
designation of fire lanes wherever it appears that parking congestion may
create a hazard by impeding the free movement of firefighting equipment
anywhere within the Township of Shaler on public or private property.
§ 123-4. Definitions. [Amended 2-11-2003 by Ord. No. 1812]
As used in the article, the following words shall have the meanings set forth
below:
FIRE OFFICIALS — The duly appointed Fire Marshal and the Assistant Fire
Marshal of the Township of Shaler for the enforcement and administration
of this article.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Shaler.
§ 123-5. Power of fire official; markings; prohibited actions.
§ 123-6. Enforcement.
The Township Secretary shall prescribe and issue all forms necessary for
the administration of this article. Both the Township police and fire official
may enforce this article.
§ 123-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-15-1988 by Ord. No.
1631; 3-8-1994 by Ord. No. 1703]
A. The fire official shall have the power, subject to the written approval of
the Secretary, Manager and Chief of Police, to designate fire lanes
anywhere within the Township on public or private property where he
deems that parking congestion may create a hazard by impeding the
free movement of firefighting equipment.
B. Such fire lanes shall be marked in such a fashion as to indicate their
location and posted with "no-parking" signs.
C. Parking shall be prohibited within the designated fire lanes. No person,
firm or corporation may place or cause to be placed any sign adjacent to
such fire lane indicating a loading zone, pickup area, parking area or
such other sign indicating parking or stopping is permitted in the fire
lanes.
A. Any vehicle owner who parks or permits his vehicle to be parked within
a designated fire zone will be prosecuted by the Township police or fire
official. A fine of $25 shall be imposed and shall be collected by the
Township by a ticketing procedure whereby the fine may be paid at the
§ 123-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 123-7
1:293
§ 123-8. Qualifications and appointment of fire officials. [Added
2-11-2002 by Ord. No. 1812]
Township Municipal Building. If payment is made within 48 hours, the
fine shall be $10. If the fine is not paid within 10 days, the police or
the fire official shall further prosecute the violator before a Magisterial
District Judge. If such prosecution is necessary, the violator shall pay
a fine of $25, plus costs of prosecution, imposed by the Magisterial
District Judge and, in default of payment, the violator may be sentenced
to imprisonment in the Allegheny County Jail for not more that 30 days.
B. Any person, firm or corporation who places or causes to be placed any
sign adjacent to such fire lane indicating a loading zone will be
prosecuted by the police or fire official. A fine up to $1,000 shall be
imposed for each violation, and each day shall constitute a separate
offense.
A. Wherever the words "fire officials" are used in this article, they shall be
held to mean the Fire Marshal and the Assistant Fire Marshal.
B. The Board of Commissioners shall appoint all fire officials in the
Township of Shaler.
C. Fire officials shall be appointed for an indefinite term of office and shall
serve at the will of the Board of Commissioners until removed and a
successor appointed.
D. One fire official shall have a minimum of five years' experience as a
volunteer fireman in the Township, and one fire official shall have a
minimum of five years' experience as a law enforcement officer in the
Township and shall have successfully completed arson investigation
training.
E. The fire officials shall have the authority and the responsibility for the
enforcement of all fire regulations in the Township.
§ 123-7 SHALER CODE § 123-8
1:294
Chapter 125
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 22.
Building construction codes — See Ch. 90.
Gasoline stations — See Ch. 137.
§ 123-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 123-8
1:295

ARTICLE I
Authority at Fires
[Adopted 7-1-1959 by Ord. No. 796]
§ 125-1. Chief and line officers.
The Chief and line officers of the volunteer fire companies, on assuming
their offices in the fire company, take on the obligation of protecting life and
property within the jurisdiction of their said district of Shaler Township. All
persons are subservient to their orders and must obey for the common good
in times of fire or any time the fire company is called into service for the
protection of life and property from fire.
§ 125-2. Orders to vacate.
The Chief, officer or fireman in command at the scene of a fire or emergency
can order all persons in the endangered building, buildings or exposures to
vacate the building, buildings or exposures when he deems it necessary for
their protection and to be able to properly combat the fire or emergency,
also to take the proper precautions in preventing the spread of fire or
exposed areas. He may also allow the occupant or occupants of endangered
building, buildings or exposures to save valuable possessions that may be
in the endangered building, buildings or exposures, provided that it can be
done with safety to the person or persons getting permission to enter the
building, buildings or exposures. He shall also detail necessary firemen to
accompany said person or persons as a safety measure.
§ 125-3. Obedience required.
All person or persons in the area of a fire where there is danger to life
and property must obey the orders of the Fire Chief, officer or fireman and
police officers in command at the said time of fire or emergency.
§ 125-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-14-1996 by Ord. No.
1739]
Any person who shall violate any provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction before a Magisterial District Judge in summary proceedings, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $10 nor more than $50 and, in
default of the payment thereof, shall undergo imprisonment for not more
than 10 days.
§ 125-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 125-4
1:297

ARTICLE II
Adoption of Standards
[Adopted 10-8-1991 by Ord. No. 1668]
§ 125-5. Adoption of BOCA Code.89
From and after the passage of this article, the 1990 National Fire
Prevention Code of the Building Officials and Code Administrators
International, Inc. (hereinafter referred to as the "Fire Code") is hereby
adopted as the official Fire Code for the Township of Shaler. The provisions
of said Fire Code are adopted as fully and completely as though said Fire
Code were set forth herein at length, except and unless otherwise provided
to the contrary in the statutes of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania; in
which event, the contrary provisions of said statutes shall control. Copies
of said Fire Code may be examined during regular business hours at the
offices of the Township Manager of said Township in the Township of Shaler
Municipal building, 300 Wetzel Road, Glenshaw, Pennsylvania.
§ 125-6. Amendments.
The Fire Code shall be amended by adding thereto the name of the
Township of Shaler, where indicated ("name of jurisdiction").
§ 125-7. Additional standards.
A. From and after the passage of this article, the following portions of the
1990 National Fire Protection Association Code (NFPA), ISBN:
0-87765-140-X, Library of Congress Catalog Card Number 38-27236,
are also hereby adopted as the official Fire Code for the Township of
Shaler:
(1) Volumes 1 through 7 are adopted in their entirety.
(2) Volume 8, only Section 1141 is adopted.
(3) Volume 9, only Sections 101-M and Section 171 are adopted.
B. The provisions of said code are adopted as fully and completely as
though said code were set forth herein at length, except and unless
otherwise provided to the contrary in the statutes of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, in which event, the contrary provisions
of said statutes shall control. Copies of the said code may be examined
during regular business hours at the offices of the Township Manager of
said Township in the Township of Shaler Municipal Building, 300 Wetzel
Road, Glenshaw, Pennsylvania.
89.Editor's Note: See now Ch. 90, Building Construction, Art. III, BOCA National Fire
Prevention Code, and Art. IV, Uniform Construction Code.
§ 125-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 125-8
1:299
§ 125-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person or persons, partnership, corporation or any other entity who
shall violate or fail to comply with any of the provisions of this article or
any lawful order or requirement of the fire official (as defined in the above
code) made in accordance with the provisions hereof shall be subject to
a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $1,000, plus the costs of the
proceedings for each offense, the same to be collected in the name of the
Township of Shaler by summary proceeding or, in default of the payment of
fine and costs, shall be committed to the Allegheny County Jail for a period
not to exceed 90 days. Each day that any person shall continue to violate
or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this article or of such
order or requirement shall be considered a separate offense. In addition, all
other remedies provided in law or equity and available to the Township of
Shaler with regard to a violation or proposed violation of this article shall
be available to the Township of Shaler in addition to the aforesaid penalties
set forth in this section.
§ 125-8 SHALER CODE § 125-8
1:300
Chapter 127
FIREWORKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction codes — See Ch. 90. Zoning — See Ch. 225.
§ 127-1. Purpose.
It is the intent of this chapter to protect the health, safety and welfare
of the general public through limiting the use of fireworks. Fireworks, by
nature, contain explosives which when misused can damage property and
endanger human life. This chapter prohibits the use of display fireworks
by the general public but allows for public displays of display fireworks by
professional competent pyrotechnicians in a safe manner. This chapter also
prohibits all fireworks, whether consumer or display fireworks, without a
permit.
§ 127-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings ascribed in this section unless the context of their usage clearly
indicates another meaning:
CONSUMER FIREWORKS —
FIREWORKS — Any composition or device designed to produce a visible
or an audible effect by combustion, deflagration, or detonation, and which
meets the definition of consumer fireworks in this section.
GROUND AND HANDHELD SPARKLING DEVICES — Any devices designed
to produce a shower of sparks or a cloud of smoke, do not rise into the air or
shoot projectiles into the air, and do not explode or produce a report. They
include: cylindrical fountains, cone fountains, illuminating torch, wheels,
Any combustible or explosive composition or any substance or
combination of substances intended to produce visible and/or audible
effects by combustion and which is suitable for use by the public,
that complies with the construction, performance, composition and
labeling requirements promulgated by the Consumer Products Safety
Commission in 16 CFR (relating to commercial practices) or any
successor regulation, and which complies with the provisions for
consumer fireworks as defined in the American Pyrotechnics
Association (APA) Standard 87-1 (relating to the Standard for
Construction for Approval for Transportation of Fireworks, Novelties
and Theatrical Pyrotechnics), or any successor standard.
A.
The term does not include devices known as ground and handheld
sparkling devices, novelties and toy caps in APA Standard 87-1, the
sale, possession and use of which shall be permitted as set forth herein.
B.
§ 125-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 127-2
1:301
ground spinners, flitter sparklers, toy smoke devices and wire sparklers/
dipped sticks (the larger-type wire sparkler, up to 100 grams of pyrotechnic
composition per item).
NOVELTY — A device containing small amounts of pyrotechnic and/or
explosive composition but does not fall under the category of consumer
fireworks. Such devices produce limited visible or audible effects. Examples
are snakes, tanks, poppers, snappers, toy smoke devices (not more than
five grams of pyrotechnic composition), snakes/glow worms (less than two
grams of composition), and wire sparklers/dipped sticks (up to 100 grams
of composition).
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Shaler.
TOWNSHIP MANAGER — The Manager of the Township of Shaler.
TOY CAPS — Are plastic or paper caps for toy pistols in sheets, strips, rolls
or individual caps containing not more than 16 milligrams of composition
per cap.
§ 127-3. Compliance required.
On and after the first day of August 2008, it shall be unlawful for any person
or corporation to sell, offer for sale or expose for sale or have in his, her or
its possession with intent to sell, use, discharge or cause to be discharged,
ignited, fired or otherwise set in action, within the limits of the Township of
Shaler, any consumer fireworks, except in compliance with the provisions of
this chapter.
§ 127-4. Possession, sale and use of ground and handheld sparkling
devices, novelties and toy caps.
§ 127-5. Restrictions on all fireworks.
The use of fireworks, consumer fireworks or display fireworks shall be
strictly prohibited at any location within 200 feet of any structure, property
line, vehicle or roadway unless prior written permission is received from all
property owners within the two-hundred-foot area and the Township.
§ 127-6. Display fireworks.
A. The sale of ground and handheld sparkling devices, novelties and toy
caps shall be a permitted use in all NS Neighborhood Shopping
Districts, in all GC General Commercial Districts and in all I Industrial
Zoning Districts in the Township.
B. The possession and use of ground and handheld sparkling devices,
novelties and toy caps shall be a permitted in all zoning districts in the
Township.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, persons, firms or corporations,
amusement parks, fair associations or other organizations or groups of
individuals to use and/or hold public displays of display fireworks within
§ 127-2 SHALER CODE § 127-6
1:302
§ 127-7. Permit.
the limits of the Township of Shaler unless a permit therefor is first
granted by Shaler Township, as hereinafter provided.
B. The applicant for a permit to display fireworks within this Township
must comply with and abide by any and all Pennsylvania and federal
statutes and regulations and any and all applicable county or other local
regulations governing the use, storage and display of fireworks,
including but not limited to the International Fire Code, as amended,
before receiving a permit under this chapter. All Pennsylvania, federal,
county and other local laws and regulations are incorporated herein by
reference. All regulations relating to the display of fireworks under the
International Fire Code and/or Uniform Construction Code are also
incorporated herein by reference. In the event of an inconsistency
between the aforementioned Pennsylvania, federal, county and other
local laws and regulations and this chapter, the more stringent
regulation shall apply. The applicant must further receive any and all
requisite Pennsylvania, federal, county and/or other local permits and/
or licenses relating to the proposed fireworks display.
C. Every such fireworks display within the limits of the Township shall be
handled, arranged, managed and directly supervised by a licensed and
certified operator. Every such fireworks use and display within the
Township shall be of such a character and so located, discharged or
fired as not to be hazardous to property or endanger any person or
persons. The Township Fire Marshal or other such officer as may be
designated by the Township shall inspect the site where the fireworks
are to be used and displayed prior to the issuance of a permit in
accordance with the International Fire Code and other applicable
regulations and ensure that the site and proposed fireworks display are
compliant with said regulations. No permit for the use of fireworks shall
be issued until the Township Fire Marshal or other such officer as may
be designated by the Township determines that the requested permit
may be granted after inspecting the location for the requested display.
A. An application for a permit shall be made in writing to the Township at
least 30 days in advance of the date of the proposed use and display and
shall set forth the proposed date, time and location of the use and
display, the character and duration thereof, the name and address of
the competent operator, and the name and address of the owner or
owners of the grounds on which the use and display is to be held,
together with the written consent of such owner or owners thereto, and
a copy of any permit application required by the International Fire
Code. The application for the permit shall also contain copies of any and
all state, federal and/or county permits and/or licenses needed for the
use and display of fireworks. All applicants shall pay the Township the
appropriate reasonable permit fee as set by resolution of the Board of
Commissioners from time to time before the issuance of a permit. The
Township Board of Commissioners may attach conditions and/or
§ 127-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 127-7
1:303
§ 127-8. Stopping fireworks for violations or public safety.
In the event of any violation of this chapter or of the terms, conditions or
limitations noted on a permit for the display of fireworks, or in the event of
any unsafe condition occurring before or during the course of a fireworks
display, or in the event of any unsafe condition occurring as a result of
restrictions on any permit for the use and display of fireworks as it may
in its sole discretion deem necessary.
B. If and after such permit is granted by the Township Board of
Commissioners or an authorized designee, the possession, use and
display of fireworks for the approved display shall be lawful for that
purpose, date and time only and will automatically expire at the
conclusion of the display for which the permit has been issued. No
permit granted hereunder shall be transferable.
C. No permit for the use and display of fireworks shall be issued to an
individual under the age of 18.
D. The Board of Commissioners of the Township of Shaler shall require
liability insurance deemed adequate by the Board from the applicant,
permittee or licensee in an amount deemed appropriate by the Board of
Commissioners. The liability insurance amount shall be no less than
$2,000,000 and shall list Shaler Township, the Board of Commissioners,
individually and collectively, as well as the Township employees, agents
and consultants, as additional insureds. The liability insurance shall be
in a form acceptable to the Township, and no permit for a fireworks
display shall be issued unless an acceptable certificate of insurance
evidencing the required coverage is received by the Township.
E. If by reason of unfavorable weather the fireworks display for which a
permit has been granted does not take place at the time so authorized,
the person to whom such permit was issued may, the following business
day, apply to the Township and set forth under oath the fact that such
use and display was not made, the reason the use and display did not
take place, and a request for a continuance of such permit for a day
designated therein. The continuance date shall be no later than one
week (seven days) after the day fixed originally in said permit. Upon
receiving such application for a continuance, the Township, if it believes
the facts stated therein are true, may extend the provisions of said
permit to the day fixed in said application, no later than one week
(seven days) after the original day designated in the permit, and such
extension of time shall be granted without the payment of any
additional fee and without requiring any insurance other than the
certificate of insurance given for the original permit, provided that the
provisions of the original certificate of insurance extend to and cover all
damages which may be caused by reason of said use and display taking
place at such extended date in the same manner and to the same extent
as if such use and display had taken place at the date originally fixed in
the permit.
§ 127-7 SHALER CODE § 127-8
1:304
any use of consumer, display or other fireworks within the Township, the
Pennsylvania State Police, Shaler Township Police, the Township Fire
Marshal or the appropriate Township designee, or any other authorized
Township representative, may, before or during the unsafe and/or violating
occurrence, order such fireworks use or display to be stopped in the interest
of public safety.
§ 127-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm, corporation or group of individuals found in violation of
this chapter shall, upon conviction before any Magisterial District Judge, be
sentenced to pay a fine of $1,000 per day for each and every offense as well
as costs of prosecution and, in default of payment thereof, to imprisonment
for a term not to exceed 90 days. Each incident in violation of this chapter
shall be considered a separate offense and may be punishable as such.
Chapter 130
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Girty's Run Joint Sewer Authority — See Ch. 5,
Art. I.
Building construction — See Ch. 90.
Fences, walls and hedges — See Ch. 118.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 181.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 195.
Obstruction of waterways — See Ch. 220.
Zoning — See Ch. 225.
§ 127-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 127-9
1:305

Part 1
[Adopted 8-2G-i1rt9y0's5 RBuynOrd. No. 25]
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 130-1. Restrictions upon construction.
§ 130-2. Declaration of nuisance.
All erections or structures hereafter undertaken in violation of the terms
of this article are hereby declared to be public nuisances, and it shall be
the duty of the Township Supervisor to prevent and abate such nuisance
forthwith.
§ 130-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-14-1996 by Ord. No.
1739]
Any person, firm, corporation or group of individuals found in violation
of this article shall, upon conviction thereof before the issuing authority,
be subject to a fine of up to $1,000 and may be sentenced to a period
of incarceration not exceeding 90 days in the Allegheny County Jail. Each
incident in violation of this article shall be considered a separate offense
and may be punishable as such.
A. Henceforth, no bridges, culverts, tunnels or sewers shall be
constructed or reconstructed across or in Girty's Run within the limits
of the Township of Shaler unless the abutments and walls thereof shall
be constructed of stone, cement, concrete or similar composition of
equal stability and durability approved by the Committee on Public
Works in said Township, and all bridges, culverts, tunnels or sewers
erected or reconstructed over or in Girty's Run shall have a height of
not less than eight feet in the clear and be of such width as now
required by Township Ordinance No. 24, entitled "An Ordinance
Establishing the Width of Girty's Run, etc."90
B. Hereafter, all walls and other devices and structures erected along the
course of said Girty's Run shall be of stone, cement, concrete or similar
compound of equal stability and durability.
90.Editor's Note: Said ordinance is on file in the office of the Township Secretary.
§ 130-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-3
1:307

Part 2
[Adopted 2-12-1980FBloyodOprlda.i nN oM. a1n4a8g4e; mAmenetnded In Its Entirety
9-23-2014 By Ord. No. 1927]
ARTICLE II
General Provisions
§ 130-4. Statutory authorization.
The Legislature of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania has, by the passage
of the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act of 1978,91 delegated the
responsibility to local governmental units to adopt floodplain management
regulations to promote public health, safety and the general welfare of its
citizenry. Therefore, the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Shaler
does hereby order as follows.
§ 130-5. Intent.
The intent of this part is to:
§ 130-6. Applicability.
§ 130-7. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This part supersedes any other conflicting provisions which may be in effect
in identified floodplain areas. However, any other ordinance provisions shall
remain in full force and effect to the extent that those provisions are more
A. Promote the general health, welfare and safety of the community.
B. Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in order
to prevent or minimize flood damage in the future.
C. Minimize danger to public health by protecting water supply and
natural drainage.
D. Reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its governmental
units and its residents, by preventing excessive development in areas
subject to flooding.
E. Comply with federal and state floodplain management requirements.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, business or corporation
to undertake, or cause to be undertaken, any construction or
development anywhere within the Township of Shaler unless a permit
has been obtained from the floodplain administrator.
B. A permit shall not be required for minor repairs to existing buildings or
structures.
91.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 130-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-7
1:309
restrictive. If there is any conflict between any of the provisions of this part,
the more restrictive shall apply.
§ 130-8. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
A. The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this part is
considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on
accepted engineering methods of study. Larger floods may occur or
flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such as
ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This part does not
imply that areas outside any identified floodplain areas or that land uses
permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood
damages.
B. This part shall not create liability on the part of the Township of Shaler
or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result
from reliance on this part or any administrative decision lawfully made
thereunder.
§ 130-7 SHALER CODE § 130-8
1:310
ARTICLE III
Administration
§ 130-9. Designation of floodplain administrator.
§ 130-10. Permits required.
A permit shall be required before any construction or development is
undertaken within any area of the Township of Shaler.
§ 130-11. Duties and responsibilities of floodplain administrator.
A. The Building Inspector/Zoning Officer is hereby appointed to
administer and enforce this part and is referred to herein as "the
floodplain administrator." The floodplain administrator may: (1) fulfill
the duties and responsibilities set forth in these regulations; (2)
delegate duties and responsibilities set forth in these regulations to
qualified technical personnel, plan examiners, inspectors and other
employees; or (3) enter into a written agreement or written contract
with another agency or private sector entity to administer specific
provisions of these regulations. Administration of any part of these
regulations by another entity shall not relieve the community of its
responsibilities pursuant to the participation requirements of the
National Flood Insurance Program as set forth in the Code of Federal
Regulations at 44 CFR 59.22.
B. In the absence of a designated floodplain administrator, the floodplain
administrator duties are to be fulfilled by the Township Manager.
A. The floodplain administrator shall issue a permit only after it has been
determined that the proposed work to be undertaken will be in
conformance with the requirements of this and all other applicable
codes and ordinances.
B. Prior to the issuance of any permit, the floodplain administrator shall
review the application for the permit to determine if all other necessary
government permits required by state and federal laws have been
obtained, such as those required by the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities
Act (Act 1966-537, as amended); the Pennsylvania Dam Safety and
Encroachments Act (Act 1978-325, as amended); the Pennsylvania
Clean Streams Act (Act 1937-394, as amended); and the U.S. Clean
Water Act, Section 404, 33 U.S.C. § 1344. No permit shall be issued
until this determination has been made.
C. In the case of existing structures, prior to the issuance of any
development/permit, the floodplain administrator shall review the
history of repairs to the subject building, so that any repetitive loss
concerns can be addressed before the permit is issued.
D. During the construction period, the floodplain administrator or other
authorized official shall inspect the premises to determine that the work
§ 130-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-11
1:311
§ 130-12. Application procedures and requirements.
is progressing in compliance with the information provided on the
permit application and with all applicable municipal laws and
ordinances. He/she shall make as many inspections during and upon
completion of the work as are necessary.
E. In the discharge of his/her duties, the floodplain administrator shall
have the authority to enter any building, structure, premises or
development in the identified floodplain area, upon presentation of
proper credentials, at any reasonable hour to enforce the provisions of
this part.
F. In the event the floodplain administrator discovers that the work does
not comply with the permit application or any applicable laws and
ordinances, or that there has been a false statement or
misrepresentation by any applicant, the floodplain administrator shall
revoke the permit and report such fact to the Board of Commissioners
for whatever action it considers necessary.
G. Whenever the Building Inspector or other authorized municipal
representative determines that there are reasonable grounds to believe
that a violation of this part or of any regulation adopted pursuant
thereto has occurred or is occurring, he shall notify the owner of the
property on which the violation has occurred or is occurring. Notice
shall be written, include a description of the violation and an outline of
the remedial action which will effect compliance with this part or any
regulation adopted pursuant thereto, and shall establish a reasonable
time period within which remedial action must be taken. Notice shall be
served upon the property owner or his agent as the case may require;
provided, however, that such notice shall be deemed to have been
properly served upon such owner or agent when a copy thereof has
been served by any method or in any manner authorized by law.
H. The floodplain administrator shall maintain in perpetuity all records
associated with the requirements of this part, including, but not limited
to, finished construction elevation data, permitting, inspection and
enforcement.
I. The floodplain administrator is the official responsible for submitting a
biennial report to FEMA concerning community participation in the
National Flood Insurance Program.
J. The responsibility, authority and means to implement the commitments
of the floodplain administrator can be delegated from the person
identified. However, the ultimate responsibility lies with the person
identified in this part as the floodplain administrator/manager.
K. The floodplain administrator shall consider the requirements of Title 34
Pennsylvania Code and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC, or latest
revisions thereof.
§ 130-11 SHALER CODE § 130-12
1:312
A. Application for such a permit shall be made, in writing, to the floodplain
administrator on forms supplied by the Township of Shaler. Such
application shall contain the following:
(1) Name and address of applicant.
(2) Name and address of owner of land on which proposed
construction is to occur.
(3) Name and address of contractor.
(4) Site location including address.
(5) Listing of other permits required.
(6) Brief description of proposed work and estimated cost, including a
breakout of flood-related cost and the market value of the building
before the flood damage occurred, where appropriate.
(7) A plan of the site showing the exact size and location of the
proposed construction as well as any existing buildings or
structures.
B. If any proposed construction or development is located entirely or
partially within any identified floodplain area, applicants for permits
shall provide all the necessary information in sufficient detail and
clarity to enable the floodplain administrator to determine that:
(1) All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage and conform with the requirements of this and all other
applicable codes and ordinances;
(2) All utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems, are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage;
(3) Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards;
(4) Structures will be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement;
(5) Building materials are flood-resistant;
(6) Appropriate practices that minimize flood damage have been used;
and
(7) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air-conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities have been designed and
located to prevent water entry or accumulation.
C. Applicants shall file the following minimum information plus any other
pertinent information as may be required by the floodplain
administrator to make the above determination:
§ 130-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-12
1:313
(1) A completed permit application form.
(2) A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one
inch being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
(a) North arrow, scale and date;
(b) Topographic contour lines, if available;
(c) The location of all existing and proposed buildings, structures,
and other improvements, including the location of any existing
or proposed subdivision and development;
(d) The location of all existing streets, drives and other
accessways; and
(e) The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
identified floodplain areas and, if available, information
pertaining to the floodway and the flow of water, including
direction and velocities.
(3) Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other
improvements, drawn at suitable scale, showing the following:
(a) The proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed building
based upon North American Vertical Datum of 1988;
(b) The elevation of the base flood;
(c) Supplemental information as may be necessary under Title 34
Pennsylvania Code, the 2009 IBC or the 2009 IRC.
(4) The following data and documentation:
(a) Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures and corresponding elevations.
(b) If available, information concerning flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors associated
with a base flood; and floodway area (see § 130-21A), when
combined with all other existing and anticipated development,
will not increase the base flood elevation at any point.
(c) A document, certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect, which states that the proposed construction or
development has been adequately designed to withstand the
pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces associated with
the base flood. Such statement shall include a description of
the type and extent of floodproofing measures which have been
incorporated into the design of the structure and/or the
development.
§ 130-12 SHALER CODE § 130-12
1:314
§ 130-13. Review of application by others.
A copy of all plans and applications for any proposed construction or
development in any identified floodplain area to be considered for approval
may be submitted by the floodplain administrator to any other appropriate
agencies and/or individuals (e.g., Planning Commission, Municipal
Engineer, etc.) for review and comment.
§ 130-14. Changes.
After the issuance of a permit by the floodplain administrator, no changes
of any kind shall be made to the application, permit or any of the plans,
specifications or other documents submitted with the application without
the written consent or approval of the floodplain administrator. Requests for
any such change shall be in writing and shall be submitted by the applicant
to the floodplain administrator for consideration.
§ 130-15. Placards.
In addition to the permit, the floodplain administrator shall issue a placard,
which shall be displayed on the premises during the time construction is in
progress. This placard shall show the number of the permit, the date of its
issuance, and be signed by the floodplain administrator.
§ 130-16. Start of construction.
(d) Detailed information needed to determine compliance with
§ 130-27F, Storage, and § 130-28, Development which may
endanger human life, including:
[1] The amount, location and purpose of any materials or
substances referred to in §§ 130-27F and 130-28 which are
intended to be used, produced, stored or otherwise
maintained on site.
[2] A description of the safeguards incorporated into the
design of the proposed structure to prevent leaks or spills
of the dangerous materials or substances listed in § 130-28
during a base flood.
(e) The appropriate component of the Department of
Environmental Protection's Planning Module for Land
Development.
(f) Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting
the requirements of the Department of Environmental
Protection to implement and maintain erosion and
sedimentation control.
D. Applications for permits shall be accompanied by a fee, payable to the
municipality, based upon the estimated cost of the proposed
construction as determined by the floodplain administrator.
§ 130-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-16
1:315
§ 130-17. Enforcement.
A. Work on the proposed construction or development shall begin within
90 days after the date of issuance of the development permit. Work
shall also be completed within 12 months after the date of issuance of
the permit, or the permit shall expire unless a time extension is
granted, in writing, by the floodplain administrator. The issuance of a
development permit does not refer to the zoning approval.
B. The actual start of construction means either the first placement of
permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of
slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or
any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does
it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the
erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds, not occupied
as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial
improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration
of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether
or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
C. Time extensions shall be granted only if a written request is submitted
by the applicant, who sets forth sufficient and reasonable cause for the
floodplain administrator to approve such a request, and the original
permit is compliant with the ordinance and FIRM/FIS in effect at the
time the extension is granted.
A. Notices. Whenever the floodplain administrator or other authorized
municipal representative determines that there are reasonable grounds
to believe that there has been a violation of any provisions of this part,
or of any regulations adopted pursuant thereto, the floodplain
administrator shall give notice of such alleged violation as hereinafter
provided. Such notice shall:
(1) Be in writing;
(2) Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance;
(3) Allow a reasonable time, not to exceed a period of 30 days, for the
performance of any act it requires;
(4) Be served upon the property owner or his agent, as the case may
require; provided, however, that such notice or order shall be
deemed to have been properly served upon such owner or agent
when a copy thereof has been served with such notice by any other
method authorized or required by the laws of this state;
(5) Contain an outline of remedial actions which, if taken, will effect
compliance with the provisions of this part.
§ 130-16 SHALER CODE § 130-17
1:316
§ 130-18. Appeals.
§ 130-19. Hearings.
B. Penalties. Any person, firm, corporation or group of individuals who or
which fails to comply with any or all of the requirements or provisions of
this part or who fails or refuses to comply with any notice, order or
direction of the floodplain administrator or any other authorized
employee of the municipality shall pay a fine to the Township of Shaler
of not less than $25 nor more than $1,000, plus costs of prosecution,
and may be sentenced to a period of incarceration not exceeding 90
days in the Allegheny County Jail. In addition to the above penalties, all
other actions are hereby reserved, including an action in equity, for the
proper enforcement of this part. The imposition of a fine or penalty for
any violation of or noncompliance with this part shall not excuse the
violation or noncompliance or permit it to continue. All such persons
shall be required to correct or remedy such violations and
noncompliance within a reasonable time. Any development initiated or
any structure or building constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, altered
or relocated in noncompliance with this part may be declared by the
Board of Commissioners to be a public nuisance and abatable as such.
A. Any person aggrieved by any action or decision of the floodplain
administrator concerning the administration of the provisions of this
part may appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board. Such appeal must be
filed, in writing, within 30 days after the decision, determination or
action of the floodplain administrator.
B. Upon receipt of such appeal, the Zoning Hearing Board shall consider
the appeal in accordance with the Municipalities Planning Code and
any other local ordinance.
C. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Zoning Hearing Board may
seek relief therefrom by appeal to court, as provided by the laws of this
state, including the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act.
A. Any person aggrieved by any notice which has been issued in
connection with the enforcement of the provisions of this part or any
regulation adopted pursuant thereto may request and shall be granted
a hearing on the matter before the Zoning Hearing Board of Shaler
Township, provided that such person shall file with the Township
Zoning Officer a written petition requesting such a hearing and setting
forth a brief statement of the grounds thereof within 10 days after the
notice was served. The filing of the request for a hearing shall operate
as a stay of the notice and suspension unless, in the opinion of the
Zoning Officer, to permit the work to continue would jeopardize the
safety of persons or property. On receipt of such petition, the Zoning
Officer shall record the same and place the petition on the agenda of
the Zoning Hearing Board; such meeting shall be no later than 40 days
from date of receipt of the petition.
§ 130-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-19
1:317
B. After hearing such petition, the Zoning Hearing Board shall make
findings as to compliance with the provisions of this part and
regulations issued thereunder and shall issue an order, in writing,
sustaining, modifying or withdrawing the notice, which shall be served
as provided in Chapter 225, Zoning, of the Code of the Township of
Shaler for any matters coming before the Zoning Hearing Board. The
proceedings at the hearing, including the findings and decision of the
Zoning Hearing Board, together with a copy of every notice and order
related thereto, shall be entered as a matter of public record in the
Township files, but the transcript of the proceedings need not be
transcribed except upon request of a party, at his expense. Any person
aggrieved by a decision of the Township may seek relief therefrom in
any court of competent jurisdiction as provided by the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 130-19 SHALER CODE § 130-19
1:318
ARTICLE IV
Identification of Floodplain Areas
§ 130-20. Identification.
§ 130-21. Description and special requirements of identified
floodplain areas.
The identified floodplain area shall consist of the following specific areas:
A. The identified floodplain area shall be: any areas of Township of Shaler
classified as special flood hazard areas (SFHAs) in the Flood Insurance
Study (FIS) and the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs),
dated September 26, 2014, and issued by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA), or the most recent revision thereof,
including all digital data developed as part of the Flood Insurance
Study.
B. The above-referenced FIS and FIRMs, and any subsequent revisions
and amendments, are hereby adopted by Township of Shaler and
declared to be a part of the ordinance.
A. The floodway area shall be those areas identified in the FIS and the
FIRM as floodway and which represent the channel of a watercourse
and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge
the base flood without increasing the water surface elevation by more
than one foot at any point. This term shall also include floodway areas
which have been identified in other available studies or sources of
information for those special flood hazard areas where no floodway has
been identified in the FIS and FIRM.
(1) Within any floodway area, no encroachments, including fill, new
construction, substantial improvements, or other development,
shall be permitted unless it has been demonstrated through
hydrologic and hydraulic analysis performed in accordance with
standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment
would not result in any increase in flood levels within the
community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
(2) Within any floodway area, no new construction or development
shall be allowed, unless the appropriate permit is obtained from the
Department of Environmental Protection Regional Office.
B. The AE Area/District shall be those areas identified as an AE Zone on
the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA for which base flood
elevations have been provided.
(1) The AE area adjacent to the floodway shall be those areas identified
as an AE Zone on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA
for which base flood elevations have been provided and a floodway
has been delineated.
§ 130-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-21
1:319
§ 130-22. Changes in identification of area.
The identified floodplain area may be revised or modified by the Board of
Commissioners where studies or information provided by a qualified agency
or person documents the need for such revision. However, prior to any
such change to the special flood hazard area, approval must be obtained
from FEMA. Additionally, as soon as practicable, but not later than six
months after the date such information becomes available, a community
shall notify FEMA of the changes to the special flood hazard area by
submitting technical or scientific data. See § 130-25B for situations where
FEMA notification is required.
§ 130-23. Boundary disputes.
Should a dispute concerning any identified floodplain boundary arise, an
initial determination shall be made by the Township of Shaler, and any party
aggrieved by this decision or determination may appeal to the Board of
Commissioners. The burden of proof shall be on the appellant.
§ 130-24. Jurisdictional boundary changes.
Prior to development occurring in areas where annexation or other
corporate boundary changes are proposed or have occurred, the community
shall review flood hazard data affecting the lands subject to boundary
changes. The community shall adopt and enforce floodplain regulations in
areas subject to annexation or corporate boundary changes which meet or
exceed those in 44 CFR 60.3.
C. The A Area/District shall be those areas identified as an A Zone on the
FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA and for which no base
flood elevations have been provided. For these areas, elevation and
floodway information from other federal, state or other acceptable
sources shall be used when available. Where other acceptable
information is not available, the base flood elevation shall be
determined by using the elevation of a point on the boundary of the
identified floodplain area which is nearest the construction site.
D. In lieu of the above, the municipality may require the applicant to
determine the elevation with hydrologic and hydraulic engineering
techniques. Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only
by professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications, who
shall certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently
accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc.,
shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical
review by the municipality.
§ 130-21 SHALER CODE § 130-24
1:320
ARTICLE V
Technical Provisions
§ 130-25. General.
§ 130-26. Elevation and floodproofing requirements.
A. Alteration or relocation of watercourse.
(1) No encroachment, alteration or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse until all adjacent municipalities which
may be affected by such action have been notified by the
municipality, and until all required permits or approvals have first
been obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection
Regional Office.
(2) No encroachment, alteration or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse unless it can be shown that the activity
will not reduce or impede the flood-carrying capacity of the
watercourse in any way.
(3) In addition, FEMA and the Pennsylvania Department of Community
and Economic Development shall be notified prior to any alteration
or relocation of any watercourse.
B. When a community proposes to permit the following encroachments:
any development that causes a rise in the base flood elevations within
the floodway; or any development occurring in Zones A1-30 and Zone
AE without a designated floodway which will cause a rise of more than
one foot in the base flood elevation; or alteration or relocation of a
stream (including but not limited to installing culverts and bridges), the
applicant shall (as per 44 CFR 65.12):
(1) Apply to FEMA for conditional approval of such action prior to
permitting the encroachments to occur.
(2) Upon receipt of the administrator's conditional approval of map
change and prior to approving the proposed encroachments, a
community shall provide evidence to FEMA of the adoption of
floodplain management ordinances incorporating the increased
base flood elevations and/or revised floodway reflecting the postproject
condition.
(3) Upon completion of the proposed encroachments, a community
shall provide as-built certifications. FEMA will initiate a final map
revision upon receipt of such certifications in accordance with 44
CFR Part 67.
C. Any new construction, development, uses or activities allowed within
any identified floodplain area shall be undertaken in strict compliance
with the provisions contained in this part and any other applicable
codes, ordinances and regulations.
§ 130-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-26
1:321
A. Residential structures.
(1) In AE, A1-30 and AH Zones, any new construction or substantial
improvement shall have the lowest floor elevated up to or above the
regulatory flood elevation.
(2) In A Zones, where there are no base flood elevations specified on
the FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall
have the lowest floor elevated up to or above the regulatory flood
elevation determined in accordance with § 130-21C of this part.
(3) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in the
2009 International Residential Code (IRC), or the most recent
revisions thereof, and ASCE 24 and 34 Pennsylvania Code
(Chapters 401 to 405, as amended) shall be utilized, where they are
more restrictive.
B. Nonresidential structures.
(1) In AE, A1-30 and AH Zones, any new construction or substantial
improvement of a nonresidential structure shall have the lowest
floor elevated up to or above the regulatory flood elevation or be
designed and constructed so that the space enclosed below the
regulatory flood elevation:
(a) Is floodproofed so that the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water; and
(b) Has structural components with the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
(2) In A Zones, where no base flood elevations are specified on the
FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall have
the lowest floor elevated or completely floodproofed up to or above
the regulatory flood elevation determined in accordance with
§ 130-21C of this part.
(3) Any nonresidential structure or part thereof made watertight below
the regulatory flood elevation shall be floodproofed in accordance
with the W1 or W2 space classification standards contained in the
publication entitled "Flood-Proofing Regulations," published by the
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (June 1972, as amended March
1992), or with some other equivalent standard. All plans and
specifications for such floodproofing shall be accompanied by a
statement certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect which states that the proposed design and methods of
construction are in conformance with the above-referenced
standards.
(4) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in the
§ 130-26 SHALER CODE § 130-26
1:322
2009 International Residential Code (IRC), or the most recent
revisions thereof, and ASCE 24 and 34 Pennsylvania Code
(Chapters 401 to 405, as amended) shall be utilized, where they are
more restrictive.
C. Space below the lowest floor. Enclosed areas below the lowest floor
(including basements) are prohibited.
D. Historic structures. Historic structures undergoing repair or
rehabilitation that would constitute a substantial improvement, as
defined in this part, must comply with all ordinance requirements that
do not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic
structure. Documentation that a specific ordinance requirement will
cause removal of the structure from the National Register of Historic
Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places must be obtained from
the Secretary of the Interior or the State Historic Preservation Officer.
Any exemption from ordinance requirements will be the minimum
necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure.
E. Accessory structures. Structures accessory to a principal building need
not be elevated or floodproofed to remain dry but shall comply, at a
minimum, with the following requirements:
(1) The structure shall not be designed or used for human habitation
but shall be limited to the parking of vehicles, or to the storage of
tools, material and equipment related to the principal use or
activity.
(2) Floor area shall not exceed 500 square feet.
(3) The structure will have a low damage potential.
(4) The structure will be located on the site so as to cause the least
obstruction to the flow of floodwaters.
(5) Power lines, wiring and outlets will be elevated to the regulatory
flood elevation.
(6) Permanently affixed utility equipment and appliances such as
furnaces, heaters, washers, dryers, etc., are prohibited.
(7) Sanitary facilities are prohibited.
(8) The structure shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse and lateral movement and shall be designed to
automatically provide for the entry and exit of floodwater for the
purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces on the walls. Designs for
meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria:
§ 130-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-26
1:323
§ 130-27. Design and construction standards.
The following minimum standards shall apply for all construction and
development proposed within any identified floodplain area:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc., or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
A. Fill. Within any identified floodplain area the use of fill shall be
prohibited. If a variance is obtained in accordance with the criteria in
Article VIII, then the following provisions apply.
(1) If fill is used, it shall:
(a) Extend laterally at least 15 feet beyond the building line from
all points;
(b) Consist of soil or small rock materials only; sanitary landfills
shall not be permitted;
(c) Be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and
resistance to erosion, scouring or settling;
(d) Be no steeper than one vertical to two horizontal feet unless
substantiated data justifying steeper slopes is submitted to and
approved by the floodplain administrator; and
(e) Be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect
adjacent properties.
B. Drainage facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to
convey the flow of stormwater runoff in a safe and efficient manner. The
system shall ensure proper drainage along streets and provide positive
drainage away from buildings. The system shall also be designed to
prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent properties.
C. Water and sanitary sewer facilities and systems.
(1) All new or replacement water supply and sanitary sewer facilities
and systems shall be located, designed and constructed to minimize
or eliminate flood damages and the infiltration of floodwaters.
(2) Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to prevent
the discharge of untreated sewage into floodwaters.
(3) No part of any on-site waste disposal system shall be located within
any identified floodplain area except in strict compliance with all
§ 130-26 SHALER CODE § 130-27
1:324
state and local regulations for such systems. If any such system
is permitted, it shall be located so as to avoid impairment to it or
contamination from it during a flood.
(4) The design and construction provisions of the UCC and FEMA No.
348, "Protecting Building Utilities from Flood Damages," and the
International Private Sewage Disposal Code shall be utilized.
D. Other utilities. All other utilities, such as gaslines, electrical and
telephone systems, shall be located, elevated (where possible) and
constructed to minimize the chance of impairment during a flood.
E. Streets. The finished elevation of all new streets shall be no more than
one foot below the regulatory flood elevation.
F. Storage. All materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive or, in
times of flooding, could be injurious to human, animal or plant life, and
not listed in § 130-28, Development which may endanger human life,
shall be stored at or above the regulatory flood elevation or
floodproofed to the maximum extent possible.
G. Placement of buildings and structures. All buildings and structures
shall be designed, located and constructed so as to offer the minimum
obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to have a
minimum effect upon the flow and height of floodwater.
H. Anchoring.
(1) All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance
with accepted engineering practices to prevent flotation, collapse
or lateral movement.
(2) All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks and other similar objects or
components located below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
securely anchored or affixed to prevent flotation.
I. Floors, walls and ceilings.
(1) Wood flooring used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be installed to accommodate a lateral expansion of the flooring,
perpendicular to the flooring grain, without causing structural
damage to the building.
(2) Plywood used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of
a marine or water-resistant variety.
(3) Walls and ceilings at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be designed and constructed of materials that are water-resistant
and will withstand inundation.
(4) Windows, doors and other components at or below the regulatory
flood elevation shall be made of metal or other water-resistant
material.
§ 130-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-27
1:325
§ 130-28. Development which may endanger human life.
Within any identified floodplain area, any structure of the kind described
in Subsection A below shall be prohibited. If a variance is obtained in
accordance with the criteria in Article VIII, then the following provisions
apply: § 130-28B, C and D).
J. Paints and adhesives.
(1) Paints and other finishes used at or below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be of marine or water-resistant quality.
(2) Adhesives used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
of a marine or water-resistant variety.
(3) All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) used at or
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be finished with a marine
or water-resistant paint or other finishing material.
K. Electrical components.
(1) Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three feet above the
base flood elevation.
(2) Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be
dropped from above.
L. Equipment. Water heaters, furnaces, air-conditioning and ventilating
units and other electrical, mechanical or utility equipment or apparatus
shall not be located below the regulatory flood elevation.
M. Fuel supply systems. All gas and oil supply systems shall be designed to
prevent the infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharges
from the system into floodwaters. Additional provisions shall be made
for the drainage of these systems in the event that floodwater
infiltration occurs.
N. Uniform Construction Code coordination. The standards and
specifications contained 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401 to 405), as
amended, and not limited to the following provisions, shall apply to the
above and other sections and subsections of this part to the extent that
they are more restrictive and supplement the requirements of this part.
(1) International Building Code (IBC) 2009, or the latest edition
thereof: Secs. 801, 1202, 1403, 1603, 1605, 1612, 3402, and
Appendix G.
(2) International Residential Building Code (IRC) 2009, or the latest
edition thereof: Secs. R104, R105, R109, R322, Appendix E and
Appendix J.
A. In accordance with the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act, and
the regulations adopted by the Department of Community and
§ 130-27 SHALER CODE § 130-28
1:326
Economic Development as required by the Act, any new or substantially
improved structure, which will be used for the production or storage
of any of the following dangerous materials or substances or will be
used for any activity requiring the maintenance of a supply of more
than 550 gallons, or other comparable volume, of any of the following
dangerous materials or substances on the premises or will involve the
production, storage or use of any amount of radioactive substances,
shall be subject to the provisions of this section, in addition to all other
applicable provisions. The following list of materials and substances are
considered dangerous to human life:
(1) Acetone.
(2) Ammonia.
(3) Benzene.
(4) Calcium carbide.
(5) Carbon disulfide.
(6) Celluloid.
(7) Chlorine.
(8) Hydrochloric acid.
(9) Hydrocyanic acid.
(10) Magnesium.
(11) Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen.
(12) Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.).
(13) Phosphorus.
(14) Potassium.
(15) Sodium.
(16) Sulphur and sulphur products.
(17) Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides and rodenticides).
(18)Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not
otherwise regulated.
B. Within any identified floodplain area, any new or substantially improved
structure of the kind described in Subsection A above shall be
prohibited within the area measured 50 feet landward from the top-ofbank
of any watercourse.
C. Within any floodway area, any structure of the kind described in
Subsection A above shall be prohibited. Where permitted within any
identified floodplain area, any new or substantially improved residential
§ 130-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-28
1:327
§ 130-29. Special requirements for subdivisions and development.
All subdivision proposals and development proposals containing at least 50
lots or at least five acres, whichever is the lesser, in identified floodplain
areas where base flood elevation data is not available, shall be supported
by hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses that determine base flood
elevations and floodway information. The analyses shall be prepared by
a licensed professional engineer in a format required by FEMA for a
conditional letter of map revision and letter of map revision. Submittal
requirements and processing fees shall be the responsibility of the
applicant.
§ 130-30. Special requirements for manufactured homes.
Within any floodway area/district, manufactured homes shall be prohibited.
If a variance is obtained in accordance with the criteria in Article VIII, then
the following provisions apply:
structure of the kind described in § 130-28A above shall be elevated
to remain completely dry up to at least 1 1/2 feet above base flood
elevation and built in accordance with § 130-25, 130-26 and 130-27.
D. Where permitted within any identified floodplain area, any new or
substantially improved nonresidential structure of the kind described in
§ 130-28A above shall be built in accordance with §§ 130-25, 130-26 and
130-27, including:
(1) Elevated or designed and constructed to remain completely dry up
to at least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation; and
(2) Designed to prevent pollution from the structure or activity during
the course of a base flood.
Any such structure or part thereof that will be built below the
regulatory flood elevation shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the standards for completely dry floodproofing
contained in the publication "Flood-Proofing Regulations" (U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers, June 1972, as amended March 1992), or
with some other equivalent watertight standard.
A. Within any identified floodplain area, manufactured homes shall be
prohibited within the area measured 50 feet landward from the top-ofbank
of any watercourse.
B. Where permitted within any identified floodplain area, all manufactured
homes, and any improvements thereto, shall be:
(1) Placed on a permanent foundation;
(2) Elevated so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at
least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation;
(3) Anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement; and
§ 130-28 SHALER CODE § 130-30
1:328
§ 130-31. Special requirements for recreational vehicles.
Within any identified floodplain area, recreational vehicles shall be
prohibited. If a variance is obtained in accordance with the criteria in
Article VIII, then the following provisions apply:
(4) Have all ductwork and utilities, including HVAC/heat pump,
elevated to the regulatory flood elevation.
C. Installation of manufactured homes shall be done in accordance with
the manufacturers' installation instructions as provided by the
manufacturer. Where the applicant cannot provide the above
information, the requirements of Appendix E of the 2009 International
Residential Building Code or the U.S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development's "Permanent Foundations for Manufactured
Housing," 1984 Edition, draft or latest revision thereto, and 34 Pa. Code
Chapters 401 to 405 shall apply.
D. Consideration shall be given to the installation requirements of the
2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC, or the most recent revisions thereto, and
Title 34 Pennsylvania Code, as amended, where appropriate and/or
applicable to units where the manufacturers' standards for anchoring
cannot be provided or were not established for the proposed unit's
installation.
A. Recreational vehicles in Zones A, A1-30, AH and AE must either:
(1) Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; and
(2) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
(3) Meet the permit requirements for manufactured homes in § 130-30.
§ 130-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-31
1:329

ARTICLE VI
Activities Requiring Special Permits
§ 130-32. General.
In accordance with the administrative regulations promulgated by the
Department of Community and Economic Development to implement the
Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act, the following activities shall be
prohibited within any identified floodplain area unless a special permit has
been issued by the Township of Shaler:
§ 130-33. Application requirements for special permits.
Applicants for special permits shall provide five copies of the following
items:
A. The commencement of any of the following activities or the
construction, enlargement or expansion of any structure used, or
intended to be used, for any of the following activities:
(1) Hospitals.
(2) Nursing homes.
(3) Jails or prisons.
B. The commencement of or any construction of a new manufactured
home park or manufactured home subdivision or substantial
improvement to an existing manufactured home park or manufactured
home subdivision.
A. A written request, including a completed permit application form.
B. A small-scale map showing the vicinity in which the proposed site is
located.
C. A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one inch
being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
(1) North arrow, scale and date;
(2) Topography based upon the North American Vertical Datum
(NAVD) of 1988, showing existing and proposed contours at
intervals of two feet;
(3) All property and lot lines, including dimensions, and the size of the
site expressed in acres or square feet;
(4) The location of all existing streets, drives, other accessways and
parking areas, with information concerning widths, pavement types
and construction, and elevations;
(5) The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
buildings, structures and other public or private facilities,
§ 130-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-33
1:331
including railroad tracks and facilities, and any other natural and
man-made features affecting or affected by the proposed activity or
development;
(6) The location of the floodplain boundary line, information and spot
elevations concerning the base flood elevation, and information
concerning the flow of water, including direction and velocities;
(7) The location of all proposed buildings, structures, utilities and any
other improvements; and
(8) Any other information which the municipality considers necessary
for adequate review of the application.
D. Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other improvements,
clearly and legibly drawn at suitable scale, showing the following:
(1) Sufficiently detailed architectural or engineering drawings,
including floor plans, sections and exterior building elevations, as
appropriate;
(2) For any proposed building, the elevation of the lowest floor
(including basement) and, as required, the elevation of any other
floor;
(3) Complete information concerning flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces, and other factors associated
with the base flood;
(4) Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures;
(5) Cross-section drawings for all proposed streets, drives, other
accessways and parking areas, showing all rights-of-way and
pavement widths;
(6) Profile drawings for all proposed streets, drives and vehicular
accessways, including existing and proposed grades; and
(7) Plans and profiles of all proposed sanitary and storm sewer
systems, water supply systems, and any other utilities and
facilities.
E. The following data and documentation.
(1) Certification from the applicant that the site upon which the
activity or development is proposed is an existing separate and
single parcel, owned by the applicant or the client he represents;
(2) Certification from a registered professional engineer, architect or
landscape architect that the proposed construction has been
adequately designed to protect against damage from the base
flood;
§ 130-33 SHALER CODE § 130-33
1:332
§ 130-34. Application review procedures.
Upon receipt of an application for a special permit by the Township of
Shaler, the following procedures shall apply in addition to those of Article
III:
(3) A statement, certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect, landscape architect or other qualified person, which
contains a complete and accurate description of the nature and
extent of pollution that might possibly occur from the development
during the course of a base flood, including a statement concerning
the effects such pollution may have on human life;
(4) A statement, certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect or landscape architect, which contains a complete and
accurate description of the effects the proposed development will
have on base flood elevation and flows;
(5) A statement, certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect or landscape architect, which contains a complete and
accurate description of the kinds and amounts of any loose buoyant
materials or debris that may possibly exist or be located on the site
below the base flood elevation and the effects such materials and
debris may have on base flood elevation and flows;
(6) The appropriate component of the Department of Environmental
Protection's Planning Module for Land Development;
(7) Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting the
requirements of the Department of Environmental Protection to
implement and maintain erosion and sedimentation control;
(8) Any other applicable permits, such as, but not limited to, a permit
for any activity regulated by the Department of Environmental
Protection under Section 302 of Act 1978-166; and
(9) An evacuation plan which fully explains the manner in which the
site will be safely evacuated before or during the course of a base
flood.
A. Within three working days following receipt of the application, a
complete copy of the application and all accompanying documentation
shall be forwarded to the County Planning Commission by registered or
certified mail for its review and recommendations. Copies of the
application shall also be forwarded to the Township of Shaler Planning
Commission and Township of Shaler Engineer for review and comment.
B. If an application is received that is incomplete, the Township of Shaler
shall notify the applicant in writing, stating in what respect the
application is deficient.
§ 130-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-34
1:333
§ 130-35. Special technical requirements.
C. If the Township of Shaler decides to disapprove an application, it shall
notify the applicant, in writing, of the reasons for the disapproval.
D. If the Township of Shaler approves an application, it shall file written
notification, together with the application and all pertinent information,
with the Department of Community and Economic Development, by
registered or certified mail, within five working days after the date of
approval.
E. Before issuing the special permit, the Township of Shaler shall allow the
Department of Community and Economic Development 30 days after
receipt of the notification by the Department to review the application
and decision made by the Township of Shaler.
F. If the Township of Shaler does not receive any communication from the
Department of Community and Economic Development during the
thirty-day review period, it may issue a special permit to the applicant.
G. If the Department of Community and Economic Development should
decide to disapprove an application, it shall notify the Township of
Shaler and the applicant, in writing, of the reasons for the disapproval,
and the Township of Shaler shall not issue the special permit.
A. In addition to the requirements of Article V of this part, the following
minimum requirements shall also apply to any proposed development
requiring a special permit. If there is any conflict between any of the
following requirements and those in Article V of this part or in any other
code, ordinance or regulation, the more restrictive provision shall
apply.
B. No application for a special permit shall be approved unless it can be
determined that the structure or activity will be located, constructed
and maintained in a manner which will:
(1) Fully protect the health and safety of the general public and any
occupants of the structure. At a minimum, all new structures shall
be designed, located and constructed so that:
(a) The structure will survive inundation by waters of the base
flood without any lateral movement or damage to either the
structure itself or to any of its equipment or contents below the
BFE.
(b) The lowest floor (including basement) will be elevated to at
least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation.
(c) The occupants of the structure can remain inside for an
indefinite period of time and be safely evacuated at any time
during the base flood.
§ 130-34 SHALER CODE § 130-35
1:334
(2) Prevent any significant possibility of pollution, increased flood
levels or flows, or debris endangering life and property.
C. All hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by
professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications, who
shall certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently
accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc.,
shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical
review by the Township of Shaler and the Department of Community
and Economic Development.
§ 130-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-35
1:335

ARTICLE VII
Existing Structures in Identified Floodplain Areas
§ 130-36. Existing structures.
The provisions of this part do not require any changes or improvements to
be made to lawfully existing structures. However, when an improvement is
made to any existing structure, the provisions of § 130-37 shall apply.
§ 130-37. Improvements.
The following provisions shall apply whenever any improvement is made to
an existing structure located within any identified floodplain area:
A. No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed
within any floodway area/district that would cause any increase in BFE.
B. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction or improvement of any kind
to an existing structure to an extent or amount of 50% or more of its
market value shall constitute a substantial improvement and shall be
undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this part.
C. The above activity shall also address the requirements of 34
Pennsylvania Code, as amended, and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC.
D. Within any floodway area/district (see § 130-21A), no new construction
or development shall be allowed unless the appropriate permit is
obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection Regional
Office.
E. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction or improvement of any kind
to an existing structure to an extent or amount of less than 50% of its
market value shall be elevated and/or floodproofed to the greatest
extent possible.
F. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction or improvement of any kind
that meets the definition of "repetitive loss" shall be undertaken only in
full compliance with the provisions of this part.
§ 130-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-37
1:337

ARTICLE VIII
Variances
§ 130-38. General.
If compliance with any of the requirements of this part would result in
an exceptional hardship to a prospective builder, developer or landowner,
the Township of Shaler may, upon request, grant relief from the strict
application of the requirements.
§ 130-39. Variance procedures and conditions.
A. Requests for variances shall be considered by the Township of Shaler in
accordance with the procedures contained in § 130-18 and the
following:
(1) No variance shall be granted for any construction, development,
use or activity within any floodway area/district that would cause
any increase in the BFE.
(2) Except for a possible modification of the regulatory flood elevation
requirement involved, no variance shall be granted for any of the
other requirements pertaining specifically to development
regulated by special permit (Article VI) or to development which
may endanger human life (§ 130-28).
(3) If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification
necessary to provide relief.
(4) In granting any variance, the Township of Shaler shall attach
whatever reasonable conditions and safeguards it considers
necessary in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare
and to achieve the objectives of this part.
(5) Whenever a variance is granted, the Township of Shaler shall notify
the applicant in writing that:
(a) The granting of the variance may result in increased premium
rates for flood insurance.
(b) Such variances may increase the risks to life and property.
(6) In reviewing any request for a variance, the Township of Shaler
shall consider, at a minimum, the following:
(a) That there is good and sufficient cause.
(b) That failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant.
(c) That the granting of the variance will:
§ 130-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-39
1:339
[1] Neither result in an unacceptable or prohibited increase in
flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or
extraordinary public expense.
[2] Nor create nuisances, cause fraud on, or victimize the
public, or conflict with any other applicable state or local
ordinances and regulations.
(7) A complete record of all variance requests and related actions shall
be maintained by the Township of Shaler. In addition, a report of all
variances granted during the year shall be included in the annual
report to the FEMA.
B. Notwithstanding any of the above, however, all structures shall be
designed and constructed so as to have the capability of resisting the
one-percent annual chance flood.
§ 130-39 SHALER CODE § 130-39
1:340
ARTICLE IX
Definitions
§ 130-40. General.
Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this part shall
be interpreted so as to give this part its most reasonable application.
§ 130-41. Specific definitions.
As used in this part, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE — A use or structure on the same
lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the
principal use or structure.
BASE FLOOD — A flood which has a one-percent chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year (also called the "one-hundred-year flood" or
"one-percent annual chance flood").
BASE FLOOD DISCHARGE — The volume of water resulting from a base
flood as it passes a given location within a given time, usually expressed in
cubic feet per second (cfs).
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The elevation shown on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for Zones AE, AH, A1-30 that indicates the
water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one-percent or
greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor below ground level
on all sides.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a permanent structure
having walls and a roof. Included shall be all manufactured homes and
trailers to be used for human habitation.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to the construction, reconstruction,
renovation, repair, expansion or alteration of buildings or other structures;
the placement of manufactured homes; streets and other paving; utilities;
filling, grading and excavation; mining; dredging; drilling operations;
storage of equipment or materials; and the subdivision of land.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to
be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR
SUBDIVISION — The preparation of additional sites by the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
§ 130-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-41
1:341
affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FLOOD — A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which the
Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas
of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report provided by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency that includes flood profiles, the
Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the
water surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOODPLAIN AREA — A relatively flat or low land area which is subject to
partial or complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream, river or
watercourse; and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation
of surface waters from any source.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one
foot.
HISTORIC STRUCTURES — Any structure that is:
IDENTIFIED FLOODPLAIN AREA — This term is an umbrella term that
includes all of the areas within which the community has selected to enforce
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states which
have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
D.
§ 130-41 SHALER CODE § 130-41
1:342
floodplain regulations. It will always include the area identified as the
Special Flood Hazard Area on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps and Flood
Insurance Study, but may include additional areas identified by the
community. See §§ 130-20 and 130-21 for the specifics on what areas the
community has included in the identified floodplain area.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished, flood-resistant partially enclosed area,
used solely for parking of vehicles, building access and incidental storage,
in an area other than a basement area, is not considered the lowest floor of
a building, provided that such space is not designed and built so that the
structure is in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements
of this part.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis, and is designed for use
with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required
utilities. The term includes park trailers, travel trailers, recreational and
other similar vehicles which are placed on a site for more than 180
consecutive days.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.
MINOR REPAIR — The replacement of existing work with equivalent
materials for the purpose of its routine maintenance and upkeep, but not
including the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the
removal or cutting of any structural beam or bearing support, or the
removal or change of any required means of egress, or rearrangement of
parts of a structure affecting the exitway requirements; nor shall minor
repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of any
standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, oil, waste, vent
or similar piping, electric wiring, mechanical or other work affecting public
health or general safety.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after September 26, 2014, and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures. Any construction started after March 18,
1980 and before September 26, 2014, is subject to the ordinance in effect
at the time the permit was issued, provided the start of construction was
within 180 days of permit issuance.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads)
is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management
regulations adopted by a community.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation, firm, trust, estate, municipality, governmental unit, public
§ 130-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-41
1:343
utility or any other legal entity whatsoever which is recognized by law as
the subject of rights and duties.
POST-FIRM STRUCTURE — A structure for which construction or
substantial improvement occurred after December 31, 1974 or on or after
the community's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated March 18,
1980, whichever is later, and, as such, would be required to be compliant
with the regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program.
PRE-FIRM STRUCTURE — A structure for which construction or substantial
improvement occurred on or before December 31, 1974 or before the
community's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated March 18,
1980, whichever is later, and, as such, would not be required to be
compliant with the regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The base flood elevation (BFE) or
estimated flood height as determined using simplified methods plus a
freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet.
REPETITIVE LOSS — Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on
two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of
repairs at the time of each such flood event, on average, equals or exceeds
25% of the market value of the structure before the damages occurred.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA) — An area in the floodplain
subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It
is shown on the FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99 or AH.
SPECIAL PERMIT — A special approval which is required for hospitals,
nursing homes, jails and new manufactured home parks/subdivisions and
substantial improvements to such existing parks when such development is
located in all or a designated portion of a floodplain.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — Includes substantial improvement and other
proposed new development and means the date the permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement or other improvement was within 180
days after the date of the permit and shall be completed within 12 months
after the date of issuance of the permit unless a time extension is granted,
in writing, by the floodplain administrator. The actual start means either
the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such
as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
A. Built on a single chassis;
Not more than 400 square feet, measured at the largest horizontal
projections;
B.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck; and
C.
Not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living
quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
D.
§ 130-41 SHALER CODE § 130-41
1:344
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does
it include the installation of streets and walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection
of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of
accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds, not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the
actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured
home.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land
by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions
of land, including changes in existing lot lines, for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs,
or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided,
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage from any cause sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% or more of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition or other improvement of a structure, of which the cost equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start of
construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which have
incurred substantial damage or repetitive loss regardless of the actual
repair work performed. The term does not, however, include any project for
improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local
health, sanitary or safety code specifications which have been identified by
the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary
to assure safe living conditions.
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE (UCC) — The statewide building code
adopted by the Pennsylvania General Assembly in 1999, applicable to new
construction in all municipalities whether administered by the municipality,
a third party or the Department of Labor and Industry. Applicable to
residential and commercial buildings, the code adopted the International
Residential Code (IRC) and the International Building Code (IBC), by
reference, as the construction standard applicable with state floodplain
construction. For coordination purposes, references to the above are made
specifically to various sections of the IRC and the IBC.
VARIANCE — A grant of relief by a community from the terms of a
floodplain management regulation.
§ 130-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-41
1:345
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certifications or other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR
60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4) or (e)(5) is presumed to be in
violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
§ 130-41 SHALER CODE § 130-41
1:346
Chapter 137
GASOLINE STATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 125.
§ 137-1. Extinguishers required.
All self-service gasoline stations shall have fifteen-pound dry-chemical fire
extinguishers on each island where pumps are located and gasoline is
dispensed.
§ 137-2. Training for attendants.
All attendants shall be trained in emergency procedures to utilize the fire
extinguishers specified in § 137-1 hereof.
§ 137-3. Posting of signs.
All service stations on each dispenser island shall have a sign posted with
all letters at least an inch in height that reads as follows: "Warning - It
is unlawful to dispense gasoline into any portable container unless the
container is constructed of metal with a spring-type or screen-type lid and
clearly marked for storage of Class 1 liquids."
§ 137-4. Supervision for dispensing; attendant.
No gasoline station shall permit any purchaser, customer or other person
to use or manipulate any pump, hose, pipe or other device for dispensing
gasoline or other flammable liquid for any purpose, unless such dispensing
of gasoline or other flammable liquid is conducted under the supervision of
a person trained in the dispensing of such liquid and under such conditions
that the supervising person shall be within 15 feet of the point of dispensing
of such liquid at all times during the dispensing of such liquid or under such
conditions that the person supervising shall be located in a control booth
with a control panel controlling all of the pumps, hoses or other devices for
the pumping or dispensing of gasoline or other flammable liquids and where
such supervising person has a full and unobstructed view of all customers
and dispensing apparatus. The primary function of an attendant shall be to
supervise and observe the dispensing of flammable or combustible liquids.
The dispensing operations shall be in clear view of the attendant, and no
obstacles can be placed between the attendant and the dispensing area.
The attendant must be within arm's length of all emergency and remote
controls while flammable or combustible liquids are being dispensed by
customers. At all times, the attendant in a self-service station shall be in
voice communication with customers in self-service stations.
§ 130-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 137-5
1:347
§ 137-5. Portable containers.
It shall be the duty of the attendant to prevent the dispensing of Class
1 liquids into portable containers unless the container is of sound metal
construction with a spring-type or screw-type lid. The container must also
be clearly marked for storage of Class 1 liquids.
§ 137-6. Location of emergency control.
The service station must have emergency controls for the pumps and a main
power shutoff switch or switches within 15 feet of the attendant's principal
location and not more than 50 feet from the dispensers or pumps.
§ 137-7. Posting of instructions.
There must be instructions conspicuously posted in the attendant's area for
the operation of all safety, fire and dispensing equipment.
§ 137-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this chapter shall,
upon conviction thereof before any issuing authority, forfeit and pay a fine
of not more than $1,000 for each offense and may be sentenced to a period
of incarceration not exceeding 90 days in the Allegheny County Jail. Each
incident in violation of this chapter shall be considered a separate offense
and may be punishable as the same.
Chapter 140
GRADING, EXCAVATING AND FILLING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 225.
§ 140-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide minimum standards to safeguard
person and property and to protect and to promote the public welfare
by preventing excess erosion, hazardous rock and soil slippage, sediment
production and other soil and water management problems, and by
regulating and controlling the design, construction, quality of materials
used, location and maintenance of grading, excavation and fill.
§ 140-2. Definitions.
Wherever used in this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADMINISTRATOR — The Building Inspector of the Township of Shaler.
§ 137-5 SHALER CODE § 140-2
1:348
APPROVAL — A written engineering or geological opinion concerning the
progress and completion of the work.
AS GRADED — The surface conditions exposed on completion of grading.
BEDROCK — The native consolidated rock underlying the surface layers of
soil.
BENCH — A relatively level step excavated into earth material, on which fill
is to be placed.
BORROW — Earth material acquired from an off-site location for use in
grading on a site.
CIVIL ENGINEER — A professional engineer registered in the
commonwealth to practice in the field of civil works.
CIVIL ENGINEERING — The application of the knowledge of the forces
of nature, principles of mechanics, and the properties of materials to the
evaluation, design and construction of civil works for the beneficial uses of
mankind.
CLEARING — The cutting or removal of vegetation which results in
exposing any bare soil.
COMPACTION — The densification of a fill by mechanical means.
EARTH MATERIAL — Any rock, natural soil or fill, and/or any combination
thereof.
ENGINEERING GEOLOGIST — A geologist experienced and knowledgeable
in engineering geology and registered as an engineering geologist in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
ENGINEERING GEOLOGY — The application of geologic knowledge and
principles in the investigation and evaluation of naturally occurring rock
and soil for use in the design of civil works.
EROSION — The natural process by which the surface of the land is worn
away by water, wind or chemical action.
EXCAVATION — Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other
similar material is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced,
relocated or bulldozed and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.
EXISTING GRADE — The grade prior to grading.
FILL — Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other material is
deposited, placed, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported or moved to a new
location and shall include the conditions resulting.
FINISH GRADE — The final grade of the site which conforms to the
approved plan.
GEOLOGICAL HAZARD — A potential or apparent risk to persons or
property because of geological or soil instability, either existing at the time
of construction or which would result from construction.
§ 140-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 140-2
1:349
GOVERNING BODY — The Board of Commissioners of the Township of
Shaler.
GRADE — The vertical location of the ground surface.
GRADING — Any excavating or filling or combination thereof.
GRADING PERMIT — Any permit required under this chapter.
HAZARD — A danger or potential danger to life, limb or health or an
adverse effect or potential adverse effect to the safety, use or stability of
property, waterways, public ways, structures, utilities and storm sewers,
including stream pollution.
KEY — A designed compacted fill placed in a trench, excavated in earth
material beneath the toe of a proposed fill slope.
PERSON — A natural person, but shall also include a partnership,
corporation, trust or association.
PROFESSIONAL — A person (engineer, surveyor or architect) licensed by
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
RETAINING WALL — An upright work or structure constructed of block,
stone, brick or other material and used to either support retained material
or to serve as a facing of a cut slope. A structure erected or constructed
for the purpose of restraining the lateral movement of soil, to contain earth
or other natural materials, and which does not exceed the height of earth
intended to be supported. Unlike a fence or an enclosure wall, only one side
of a retaining wall is visible.
RETAINING WALL, ENGINEERED — A professionally engineered structure
designed and constructed to retain the earth on one side at a higher
elevation than the earth on the other side in such a way that resists the
lateral displacement of soil or other materials in order to stabilize slopes
and provide usable areas of land at different elevations.
ROUGH GRADE — The stage at which the grade approximately conforms to
the approved plan.
SITE — Any lot or parcel of land or contiguous combination thereof under
the same ownership where grading is performed or permitted.
SLOPE — An inclined ground surface, the inclination of which is expressed
as a ratio of horizontal distance to vertical distance.
SOIL — The naturally occurring surficial deposits overlying bedrock.
SOIL ENGINEER — A person registered by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania as a professional engineer and who has training and
experience in the branch of soils engineering.
SOIL (GEOTECHNICAL) ENGINEERING — The application of the principles
of soil mechanics in the investigation, evaluation and design of civil works
involving the use of earth materials and the inspection and testing of the
construction thereof.
§ 140-2 SHALER CODE § 140-2
1:350
SOIL SURVEY — The unpublished and operational soil survey for Allegheny
County, Pennsylvania, and the accompanying text Soil Survey
Interpretations of Allegheny County, Pennsylvania, as prepared by the
United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) Natural Resources
Conservation Services et al. When applicable, "soil survey" shall mean
"Soil Survey, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania," when this publication is
completed.
SOLID WASTE — Waste, including but not limited to municipal, residual
or hazardous waste, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous
materials, as well as all parts or combinations of ashes, garbage, refuse,
radioactive material, combustible demolition materials and industrial
wastes, such as food-processing wastes, wood, plastic, metal scrap, etc.
TERRACE — A relatively level step constructed in the face of a graded slope
surface for drainage and maintenance purposes.
TOE — The base or bottom of a slope at a point where the grade changes
abruptly to a significantly flatter grade.
§ 140-3. Applicability.
An applicant shall apply for a grading permit, and this chapter shall apply
to any project which, in total or per phase (if proposed to be completed or
has been completed over more than one phase or season of work), where
earthwork, excavation (cut) or filling in excess of 10 cubic yards will be
completed.
§ 140-4. Prohibited acts.
No person shall construct, enlarge, alter, repair or maintain any grading,
excavation or fill or cause the same to be done contrary to or in violation of
any provision of this chapter.
§ 140-5. Permit required.
A. Grading permits. A grading permit is required and shall be issued for all
grading operations with the exception of the following:
(1) An excavation below finished grade for basements and footings of a
building, retaining wall, or other structure authorized by a valid
building permit. This shall not exempt any fill made with the
material from such excavation nor exempt any excavation having
an unsupported height greater than five feet after the completion
of such structure.
(2) Cemetery graves.
(3) Refuse disposal sites controlled by other regulations.
(4) Excavations for water wells.
§ 140-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 140-5
1:351
§ 140-6. Hazardous conditions.
(5) Exploratory excavations under the direction of soil (geotechnical)
engineers or engineering geologists.
(6) An excavation:
(a) Which is less than two feet in depth; or
(b) Which does not create a cut slope greater than five feet in
height and steeper than 1 1/2 horizontal to one vertical.
(7) A fill less than one foot in depth and placed on natural terrain with
a slope flatter than five horizontal to one vertical, or less than three
feet in depth not intended to support structures, which does not
obstruct a drainagecourse and which does not exceed 10 cubic
yards on any one lot.
(8) Installation and repair of private utility service lines.
B. All fill-and-cut operations shall be performed in compliance with the
Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook for Allegheny County.
C. In the event that the cut-and-fill operation affects any natural
watercourse under Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection's dams and encroachments jurisdiction, by change in
direction, cut and fill along the banks, culverts or bridges or
construction adjacent to, the applicant must present with his
application the permit and the letter of comments from the Department
of Environmental Protection, pertaining to dams and encroachments
jurisdiction.
D. Nothing contained herein shall otherwise exempt the applicant from
complying with any other Township permit requirements or notifying
any state, federal or local government agency as the law may require.
A. Whenever the governing body, upon the recommendation of the
administrator, determines that any existing excavation, embankment or
fill has become a hazard, as defined in § 140-2, the owner of the
property upon which the excavation, embankment or fill is located or
other person or agent in control of said property shall be given notice of
said determination by the administrator in writing and, upon receipt of
said notice from the administrator, shall within the reasonable period
specified therein repair, reconstruct or remove such excavation,
embankment or fill so as to eliminate the hazard.
B. If after such notification the property owner has not made the
necessary repairs within the time adopted, then the governing body
may direct government employees to make the required repairs, and
the cost thereof shall be borne by the property owner by a lien filed as
provided by law.
§ 140-5 SHALER CODE § 140-6
1:352
§ 140-7. Information on plans and in specifications.
Plans and specifications shall be submitted and shall comply with the
following:
C. Whenever the governing body, upon the recommendation of the
administrator, determines that any proposed excavation or fill may
present a hazard, as defined in § 140-2, the governing body reserves the
right to require the applicant to have the proposed work certified by a
soils engineer or geologist.
A. Plans shall be drawn to scale and shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate
the nature and extent of the work proposed and show in detail that they
will conform to the provisions of this chapter and all relevant laws,
ordinances, rules and regulations. The first sheet of each set of plans
shall give the location of the work and the name and address of the
owner and the person by whom they were prepared. In addition, any
applicable Allegheny County requirements for plan submission shall
apply. The plans shall include the following information:
(1) General vicinity of the proposed site.
(2) Property limits and accurate contours of existing ground and
details of terrain and area drainage for the site and surrounding
area.
(3) Grading setbacks from property lines in accordance with Figure 1
at the end of this chapter.
(4) Limiting dimensions, elevations or finish contours to be achieved
by the grading, and the proposed drainage channels and related
construction.
(5) Detailed schedule of when each portion of the site is to be graded;
how long the soil is to be exposed; and when the area is to be
covered with buildings, paving, new vegetation or temporary
erosion control measures.
(6) Detailed plans of all surface and subsurface drainage devices,
walls, cribbing, dams and other protective devices to be
constructed with, or as a part of, the proposed work, together with
a map showing the drainage area and the estimated runoff of the
area served by any drains.
(7) Location of any buildings or structures on the property where the
work is to be performed and the location of any buildings or
structures on land of adjacent owners which are within 15 feet of
the property or which may be affected by the proposed grading
operations.
(8) Specifications shall contain information covering construction and
material requirements.
§ 140-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 140-7
1:353
§ 140-8. Completion; performance guaranty.
(9) Civil engineering report. The civil engineering report, when
required by the Township, shall include hydrological calculations of
runoff and the existing or required safe storm drainage capacity
outlet of channels both on site and off site, and one in one-hundredyear
flood elevations for any adjacent watercourse. The report shall
include recommendations for stormwater control and disposal.
(10) Soil (geotechnical) engineering report. The soil engineering report,
when required by the Township, shall include data regarding the
nature, distribution and strength of existing soils, design criteria,
and conclusions and recommendations applicable to the proposed
development. The report shall include recommendation for
subdrainage, and for groundwater control and disposal.
Recommendations included in the report and approved by the
Township shall be incorporated in the plans and specifications. For
single-family residences, a surface reconnaissance and stability
questionnaire may be substituted for a formal soils report, at the
discretion of the Township.
(11) Engineering geology report. The engineering geology report, when
required by the Township, shall include an adequate description of
the geology of the site and conclusions and recommendations
regarding the effect of geologic conditions on the proposed
development and site(s) to be developed. Recommendations
included in the report and approved by the Township shall be
incorporated in the grading plans and specifications.
B. Issuance. The Township may require that:
(1) The amount of the site exposed during any one period of time be
limited.
(2) Grading work be scheduled to avoid weather periods or avoid
critical habitat use periods for areas existing on or adjacent to the
development site.
(3) Subsequent to the issuance of the grading permit, the Township
may require that grading operations and project designs be
modified if delays occur which can result in weather-generated
problems not considered at the time the permit was issued.
A. Before issuance of a grading permit, the applicant shall post a bond
issued by a Pennsylvania-approved corporate surety or other approved
security in the amount of 10% of the estimated cost of the grading work
and erosion control facilities proposed for the permit to guarantee said
work and facilities in a satisfactory manner and meeting the
requirements of this chapter. No bond shall be required if another bond
or other approved security is posted for construction and/or site
improvements. When all requirements of this chapter have been met,
§ 140-7 SHALER CODE § 140-8
1:354
§ 140-9. Excavation (cuts).
§ 140-10. Fills.
and the work has been completed in a satisfactory manner, the full
amount of security shall be returned to the person posting said security.
B. Alternate surety for construction of individual residence, in lieu of
above, may be as follows:
(1) Cash deposit in the amount of $500 for each residence, refundable
upon compliance with this chapter or may remain in deposit with
the Township to be applied to the next permit.
A. General. Unless otherwise recommended in the approved soil
engineering and/or engineering geology reports, cuts shall conform to
the provisions of this section.
B. Slope. The slope of cut surfaces shall be no steeper than is safe for the
intended use. Cut slopes shall be no steeper than two horizontal to one
vertical.
C. Drainage and terracing. Drainage and terracing shall be provided as
required by § 140-12.
A. General. Unless otherwise recommended in the approved soil
engineering report, fills shall conform to the provisions of this section.
In the absence of an approved soil engineering report, these provisions
may be waived for minor fills not intended to support structures. Such
fills shall be subject to review, at the discretion of the Township Code
Enforcement Officer and/or its designee of professional engineering
services.
B. Ground preparation. The ground surface shall be prepared to receive
fill by removing vegetation, noncomplying fill, topsoil and other
unsuitable materials, scarifying to provide a bond with the new fill and,
where slopes are steeper than five to one and the height greater than
five feet, by benching into competent material or sound bedrock, as
determined by the soils engineer. The bench under the toe of a fill on a
slope steeper than five to one shall be at least 10 feet wide. The area
beyond the toe of fill shall be sloped for sheet overflow or a paved drain
shall be provided. Where fill is to be placed over a cut, the bench under
the toe of a fill shall be at least 10 feet wide, but the cut must be made
before placing fill and approved by the soils engineer and engineering
geologist as a suitable foundation for fill. Unsuitable soil is soil which, in
the opinion of the Township Code Enforcement Officer or the civil
engineer or the soils engineer or the engineering geologist, is not
competent to support either soil or fill, to support structures, or to
satisfactorily perform the other functions for which the soil is intended.
C. Fill material. Only permitted material free from tree stumps, or
detrimental amounts of organic matter, trash, garbage, sod, peat and
§ 140-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 140-10
1:355
§ 140-11. Setbacks.
similar materials shall be used. Rocks larger than six inches in greatest
dimension shall not be used unless the method of placement is properly
devised, continuously inspected, and approved by the Township. The
following shall also apply:
(1) Rock sizes greater than six inches in maximum dimension shall be
10 feet or more below grade, measured vertically.
(2) Rocks shall be placed so as to assure filling all voids with fines.
Topsoil may be used in the top twelve-inch surface layer to aid in
planting and landscaping.
D. Compaction of fill. All fills shall be compacted to a minimum relative dry
density of 90%, as determined in accordance with ASTM Standard
D-1557-78. Field density verification shall be determined in accordance
with ASTM Standard D-1556-82, or equivalent, and must be submitted
for any fill 12 inches or more in depth where such fill may support the
foundation for a structure. A higher relative dry density or additional
compaction tests, or both, may be required at any time by the Township.
E. Fill slope. The slope of fill surfaces shall be no steeper than is safe for
the intended use. Fill slopes shall be no steeper than 2 horizontal to 1
vertical.
F. Drainage and terracing. Drainage and terracing shall be provided and
the area above fill slopes and the surfaces of terraces shall be graded
and paved as required by § 140-12.
A. General. The setbacks and other restrictions specified by this section
are minimal and may be increased by the Township or by the
recommendation of the civil engineer, soils engineer or engineering
geologist, if necessary for safety and stability or to prevent damage of
adjacent properties from deposition or erosion or to provide access for
slope maintenance and drainage.
B. Setbacks from property lines. The tops of cuts and toes of fill slopes
shall be set back from the outer boundaries of the permit area,
including slope right areas and easements, in accordance with Figure 1
at the end of this chapter.
C. Setbacks for retaining walls.
(1) Retaining walls four feet in height or less. A retaining wall which is
not over four feet in height may be placed on a property line,
provided the retaining wall is not in a public right-of-way area.
(2) Retaining walls higher than four feet in height. A retaining wall
which is over four feet in height shall be set back a minimum of five
feet from all property lines for each additional four feet in height
over four feet. For example, a retaining wall or a terraced retaining
§ 140-10 SHALER CODE § 140-11
1:356
§ 140-12. Drainage and terracing.
wall over four feet in height but not over eight feet in height shall
be set back a minimum of five feet from all property lines, and a
retaining wall or a terraced retaining wall over eight feet in height
but less than 12 feet in height shall be set back a minimum of 10
feet from all property lines.
(3) Terraced retaining walls. The height of a terraced retaining wall is
cumulative and is equal to the combined height of each wall. There
shall be a minimum of five feet between the exposed faces of each
wall.
(4) Measurement of height. The height of a retaining wall shall be
measured from the lowest level of the grade on the exterior side of
the wall that faces a street, alley or other property to the top of the
wall.
(5) Building permit. A building permit is required for all retaining walls
over four feet in height, including the cumulative height of all
terraced retaining walls over four feet in height.
(6) Fences on retaining walls. Where a fence is placed on a retaining
wall, the height of the wall is restricted by the above wall
requirements, and the height of the fence is restricted by the
maximum height for a fence.
(7) A waiver to the requirements of this section may be granted by the
Township when a proposed retaining wall is necessary to ensure
the normal use of the property, i.e., for a sideline driveway.
(8) A waiver to the requirements of this section may be granted by the
Township when a proposed retaining wall is a joint venture
between adjacent property owners and a document satisfactory to
the Township is filed with the application for a building permit.
A. General. Unless otherwise indicated on the approved grading plan,
drainage facilities and terracing shall conform to the provisions of this
section.
B. Terrace. Terraces at least six feet in width shall be established at not
more than twenty-foot vertical intervals on all cut or fill slopes to
control surface drainage and debris; except that, where only one
terrace is required, it shall be at mid-height. For cut or fill slopes
greater than 20 feet and up to 40 feet in vertical height, one terrace at
approximately mid-height shall be 12 feet in width. Terrace widths and
spacing for cut-and-fill slopes greater than four feet in height shall be
designed by the civil engineer and approved by the Township. Suitable
access shall be provided to permit proper cleaning and maintenance. A
single run of swale or ditch shall not collect runoff from a tributary area
exceeding 13,500 square feet (projected) without discharging into a
down drain.
§ 140-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 140-12
1:357
C. Subsurface drainage.
(1) Cut-and-fill slopes shall be provided with subdrainage as necessary
for stability. Adequate culverts shall be laid under all fills placed in
natural watercourses and along the flow line of any tributary
branches in such a manner that the hydraulic characteristics of the
stream are not adversely altered. In addition, subdrainage shall be
installed if active or potential springs or seeps are covered by the
fill. All culverts/subdrainage shall be installed after the suitable
subgrade preparation. Design details of culverts/subdrainage shall
be shown on each plan and be subject to the approval of the
Township and of other government/private agencies as may be
required. A subdrain system shall be provided for embedded
foundation/retaining walls and floor slabs where groundwater or
seepage has a potential to affect the performance of the structure.
The plans shall indicate:
(a) Subdrainage details with appropriate specifications;
(b) Location of footing subdrain/discharge lines; and
(c) Method of disposal.
(2) In lieu of above, walls/floors may be waterproofed and designed to
resist hydrostatic pressure.
D. Disposal. All drainage facilities shall be designed to carry waters to the
nearest practicable drainageway or approved stormwater management
facility, as approved by the Township and/or other appropriate
jurisdiction, as a safe place to deposit such waters. Erosion of ground in
the area of discharge shall be prevented by installation of nonerosive
down drains or other devices. Building pads shall have a drainage
gradient of 2% toward approved drainage facilities, unless waived by
the Township. Exception: The gradient from the building pad may be
1%, if all of the following conditions exist throughout the permit area:
(1) No proposed fills are greater than 10 feet in maximum depth.
(2) No proposed finish cut or fill slope faces have a vertical line in
excess of 10 feet.
(3) No existing slope faces, which have a slope face steeper than 10
horizontal to one vertical, have a vertical height in excess of 10
feet.
E. Interceptor drains. Paved interceptor drains shall be installed along the
top of all cut slopes where the tributary drainage area above slopes
towards the cut and has a drainage path greater than 40 feet, measured
horizontally. Interceptor drains shall be paved with a minimum of three
inches of concrete or gunite and reinforced. They shall have a minimum
depth of 12 inches and a minimum paved width of 30 inches, measured
§ 140-12 SHALER CODE § 140-12
1:358
§ 140-13. Supervision.
§ 140-14. Grading inspection.
horizontally across the drain. The slope of the drain shall be approved
by the Township.
A. The permit holder or his agent shall notify the administrator in writing
of the start and completion of each continuous grading operation.
Notice shall be received by the administrator or at his office at least two
working days before the start of completion of grading operation.
B. Grading work at these stages or at any other time will be subject to spot
inspections, at the discretion of the administrator, to determine that the
work is being performed in compliance with these regulations.
C. In cases when grading occurs in areas of landslide-prone soil, as
recognized by the soil survey or better, the administrator may require
special precautions from the grader, which precautions shall be in
accordance with sound engineering practice. The results of all soil tests
and core borings made relating to the site graded shall be submitted to
the administrator.
A. General. All grading operations for which a permit is required shall be
subject to inspection by the Township. When required by the Township,
special inspection of grading operations and special testing shall be
performed in accordance with the provisions of § 140-14C.
B. Grading designation. All grading in excess of 5,000 cubic yards shall be
performed in accordance with the approved grading plan prepared by a
civil engineer and shall be designated as "engineered grading." Grading
involving less than 5,000 cubic yards may also be designated as
"engineered grading" by the Township, if the grading will:
(1) Support a building or structure of a permanent nature;
(2) Support other engineering works, such as, but not limited to, tanks,
towers, machinery, retaining wall and paving;
(3) Be deemed a potential hazard under § 140-6. The permittee, with
the approval of the Township, may also choose to have the grading
performed as "engineered grading." Otherwise, the grading shall
be designated as "regular grading."
C. Engineered grading requirements.
(1) For engineered grading, it shall be the responsibility of the civil
engineer who prepares the approved grading plan to incorporate
all recommendations from the soil engineering and engineering
geology reports into the grading plan. He shall also be responsible
for the professional inspection and approval of the grading within
his area of technical specialty. This responsibility shall include, but
§ 140-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 140-14
1:359
need not be limited to, inspection and approval as to the
establishment of line, grade and drainage of the development area.
The civil engineer shall act as the coordinating agent in the event
that need arises for liaison between the other professionals, the
contractor and the Township. The civil engineer shall also be
responsible for the preparation of revised plans and the submission
of as-graded grading plans upon completion of the work. The
grading contractor shall submit in a form prescribed by the
Township a statement of compliance to said as-graded plan.
(2) Soil engineering and engineering geology reports shall be required
as specified in this chapter. During grading, all necessary reports,
compaction data, and soil engineering and engineering geology
recommendations shall be submitted to the civil engineer and the
Township by the soil engineer and the engineering geologist. The
soil engineer's area of responsibility shall include, but need not be
limited to, the professional inspection and approval concerning the
preparation of ground to receive fills, testing for required
compaction, stability of all finish slopes, and the design of buttress
fills, where required, incorporating data supplied by the
engineering geologist.
(3) The engineering geologist's area of responsibility shall include, but
need not be limited to, professional inspection and approval of the
adequacy of natural ground for receiving fills and the stability of
cut slopes with respect to geological matters, and the need for
subdrains or other groundwater drainage devices. He shall report
the findings to the soil engineer and the civil engineer for
engineering analysis.
(4) The Township shall inspect the project at the various stages of work
requiring approval and at more frequent intervals necessary to
determine that adequate control is being exercised by the
professional consultants.
D. Regular grading requirements. The Township may require inspection
and testing by an approved testing agency. The testing agency's
responsibility shall include, but need not be limited to, approval
concerning the inspection of cleared areas and benches to receive fill
and the compaction of fills. When the Township has cause to believe
that geological factors may be involved, the grading operation will be
required to conform to engineered grading requirements.
E. Notification of noncompliance. If in the course of fulfilling its
responsibilities under this chapter the civil engineer, the soil engineer,
the engineering geologist, or the testing agency finds that the work is
not being done in conformity with this chapter or the approved grading
plans, the discrepancies shall be reported immediately in writing to the
person in charge of the grading work and to the Township.
Recommendations for corrective measures, if necessary, shall be
submitted.
§ 140-14 SHALER CODE § 140-14
1:360
§ 140-15. Completion of work and maintenance.
F. Transfer of responsibility for approval. If the civil engineer, the soil
engineer, the engineering geologist, or the testing agency of record are
changed during the course of the work, the work shall be stopped until
the replacement has agreed to accept the responsibility within the area
of its technical competence for approval upon completion of the work.
A. Final reports. Upon completion of the rough grading work and the final
completion of the work the Township may require, the following reports
and drawings and supplements thereto must be provided:
(1) An as-graded grading plan prepared by the civil engineer, including
original ground surface elevations, as-graded ground surface
elevations, lot drainage patterns, and locations and elevations of all
surface and subsurface drainage facilities. The civil engineer shall
provide approval that the work was done in accordance with the
final approved grading plan.
(2) A soil grading report prepared by the soil engineer, including
locations and elevations of field density tests, summaries of field
and laboratory tests, and other substantiating data and comments
on any changes made during grading, and their effect on the
recommendations made in the soil engineering investigation
report. He shall provide approval as to the adequacy of the site for
the intended use.
(3) A geological grading report prepared by the engineering geologist,
including a final description of the geology of the site, including any
new information disclosed during the grading and the effect of
same on recommendations incorporated in the approved grading
plan. The civil engineer shall provide approval as to the adequacy
of the site for the intended use as affected by geological factors.
B. Notification of completion. The permittee or his agent shall notify the
Township when the grading operation is ready for final inspection. Final
approval shall not be given until all work, including installation of all
drainage facilities and their protective devices and all erosion control
measures, has been completed in accordance with the final approved
grading plan, and the required reports have been submitted.
C. Maintenance.
(1) The owner of any property on which an excavation or fill has been
made shall maintain in good condition and repair the excavation or
fill permitted and also all retaining walls, cribbing, drainage
structures, fences, ground cover and any other protective devices
as may be a part of the permit requirements.
(2) If at any time subsequent to the completion of the grading work the
cut face or fill slope shall evidence signs of deterioration, erosion or
other evidence which might be detrimental to the properties above
§ 140-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 140-15
1:361
§ 140-16. Expiration of permit.
Every grading permit shall expire by limitation and become null and void
if the work authorized by such permit has not been commenced within
one year or if it is not completed within the time indicated on the permit,
said completion date not to exceed one year from the date on which the
Township receives written notification that work has commenced, provided
that the governing body, acting upon the recommendation of the
administrator, may, if the permit holder presents satisfactory evidence that
unusual difficulties have prevented work from being started or completed
within the specified time limits, grant a reasonable extension of time; and
provided, further, that the application for the extension of time is made
before the date of expiration of the permit. Any physical changes in the site,
such as surface water drainage, soil and bedrock dislocations, alteration
of groundwater discharge or any other natural or man-made modification
which would cause a doubt to be cast upon the feasibility of the contents
of the original permit approval, must be reported to the administrator in
the intervening period between approval of permit and completion of the
project.
§ 140-17. Denial of permit; appeal.
and below the grading site, the administrator may direct the
property owner to take necessary remedial steps in accordance
with sound engineering practice to restore the grading to a safe
condition and to do so in a reasonable period of time.
A. When the requirements of this chapter for obtaining a permit have been
met, the administrator shall approve the proposed plan and grant a
grading permit to the applicant. Approved work may then start.
However, when, in the opinion of the administrator, work proposed by
the applicant is likely to endanger any property or person or any street
or alley or create hazardous conditions, the grading permit shall be
denied. In determining whether the proposed work is likely to endanger
property or streets or alleys or create hazardous conditions, the
administrator shall give due consideration to possible saturation by
rains, earth movements, runoffs, surface waters and subsurface
conditions, such as the stratification and faulting of rock, aquifers,
springs and the nature and type of the soil or rock. Any party aggrieved
by the decision of the administrator shall appeal the administrator's
decision to the governing body within 30 days of receipt of notice of
such decision.
B. The governing body shall, within 45 days of the filing of an appeal from
the decision of the administrator, consider the alternate methods,
standards or materials proposed by the developer when, in the
developer's opinion, strict compliance with the provisions of these
regulations is unnecessary. Any applicant or permit holder shall have
the right to appeal to any court of competent jurisdiction from any
decisions of the governing body.
§ 140-15 SHALER CODE § 140-18
1:362
§ 140-18. Liability.
Neither the issuance of a permit under the provisions of this chapter nor the
compliance with the provisions hereto or with any condition imposed by the
administrator hereunder shall relieve any person from any responsibility for
damage to persons or property resulting therefrom or as otherwise imposed
by law, nor impose any liability upon the Township for damages to persons
or property.
§ 140-19. Schedule of fees.
A fee in the amount of $5 per acre or each portion thereof will be charged
for each grading permit.
§ 140-20. Notice to cease violation.
Upon written notice of any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter
being served by the administrator on any person, such violation shall be
discontinued in accordance with said notice. If violation is not discontinued,
the administrator shall revoke the grading permit, and the violator shall be
subject to fine.
§ 140-21. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
subject to a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000 plus the costs
of proceedings for each offense, the same to be collected in the name of
the Township of Shaler by summary proceeding, and, in default of payment
of the fine and costs, such person shall be committed to the Allegheny
County Jail for a period not to exceed 90 days. The continuance of any
violation of this chapter for each period of 24 hours after notice of the same
by the administrator shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense for
each twenty-four-hour period. Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to
preclude the Township of Shaler to seek other relief or avail itself of any
remedy that may be at law or in equity to prevent continuing violation of the
terms of this chapter or to restrain or abate such violation.
Chapter 143
HOUSES AND BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 171.
§ 143-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "House Numbering Ordinance" of the
Township.
§ 140-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 143-2
1:363
§ 143-2. Adoption of provisions.
The Board of Commissioners of the Township of Shaler hereby adopts the
following provisions with respect to house and building numbering in the
Township of Shaler.
§ 143-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to require the clear display of authorized
and assigned house or building numbers on every building fronting on
any street in the Township of Shaler in order to assist the general public
and emergency services, public and private, in identifying any building
in case of emergency or otherwise. It is also the purpose of this chapter
to eliminate duplicate, nonsequential and conflicting house and building
numbers so that emergency vehicles are not dispatched to an erroneous
address. Finally, it is the intent of this chapter to require that each
telephone physically located in Shaler Township, irrespective of the billing
address of the telephone, be assigned an identification and location number
for emergency purposes.
§ 143-4. Applicability.
All residential, commercial and industrial buildings erected or to be erected
within the Township of Shaler shall display identification numbers as
provided herein and in accordance with this chapter. Moreover, each
telephone physically located in Shaler Township, and irrespective of the
billing address of the telephone, shall be assigned an identification and
location number for emergency purposes.
§ 143-5. Determination and assignment of house and building
numbers.
House and building numbers shall be determined and assigned by the
Township of Shaler Building Inspector. If on the effective date of this
chapter a structure exists in Shaler Township which requires a house or
building number, and a number has not yet been assigned to such structure,
the Township Building Inspector shall notify the owner of the structure
when a house or building number is assigned to such structure. Moreover,
the Building Inspector shall assign an identification and location number
to each telephone physically located in Shaler Township. Identification and
location numbers assigned by the Building Inspector to telephones may be
identical to the house and building number assigned to the structure in
which the telephone is located.
§ 143-6. Duplicate, nonsequential or conflicting identification
numbers.
It shall also be the duty of the Township Building Inspector to ascertain
if any duplicate, nonsequential or conflicting street identification numbers
exist in the Township of Shaler. If the Township Building Inspector
determines that a duplicate, nonsequential or conflicting street
§ 143-2 SHALER CODE § 143-6
1:364
identification number exists, it shall be the duty of the Building Inspector to
assign or reassign a different street identification number to such structure;
to require that such new street identification number be used to identify
such property; and to promptly notify the owner of the affected structure
that a new house or building number has been assigned to such structure.
In assigning or reassigning a new house or building number pursuant to
this section, the Building Inspector shall make all new assignments and
reassignments of street identification numbers as shall be necessary to
promote public safety.
§ 143-7. Appeals of reassignment of street identification numbers.
Any person aggrieved by the reassignment of a street identification number
may appeal the determination of the Township Building Inspector to the
Township Zoning Hearing Board within 30 days after notice of the decision
by the Township Building Inspector and not thereafter.
§ 143-8. Placement of street identification numbers.
The owner, occupant or lessee of every house and building in Shaler
Township which now or hereafter fronts on any public or private street,
and who has been assigned or reassigned a house number either prior or
subsequent to the effective date of this chapter, shall, at his or her own
expense and within 30 days after the effective date of this chapter or notice
of such assignment or reassignment, cause the authorized and assigned or
reassigned number of such structure to be permanently and conspicuously
placed in accordance with the specifications set forth herein. Any owner
who has not been assigned a number prior to the effective date of this
chapter shall, within 30 days after notice of assignment of such number,
comply with all requirements of this chapter.
§ 143-9. Specifications.
House or building numbers shall be:
A. In Arabic numerals;
B. A minimum height of three inches for residential properties, a minimum
height of six inches for commercial and industrial properties, and a
minimum height of six inches for garden apartments and townhouse
condominium complexes;
C. Mounted in a secure fashion to the front wall or porch of the building so
as to be clearly visible from the street;
D. Sufficiently legible in contrasting background, arrangement, spacing
and uniformity so as to be clearly visible from the street; and
E. Affixed at least 30 inches above the ground.
§ 143-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 143-10
1:365
§ 143-10. Placing numbers on post, rod or mailbox.
If numbers affixed to the front of a house or building would not be clearly
visible from the street, the requirements of § 143-6 of this chapter may be
satisfied if the owner, occupant or lessee permanently affixes the assigned
Arabic numbers upon a post, rod, mailbox or other substantial fixture at or
near the street, so that such numbers are conspicuous and visible from the
street upon which the house or building fronts. When the assigned Arabic
numbers are affixed upon a post, rod, mailbox or other type of fixture of
a substantial nature, at or near the street, the owner, occupant or lessee
of the house or building shall not be otherwise obligated to affix Arabic
numbers to his or her house or building and shall be permitted at his or her
option to utilize cursive numbers or no numbers at all upon the house or
building.
§ 143-11. Garden apartments, townhouse condominium complexes
and other buildings.
The owner or owners of garden apartments, townhouse condominium
complexes and other buildings shall provide each building with numbers as
are provided for in this chapter. Each apartment unit in every apartment
building shall display either an Arabic numeral or an alphabetical letter on
its door, a minimum of three inches in height, particularly identifying the
apartment unit.
§ 143-12. Certificates of occupancy.
After the effective date of this chapter, the Township Building Inspector
shall not issue a certificate of occupancy for any residential, commercial
and industrial structure which is erected, repaired, altered or modified and
which fronts on any street in the Township until the structure is assigned a
house, building or apartment number and such number is permanently and
conspicuously affixed to such house, building or apartment in accordance
with this chapter.
§ 143-13. Violation and penalties.
Any person, partnership or corporation who violates any of the provisions of
this chapter shall, upon conviction in a summary proceeding, be fined not
less than $1,000 and, in default of the payment of the fine and costs, shall be
committed to the Allegheny County Jail for a period not to exceed 30 days.
Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to preclude the Township to seek
other relief or avail itself of any remedy that may be at law or in equity to
prevent continuing violations of the terms of this chapter. Each day that the
violation occurs shall be deemed to be a separate violation.
§ 143-14. Authority.
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the powers and authority of the First
Class Township Code, 53 P.S. § 56522 (relating to regulating the numbering
of buildings) as well as 53 P.S. § 56510 (relating to public safety).
§ 143-10 SHALER CODE § 143-14
1:366
Chapter 146
JUNKED, ABANDONED AND NUISANCE MOTOR VEHICLES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 171.
Abandoned and junked vehicles — See Ch.
172, Art. I.
Zoning — See Ch. 225.
§ 146-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the accumulation and storage of
junk motor vehicles and nuisance motor vehicles in order to minimize safety
hazards created by such nuisance vehicles to protect the integrity of the
community; to prohibit the accumulation of storage of junked, abandoned
or discarded vehicles, trailers or boats which create an attractive nuisance
for children, provide a breeding area for rodents and other unhealthful
animals, and which violate all concepts of ecological and environmental
principles; and to otherwise protect the general health, safety and welfare
of the citizens of Shaler Township.
§ 146-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABANDONED OR JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLE OR MOTORCYCLE — Any
motorized device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon a public highway, including trailers and
semitrailers designed for use with such vehicles, and which are required to
be registered by the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code under 75 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 1301, and which is not in working order, does not have a current
registration plate or valid inspection sticker attached, and which has been
stored or kept outside of an enclosed building for a period in excess of 15
days.
DISMANTLED OR PARTIALLY DISMANTLED VEHICLE — Any motor
vehicle or part thereof, as defined in the Vehicle Code of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania, which has been rendered inoperable because a part or
parts has or have been removed therefrom.
INOPERABLE — As applied to motor vehicles under this chapter:
A motor vehicle that does not have a current registration plate and a
current inspection sticker; or
A.
A motor vehicle that does not have the required number of wheels or
tires, does not have one or more of its doors or windows, does not
B.
§ 143-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 146-2
1:367
MOTOR VEHICLE — A vehicle which is self-propelled, except one which
is propelled solely by human power or by electric power obtained from
overhead trolley wires but not operated upon rails.
NUISANCE MOTOR VEHICLE — Any condition of a motor vehicle which
shall constitute a threat or potential threat to the health, safety or welfare
of the residents of the Township of Shaler.
OR PARTS THEREOF — When used in the clause with "abandoned or junked
vehicles" or "dismantled or partially dismantled vehicles," the term shall
mean a component of a vehicle, including but not limited to bumpers,
doors, fenders, tires, windows or windshields, motors, transmissions, axles
or suspension frames, chassis, or any other component of a vehicle which is
either wrecked, discarded, dismantled, partially dismantled or inoperable,
as well as including pieces or portions thereof.
PRIVATE PROPERTY or PRIVATE PREMISES — Real property which
belongs to or is owned, controlled or used by any person, association,
partnership, firm or corporation, whether owned or leased, and not
constituting public property. All property which is not public property or
a public place is private property or a private premises, including but not
limited to any house, building or other structure designed or used, either
wholly or in part, for private residential purposes, whether inhabited or
temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and shall include any
yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox belonging
or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building or other structure,
including structures designed or utilized for commercial, business,
industrial, institutional or religious purposes. The term shall also include
that portion of any public right-of-way adjacent to the property line which is
not improved with a cartway for public travel.
PUBLIC PROPERTY — Real property which is owned by a municipal or
governmental entity, though not necessarily a place devoted solely to the
uses of the public, but shall include any public street, private street,
highway, road, alley, bridge, park, playground, vacant lot, stream, creek,
public building or similar place within the Township of Shaler which is open
to the public or to which the public or a substantial group has access. This
includes any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other public
ways and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds and buildings.
SALVOR — A person engaged in the business of acquiring abandoned
vehicles for the purpose of taking apart, recycling, selling, rebuilding or
exchanging the vehicle or parts thereof.
SCREENED — The use of any natural objects, plantings, embankments,
fencing, walls or structures, or a combination of any of these, which will
effectively hide any junked or abandoned vehicle, dismantled or partially
dismantled vehicle, or parts thereof, so as not to be visible from the highway
or abutting properties at all times of the year or by an occupant of a motor
vehicle viewing from a height of 4 1/2 feet above the pavement.
have an engine or does not have a battery, or lacks any part which is
necessary to self-propel it.
§ 146-2 SHALER CODE § 146-2
1:368
VALUELESS EXCEPT FOR SALVAGE — A vehicle which is inoperable or
unable to meet the vehicle equipment and inspection standards under
Part IV (relating to vehicle characteristics) of the Vehicle Code of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 4101 et seq., to the extent
that the cost of repairs would exceed the value of the required vehicle.
The term does not include a vehicle which would qualify as an antique or
classic vehicle under the Vehicle Code except for its lack of restoration or
maintenance. A vehicle which is inoperable or unable to meet the vehicle
equipment and inspection standards of Part IV (relating to vehicle
characteristics) to the extent that the cost of repairs would exceed the value
of the required vehicle shall be presumed to be valueless except for salvage,
but the presumption is rebuttable by a presumption of the evidence.
VEHICLE SALVAGE YARD — Any land or structure which a salvor uses
for a salvaging operation of two or more unlicensed, inoperative vehicles.
Salvaging includes the storage and sale of vehicular parts or vehicles.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which any person or property
is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices used
exclusively upon rails or tracks. The term does not include a self-propelled
wheelchair or an electrical mobility device operated by and designed for the
exclusive use of a person with a mobility-related disability.
VEHICULAR FLUIDS — A substance or liquid used frequently in motor
vehicles, such as gas, oil or antifreeze.
§ 146-3. Presumption of abandonment.
A. A vehicle shall be presumed to be abandoned under any of the following
circumstances, but the presumption is rebuttable by a preponderance
of the evidence:
(1) The vehicle is physically inoperable and is left unattended on a
highway or other public property for more than 48 hours.
(2) The vehicle has remained illegally on a highway or other public
property for a period of more than 48 hours.
(3) The vehicle is left unattended on or along a highway or other public
property for more than 48 hours and does not bear all of the
following:
(a) A valid registration plate.
(b) A certificate of inspection.
(c) An ascertainable vehicle identification number.
(4) The vehicle has remained on private property without the consent
of the owner or person in control of the property for more than 48
hours.
B. Vehicles and equipment used or to be used in construction or in the
operation or maintenance of highways or public utility facilities which
§ 146-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 146-3
1:369
§ 146-4. Storage of inoperable motor vehicles.
Any person, owner or lessee who has an abandoned or junked vehicle,
dismantled or partially dismantled vehicle, wrecked, junked, discarded or
an otherwise inoperable motor vehicle, or a vehicle valueless except for
salvage, or parts thereof, may store such vehicle(s) in the Township only in
strict compliance with the regulations provided herein.
§ 146-5. Vehicle salvage yards and junkyards requirements.
are left in a manner which do not interfere with the normal movement
of traffic shall not be considered to be abandoned.
A. The abandoned, dismantled, junked or wrecked vehicle must be stored
and kept within a garage or other enclosed building, or outside within
an opaque fence at least six feet high which is locked at all times when
unattended with the special approval of the Board of Commissioners.
B. With the special approval of the Board of Commissioners, one
abandoned, dismantled, junked or wrecked vehicle may also be stored
outside in an area enclosed by a chain-link fence at least six feet high,
screened by shrubbery around the perimeter to the height of the fence,
with an unobstructed gate capable of admitting fire or emergency
equipment under such terms and conditions as approved by the Board
of Commissioners. Nothing herein shall be construed to permit the
storage of abandoned, dismantled, junked or wrecked vehicles contrary
to the provisions of the Township Zoning Ordinance.92
C. No person shall keep, maintain or store any motor vehicle which is
leaking any vehicular fluids outside an enclosed structure in any zoning
district in the Township.
D. An abandoned or junked vehicle, dismantled or partially dismantled
vehicle, wrecked, junked, discarded or an otherwise inoperable motor
vehicle, or a vehicle valueless except for salvage, or parts thereof, as
well as construction equipment, farm machinery or equipment and
motorcycles, shall only be stored or kept on private land in the
Township in such a manner so as not to cause loud noise or offensive
odors, attract vermin or in any manner as to constitute a nuisance.
E. No abandoned or junked vehicle, dismantled or partially dismantled
vehicle, wrecked, junked, discarded or an otherwise inoperable motor
vehicle, or a vehicle valueless except for salvage, or parts thereof,
construction equipment, farm machinery or equipment or motorcycles
shall be stored or kept on public land in the Township of Shaler.
A. Such business is in full compliance with the Act of June 17, 1976, P.L.
162, No. 81, § 1 et seq., as amended, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 7301 (relating to
salvors), as well as Chapter 253 of Title 67 of the Pennsylvania Code, 67
92.Editor's Note: See Ch. 225, Zoning.
§ 146-3 SHALER CODE § 146-5
1:370
§ 146-6. Relocation of cited vehicles prohibited.
After a warning is issued or a citation filed, it shall be unlawful for any
person to relocate an abandoned or junked vehicle, dismantled or partially
dismantled vehicle, or a vehicle valueless except for salvage, or parts
thereof, to another location in Shaler Township unless in full compliance
with this chapter.
§ 146-7. Notice to remove violations; failure to comply.
The Township Manager, the Township Code Enforcement Officer, or his or
her designee, and Shaler Township police officers are hereby authorized
and directed to give notice, by personal service, United States Mail, or by
posting of such notice, to the owner or occupant, as the case may be, of
any premises or location where violations of this chapter exist, directing
and requiring such owner or occupant to remove or eliminate such violation
within 10 days after the issuance of the notice. If any person shall neglect,
fail or refuse to comply with such notice within the period stated therein,
such person shall be subject to the penalties provided in this chapter for
the violations hereof, and in addition, the proper officers of the Township
may remove such violation of this chapter. and the costs thereof, together
with any additional payment authorized by law, may be collected by the
Township from such person in the manner provided by law, and upon the
neglect, failure or refusal to pay the costs of removal, the proper officers of
the Township may cause a lien to be filed against the property.
§ 146-8. Covering of abandoned or junked vehicle or parts thereof.
Covering or draping a tarpaulin, car cover or other covering over an
abandoned or junked vehicle, a dismantled or partially dismantled vehicle,
or a vehicle valueless except for salvage, or parts thereof, is not an
abatement of a violation of this chapter and does not constitute compliance
with this chapter.
Pa. Code § 253.1 et seq., which establishes rules governing the
qualifications and duties of salvors.
B. Each year upon renewal, such business shall provide the Township
Building Inspector a valid copy of its license or certificate of
authorization from the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
C. The certificate of authorization is displayed in its place of business.
D. All such vehicles or parts thereof in the salvage yard or junkyard are
screened so as not to be visible from the highway or abutting properties
at all times of the year.
E. All such vehicles or parts thereof are not leaking vehicular fluids.
F. The salvage yard or junkyard is located in an I Industrial District.
§ 146-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 146-9
1:371
§ 146-9. Inspection of premises.
The Code Enforcement Officer is hereby empowered to inspect private
property in the Township on which an abandoned or junked vehicle,
dismantled or partially dismantled vehicle, wrecked, junked, discarded or
an otherwise inoperable motor vehicle, or a vehicle valueless except for
salvage, or parts thereof, is stored to determine if there is compliance with
the provisions of this chapter.
§ 146-10. Nuisance motor vehicles prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person, owner or lessee to have, keep, store,
accumulate, maintain or keep any abandoned or junked motor vehicle or
any motor vehicle nuisance upon the open private grounds of any owner
or lessee within the Township. A motor vehicle nuisance shall include any
motor vehicle which is:
A. Unable to move under its own power;
B. A vehicle bearing no official inspection sticker or a sticker not currently
valid; or
C. A vehicle which does not possess a current and valid registration and
has any of the following physical defects:
(1) Broken windshields, mirrors or other glass with sharp edges;
(2) One or more flat or open tires or tubes which could permit vermin
harborage;
(3) Missing doors, windows, hood, trunk or other body parts which
could permit animal harborage;
(4) Any body parts with sharp edges, including holes resulting from
rust;
(5) Missing tires resulting in unsafe suspension of the motor vehicle;
(6) Upholstery which is torn or open, which could permit animal and/or
vermin harborage;
(7) Broken headlamps or taillamps with sharp edges;
(8) Disassembled chassis parts apart from the motor vehicle or loose in
or on the vehicle;
(9) Protruding sharp objects from the chassis;
(10) Broken vehicle frame suspended from the ground in an unstable
manner;
(11) Leaking or damaged oil pan or gas tank or leaking vehicular fluids;
(12) Exposed battery containing acid;
§ 146-9 SHALER CODE § 146-10
1:372
§ 146-11. Other prohibited acts.
No abandoned or junked motor vehicle or vehicles or construction
equipment or farm machinery or equipment or motorcycles shall be stored
or kept on private land in the Township of Shaler by any person, association
or corporation in such a manner as to cause loud noise or offensive odors,
attract vermin or in any manner as to constitute a nuisance.
§ 146-12. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm, association, corporation or entity who violates any
provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof in a summary
proceeding before a Magisterial District Judge having jurisdiction of the
matter, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $100 nor more than
$1,000 plus costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of such fine
and costs, shall be committed to the Allegheny County Jail for a period
not to exceed 90 days. Each day that a violation of this chapter continues
shall constitute a separate offense, and neither notice to the offender of a
single day's violation nor repeated notice of a continuing violation shall be
necessary in order to constitute such separate offense.
§ 146-13. Additional penalties; abatement.
In addition to the penalties provided in § 146-12 above, the Board of
Commissioners shall have the power, in default of the abatement or removal
of said nuisance by the person, firm or corporation involved after proper
notice, to cause the necessary work to be done to accomplish said
abatement and collect the cost, together with a penalty of 10% of said cost
therefor, from the person, firm or corporation responsible therefor.
(13) Inoperable locking mechanism for doors or trunk;
(14) Open or damaged floorboards, including trunk and firewall;
(15) Damaged bumpers pulled away from the perimeter of vehicle;
(16) Broken grill with protruding edges;
(17) Loose or damaged metal trim and clips;
(18) Broken communication equipment antennas;
(19) Suspended on unstable supports; or
(20) Such other defects which could threaten the health, safety and
welfare of the citizens of the Township.
§ 146-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 146-13
1:373
Chapter 149
LITTERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 87.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 171.
Solid waste — See Ch. 187.
§ 149-1. Legislative findings.
It is hereby declared and found that litter carelessly deposited in the
Township of Shaler is the cause of civic disgrace; that litter is a health, fire
and safety hazard and a pollutant; that an all-out litter-control campaign
can result in substantial savings to the taxpayers of the Township of Shaler;
that the First Class Township Code authorizes regulations to prevent the
accumulation of manure, compost and the like and to prohibit the
accumulation of ashes, garbage, rubbish and other refuse materials upon
private properties, including the imposition and collection of reasonable
fees and charges for the collection, removal and disposition thereof; and
that litter and leaf waste and grass clippings is a matter affecting the
public interest, and consequently should be subject to supervision and
administrative control for the purpose of safeguarding the public health,
safety and general welfare of the people of the Township of Shaler.
§ 149-2. Littering in public places prohibited.
No person shall throw, discard, leave, emit, deposit or allow the depositing
of any litter or leaf waste or grass clippings in or upon any street, sidewalk
or other public place or right-of-way within the Township except in public
receptacles or in private receptacles for collection.
§ 149-3. Placing litter in receptacles required.
All persons shall place litter in public or private receptacles and shall do so
in such a manner as to prevent the litter from being carried or deposited by
the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private
property.
§ 149-4. Sweeping and depositing litter and leaf waste in gutters
and streets prohibited.
No person shall sweep or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place
or right-of-way within the Township the accumulation of litter from any
building, litter from any public sidewalk or driveway, or leaf waste, grass
clippings or branches from any private property.
§ 146-13 SHALER CODE § 149-5
1:374
§ 149-5. Littering from vehicles prohibited.
No person while a driver or passenger in a vehicle shall throw, discard,
emit, deposit or allow the depositing of litter upon any street or public place
within the Township or upon private property.
§ 149-6. Trucks causing litter.
No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the
Township unless such vehicle is so constructed or located as to prevent any
load, contents or litter from being blown or deposited upon any street, alley
or other public place, nor shall any person drive or move any vehicle or
truck within the Township, the wheels or tires of which carry onto or deposit
in any street, alley or other public place mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter
or foreign matter of any kind.
§ 149-7. Littering in parks prohibited.
No person shall throw, discard, emit, deposit or allow the depositing of litter
in any park within the Township except in public receptacles and in such a
manner that the litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by
the elements upon any part of the park or upon any street or other public
place. Where public receptacles are not provided or are filled to capacity,
all such litter shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible
for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere, as provided herein.
§ 149-8. Littering in public waters prohibited.
No person shall throw, discard, emit, deposit or allow the depositing of litter
in any fountain, pond, stream, creek or any other body of water in a park or
elsewhere within the Township.
§ 149-9. Illegal dumping prohibited.
No person shall discard or dump along any public place any household
or commercial solid waste, leaf waste, rubbish, refuse, junk, vehicle or
vehicle parts, rubber tires, appliances or furniture that is not specifically
designated for the purpose of solid waste storage or disposal.
§ 149-10. Littering on private and commercial premises prohibited.
No person shall throw, discard, emit, deposit or allow the depositing of
litter on any occupied private property or commercial place within the
Township, whether owned by such person or not, except that the owner
or person in control of such private property or commercial place may
maintain authorized private receptacles for collection in such a manner that
litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements
upon any street or other public place or upon any private property.
§ 149-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-11
1:375
§ 149-11. Maintenance of commercial premises free of litter.
Each owner or person in control of any commercial place, including
shopping centers and delivery and parking areas at such location, shall keep
said places, parking areas, delivery areas and other open areas which are a
part of such commercial place free from litter.
§ 149-12. Maintenance of private premises free of litter.
The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times
maintain the premises free of litter; provided, however, that this section
shall not prohibit either the storage or the placement of litter, refuse,
rubbish, trash or recycling materials in proper storage receptacles on
private premises by the owner for collection.
§ 149-13. Littering on vacant lots prohibited.
No person shall throw, discard, emit, deposit or allow the depositing of litter
on any open or vacant private property within the Township, whether owned
by such person or not.
§ 149-14. Notice to dispose of litter; failure to comply.
§ 149-15. Violations and penalties.
Any person who deposits or otherwise disposes of any garbage, litter, leaf
waste, refuse, rubbish or trash or any other thing or substance in violation
of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to pay a fine not exceeding
$600, plus costs of prosecution, or imprisonment for a term not exceeding
15 days, or to both such fine and imprisonment. The continuation of any
A. The Township Building Inspector or his designee is hereby authorized
and empowered to notify the owner and/or occupant of any open or
vacant private premises or any occupied or unoccupied private or
business premises within the Township, or the agent of such owner or
occupant, to properly dispose of litter located on such property. Such
notice shall be by certified mail, addressed to said owner and/or
occupant at his last known address, or served personally by the
Township Building Inspector or his designee upon such owner or
occupant.
B. Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any owner or occupant so notified
to properly dispose of litter within three days after receipt of the
written notice provided for in Subsection A above, or three days after
the date of such notice in the event that the same is returned unserved,
said Township Building Inspector or his designee is hereby authorized
and empowered to order the correction of such violation, using
Township funds or Township personnel to accomplish such correction,
and may charge the costs thereof to the violator. Collection of such
costs by the Township may be made by lien or otherwise as authorized
by law.
§ 149-11 SHALER CODE § 149-15
1:376
violation against the provisions of this chapter shall constitute, for each day
the violation is continued, a separate and distinct violation hereunder.
Chapter 151
LOGGING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Grading, excavating and filling — See Ch. 140. Zoning — See Ch. 225.
§ 151-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Logging Ordinance of the Township of
Shaler."
§ 151-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CLEAR-CUT — The felling of substantially all trees on a tract of land or
portion thereof.
DBH — The diameter of a tree at breast height, usually measured 3.5 feet
from the ground surface.
FOREST — Areas, groves or stands of mature or largely mature trees (i.e.,
greater than six inches in dbh) covering an area greater than 1/4 acre,
consisting of more than 10 individual trees.[Amended 5-14-1996 by Ord.
No. 1739]
FOREST, SECONDARY — A community with an overall tree cover without
dominant oaks, hickory, sugar maple, beech, black birch, hemlock,
basswood and sycamore.
LOGGING — The act of cutting live trees for cordwood, for timber, for pulp
or for any commercial purpose, excepting therefrom a homeowner cutting
on his own property for his own use, clearing for development of building
sites or clearing for farming operations.
UNIQUE TREE — A very large, old, individual tree remaining from previous
habitation of a site (sometimes referred to as a "grandfather tree").
UNIQUE TREE STAND — A particular stand of trees within one or more
contiguous areas that is remarkable for its degree of diversity, productivity,
rareness or other identifiable qualities.
§ 151-3. Permit required.
Logging operations within the Township of Shaler on any parcel of property
over one acre in size shall require a permit from the Township Zoning
§ 149-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 151-3
1:377
Officer, as well as a letter of compliance with 25 Pa. Code Ch. 102 from
the Allegheny County Conservation District. The permit shall be valid for a
maximum of 10 acres at any one time. Logging permits shall only be valid
for a period of four months.
§ 151-4. Requirements.
§ 151-5. Bond.
Prior to the commencement of a logging operation, the person who secures
the logging permit from the Zoning Officer of Shaler Township shall post
a bond written by a surety company authorized to do business in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, with the Township as obligee, in the
amount of $500 per acre, to guarantee restoration of the property. In
A. Trees, forests and secondary forests shall be protected as follows: No
clear-cutting of a forest or secondary forest shall be permitted. Areas of
unique tree stands and identified unique trees shall be preserved.
B. The application for a logging permit shall be accompanied by a survey
of the property, with the area of trees to be cut down shown thereon,
together with the exact location of any proposed roads to facilitate the
logging operation. The survey shall define the locations and boundaries
of the wooded areas of the tract and shall note the types of vegetation
associations which exist in terms of their species, types and sizes.
C. Further, all trees of 12 inches' dbh or greater and all trees from six
inches to 12 inches in dbh shall be located accurately on the survey,
either as freestanding trees or as tree masses. Logging shall not be
undertaken on any ground with a slope exceeding 25% or in landslideprone
areas of flood-prone areas. The only trees that may be cut down
in a logging operation must have a minimum diameter of 12 inches' dbh
and a maximum diameter of 36 inches' dbh. The diameter of the trees
shall be measured at 3 1/2 feet above ground level.
D. All trees shall be removed in sections not exceeding 24 feet in length.
When a logging operation has been completed, the property shall be
replanted with trees of a similar nature, measuring a minimum of two
feet in height, to replace each tree which was cut down. All logging
debris, including small tree tops and branches, shall either be hauled
from the site or properly mulched on the site and spread, and the
property shall be completely restored to a prelogging condition. Any
roads or grading to facilitate roads inherent with the logging operation
shall be completely regraded and reseeded to restore the property to a
prelogging condition and shall comply with Chapter 140, Grading,
Excavating and Filling. Proper erosion and sedimentation control
measures shall be taken on disturbed property to prevent accelerated
water runoff. No commercial sales of wood or logs shall be permitted on
the property unless the property is located in a commercial zone,
provided that no tree may be cut which is the largest of its species in
the state.
§ 151-3 SHALER CODE § 151-5
1:378
lieu of the bond, other security acceptable to the Township (e.g., cash or
irrevocable letter of credit issued by a bank or savings and loan) may be
posted with the Township.
§ 151-6. Enforcement; remedies.
In case any land or parcel of property is or is proposed to be cleared,
altered, logged, converted, maintained, not restored or used in violation
of this chapter, the Board of Commissioners or, with the approval of the
Board of Commissioners, an officer of Shaler Township, in addition to
other remedies, may institute in the name of the Township any appropriate
action or proceeding to prevent, restrain, correct or abate such conduct
or to prevent, in or about such property, any act, conduct, business or use
constituting a violation.
§ 151-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-15-1988 by Ord. No.
1631]
Any person, partnership or corporation who or which shall violate the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof in a summary
proceeding, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000, plus
costs. In default of payment of the fine, such person, the members of
such partnership or the officers of such corporation shall be liable to
imprisonment for not more than 90 days. Each day that a violation is
continued shall constitute a separate offense. All fines collected for the
violation of this chapter shall be paid over to this Township. The owner
or owners of any land or parcel or part thereof violating this chapter, and
any architect, building contractor, agent or person employed in connection
therewith and who may have knowingly assisted in the commission of
any such violation, shall each be guilty of a separate offense and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be sentenced as herein provided.
Chapter 153
MAPS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 192.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 195.
Zoning — See Ch. 225.
§ 151-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 151-7
1:379

ARTICLE I
Official Township Zoning Map
[Adopted 12-10-2002 by Ord. No. 1800]
§ 153-1. Adoption of official Township Zoning Map.
The Official Township Zoning Map, dated November 2002, and prepared by
KLH Engineers, Inc., a copy of which is attached hereto and made a part
hereof as Exhibit A, is hereby formally adopted as the Official Township
Zoning Map of Shaler Township.93
§ 153-2. Zoning district legends and scale.
The legend and the graphic scale on the Official Township Zoning Map,
showing the various zoning districts, including GC General Commercial,
P Professional District, I Industrial District, R-1 Residential District, R-2
Residential District, R-3 Residential District, R-4 Group Dwellings District,
R-5 Apartments District, NS Neighborhood Shopping District, C Cemetery
District, as well as showing Township-owned property in Shaler Township,
are hereby accepted, approved and adopted.
§ 153-3. Interpretation of district boundaries.
Unless otherwise set forth on the Official Township Zoning Map, district
boundary lines are property lines, the center lines of streets, roads and
rights-of-way, and the boundaries of the areas shown on Exhibit A.
93.Editor's Note: Said map is on file in the Township offices.
§ 153-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-3
1:381

ARTICLE II
Official Township Ward Map
[Adopted 12-10-2002 by Ord. No. 1801]
§ 153-4. Adoption of Official Township Ward Map.
The Official Township Ward Map, dated November 2002, and prepared by
KLH Engineers, Inc., a copy of which is attached hereto and made a part
hereof as Exhibit A, is hereby formally adopted as the Official Township
Ward Map of Shaler Township.94
§ 153-5. Voting, ward and election legends.
The map legend and the graphic scale on the Official Township Ward
Map, showing the voting districts of the various wards, voting polls, ward
boundary line and election district lines in Shaler Township, are hereby
accepted, approved and adopted.
§ 153-6. Physical descriptions of wards adopted.
The physical descriptions of the various Shaler Township wards as
described on Exhibit B, a copy of which is attached hereto and made a part
hereof, are hereby accepted, approved and adopted.95
94.Editor's Note: Said map is on file in the Township offices.
95.Editor's Note: Said descriptions are on file in the Township offices.
§ 153-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-6
1:383

ARTICLE III
Official Township Street Map
[Adopted 12-10-2002 by Ord. No. 1802]
§ 153-7. Adoption of Township Street Map.
The Official Township Street Map, dated November 2002, and prepared by
KLH Engineers, Inc., a copy of which is attached hereto and made a part
hereof as Exhibit A, is hereby formally adopted as the Official Township
Street Map.96
§ 153-8. Street legend.
The street legend and graphic scale on the Official Township Street Map,
showing adopted Township streets, showing recorded streets not adopted
by the Township, showing state roads and showing county roads in Shaler
Township, are hereby accepted, approved and adopted.
96.Editor's Note: Said map is on file in the Township offices.
§ 153-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-8
1:385
Chapter 155
MOTORIZED VEHICLES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 212.
§ 155-1. Prohibited acts.
From and after the effective date of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for
any person to operate any motorcycle, motor scooter or bicycle with motor
attached on private property other than that of the operator of such vehicle
unless written permission has been secured from the owner of the property
upon which the vehicle is being operated.
§ 155-2. Permission required.
The written permission referred to in § 155-1 must be carried on the person
of the operator of such vehicle at all times during the operation thereof on
private property. Failure to carry such written permission shall constitute a
separate violation of this chapter.
§ 155-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-15-1988 by Ord. No.
1631; 5-14-1996 by Ord. No. 1739]
A violation of this chapter shall be considered a summary offense, and
upon conviction thereof before any Magisterial District Judge, the person so
convicted may be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600.
Chapter 158
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Aircraft — See Ch. 74.
Animals — See Ch. 80.
Dances and dance halls — See Ch. 106.
Motorized vehicles — See Ch. 155.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 167.
Zoning — See Ch. 225.
§ 158-1. Findings; intent.
The Board of Commissioners of the Township of Shaler has determined that:
A. The making, creation or maintenance of excessive, unnecessary,
unnatural or unusually loud noises in the Township of Shaler, which are
prolonged, unusual and unnatural in their time, place and use, affect
§ 153-8 SHALER CODE § 158-1
1:386
§ 158-2. Unreasonable noise prohibited.
and are a detriment to the public health, comfort, safety, welfare and
property of the residents of the Township of Shaler.
B. As a matter of legislative determination and public policy, the
provisions, regulations and prohibitions of this chapter are enacted
pursuant to and for the purpose of securing and promoting the public
health, comfort, safety, convenience and welfare and property of the
residents of the Township of Shaler.
A. Unless exempted under the provisions of this chapter, no person shall
make, continue, cause to be made or continued, directly or indirectly,
any unreasonably loud, harsh, prolonged or excessive noise which
either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the health, comfort,
repose, safety or welfare of others within the Township of Shaler unless
the making and continuing of the noise is necessary for the protection
or preservation of property or the life, health or safety of a person or
persons.
B. The following specific acts are declared to be loud, disturbing and
unnecessary noises in violation of this chapter, but said enumeration
shall not be deemed to be exclusive:
(1) Horns, signaling devices, etc. The sounding of any horn or
signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus, truck or other
vehicle on any street, road or public place, except as a warning
pursuant to the provisions of the Motor Vehicle Code of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania; a whistle or other device operated
by engine exhaust; and the use of any such signaling device when
traffic is for any reason held up, stopped or slowed for any reason.
(2) Radio and television sets, machines, etc. The use of radio or
television receiving sets, musical instruments, or other machines or
devices for the producing or reproducing of sound in such manner
as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the neighboring
inhabitants or at any time with volume louder than is necessary for
convenient hearing for the person or persons who are in the room
or vehicle in which such machine or device is operated and who are
voluntary listeners thereto. Operation of any such set, instrument,
machine or device between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in
such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from
the dwelling unit, nonresidential structure or vehicle in which it is
located shall be evidence of a violation of this section.
(3) Loudspeakers or amplifiers for advertising. The use of any radio
receiving set, musical instrument, loudspeaker, sound amplifier or
other machine or device for producing or reproducing of sound
which is cast upon the public streets for the purpose of commercial
advertising. The use of any loudspeaker, public address system or
similar amplification device between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and
§ 158-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-2
1:387
7:00 a.m. for any reason, except when used by officers of the
police department, fire department or of any municipal entity or
during school district activities permitted by the Township, shall be
prohibited.
(4) Animals, birds, etc. The keeping of any animal or bird which, by
causing frequent noise for more than 10 minutes at any time of the
day or night by repeated barking, whining, screeching, howling,
crowing, braying or other sounds which can be heard beyond the
owner's property and, shall disturb the comfort or repose of
persons residing in the vicinity.
(5) Exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any
internal combustion engine except through an adequate muffler or
other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises
therefrom. (See Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code.97) This includes,
by way of example and not by way of limitation, internal
combustion engines powering motor vehicles, lawn mowers and
chain saws.
(6) Loading and unloading. The creation of a loud and excessive noise
in connection with loading and unloading any vehicle, handling of
boxes, crates, containers, building materials or the opening or
destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers.
(7) Construction or repairing of buildings. The erection (including
excavating), demolition, alteration or repair of any building other
than during construction hours, which are defined as between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday, and
10:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., Sunday and holiday, except in case of
urgent necessity in the interest of public health and safety, and
then only with a permit from the Building Inspector, which permit
may be granted for a period not to exceed three days or less while
the emergency continues, and which permit may be renewed for a
period of three days or less while the emergency continues.
(8) On all nonresidential and multifamily residential buildings, all
building mechanical systems such as air-conditioning units,
exhaust systems, compression devices, pool filter systems and
other similar building features, whether on the building roof or on
the ground, shall be integrated into the overall design and
character of the site. Where appropriate, sound-absorbent material
shall be utilized to screen building mechanical systems with the
presence of motors to negate loud, penetrating or continuous
noises that disturb standard activities of persons residing in the
vicinity of the lot on which the noise is generated.
(9) Schools, courts, churches, hospitals. The creation of any excessive
noise adjacent to any school, institution of learning, place of
97.Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 4523 for state law regarding muffler requirements on
motor vehicles.
§ 158-2 SHALER CODE § 158-2
1:388
§ 158-3. Standards.
The standards which shall be considered in determining whether a violation
exists shall include but not be limited to:
worship, place of assembly or judicial court while the same are
in use or adjacent to any hospital, nursing home, assisted living
facility or other residential facility which unreasonably interferes
with the workings of such institution or which disturbs or unduly
annoys patients in the hospital or residents, provided that
conspicuous signs are displayed on the adjacent streets indicating
that the same is a school, residential facility, hospital, place of
worship, place of assembly, or street.
(10) Hawkers, peddlers. The shouting and crying of peddler, hawkers
and vendors which disturbs the peace and quiet of the
neighborhood.
(11) Drums, bells and the like. The use of any drum, bell, horn,
loudspeaker or other instrument or device for the purpose of
attracting attention to any performance, show or sale or display of
merchandise by any creation of noise or sound.
(12) Mobile loudspeakers. The use of mechanical loudspeakers or
amplifiers on vehicles or aircraft for commercial advertising
purposes.
(13) Motor vehicles:
(a) No person shall operate either a single or combination of motor
vehicle, motorcycle, motor scooter, all-terrain vehicle,
motocross vehicle, bicycle with motor attached, or similar offroad
motorized bicycle and/or vehicle of a type subject to
registration, except police or fire equipment or ambulances, at
any time or under any condition of grade, load, acceleration or
deceleration, in such a manner as to produce any unreasonably
loud, harsh, excessive, continuous and/or repetitive noise, or to
discharge into the open air the exhaust of any vehicle except
through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent
any unreasonably loud, harsh or excessive noise therefrom.
(b) No person shall allow noise from an automobile alarm in excess
of five minutes after it has been activated.
A. The volume of the noise.
B. The intensity of the noise.
C. The volume and intensity of the background noise.
D. The proximity of the noise to a residential area, place of public
accommodation such as a hotel, motel or inn, health-care facilities,
§ 158-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-3
1:389
§ 158-4. Exceptions.
The prohibitions contained in this chapter shall not apply to:
residential facilities, places of worship, places of assembly, schools or
judicial court, and whether the same are in use.
E. The nature and zoning of the area within which the noise emanates.
F. The time of day or night the noise occurs.
G. The duration of the noise.
H. Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent or constant.
A. Persons who are engaged in the performance of any public or
governmental function, such as the sounding of a bell associated with a
place of assembly, place of worship or school, or police, fire, ambulance,
air raid or like disaster warning, alert or alarm, whether such alarm
shall be for an actual emergency purpose or for practice or drilling
purposes.
B. Persons who are engaged in a religious, charitable, recreational, civic
or political activity by means of a sound truck or other amplifying
device, for nonprofit purposes, provided that such persons shall have
first filed with the Township an application for a permit, setting forth
the sponsorship, date, hours and routes of such activity, and provided
such activity is not in conflict, in terms of hours, route, traffic volume
and like factors, with any other previously scheduled activity.
C. Persons who are engaged in any activity specifically permitted or
required by any ordinance, resolution, statute or governmental
regulation.
D. Noise from domestic power tools, construction equipment, lawn
mowers and machinery for landscaping purposes when operated with a
muffler between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., Monday through
Saturday, and 10:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. on Sundays and legal holidays.
E. Noise from snow blowers, snow throwers and snowplows when
operated with a muffler for the purpose of snow removal.
F. Noise from an exterior burglar alarm of any building or motor vehicle,
provided such burglar alarm shall terminate its operation within five
minutes after it has been activated.
G. Noise generated by Township-sponsored concerts and events.
H. Noises relating to the collection of refuse between the hours of 6:00
a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
I. Noises generated within a public right-of-way deemed necessary to
protect the public's health and safety, including, but not limited to,
street or hard surface sweeping or cleaning; removal of down limbs
§ 158-3 SHALER CODE § 158-4
1:390
§ 158-5. Applications for reprieve.
The Board of Commissioners shall have the authority to grant applications
for reprieve for limited times and purposes of this chapter. Any person
seeking such an application pursuant to this section shall file an application
with the Board of Commissioners. The application shall consist of a letter
signed by the applicant and shall contain a legal form of verification. Such
letter shall contain information which demonstrates that bringing the
source of sound or activity for which the reprieve is sought into compliance
with this chapter would constitute an unreasonable hardship of the
applicant on the community or on other persons. In addition, the following
information shall be provided:
caused by natural causes; removal of downed wires; restoring electrical
service; repairing traffic signals; unplugging sewers; snow removal;
house moving; vacuuming catch basins; removal of damaged poles and
vehicles; repair of water hydrants and mains, gas lines, oil lines and
sewers. Said noises occurring on real property shall be permitted,
following application by the lot owner to the Township and subsequent
approval granted by the Township.
J. Noise from generators during power outages.
A. The plans, specifications and any other information pertinent to the
source of sound.
B. The characteristics of the sound emitted by the source, including but
not limited to the distance from the source of the sound that a
reasonable person can hear the sound, the day(s) and hours during
which such sound is generated.
C. The noise abatement and control methods used to restrict the emissions
of the sound.
D. A time schedule for the installation of noise abatement and control
devices, technology and procedures or process modifications that will
be followed to restrict the emissions of sounds.
E. The name and address of the applicant and the applicant's agent, if any,
and whether the applicant is the owner, lessee, licensee, etc., of the
premises. If the applicant is not the owner, the application must contain
the written consent of the owner.
F. The names and addresses of all owners of contiguous land within 500
feet of the premises. The applicant in like manner shall give notice of
the application by certified mail, return receipt requested, to all
property owners surrounding the sound source site within a radius of
500 feet from the borders of said site.
G. A filing fee, in such amount as the Township shall from time to time set
by resolution.
§ 158-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-5
1:391
§ 158-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person, persons, firm, partnership or corporation violating any of the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof before any
Magisterial District Judge, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more $1,000,
plus costs of prosecution, and may be sentenced to a period of incarceration
not exceeding 90 days, or both. Each and every day that the offense
continues shall be considered as a separate offense and shall be subject to
separate and distinct penalties.
Chapter 160
H. Public hearing and decision. Upon prior reasonable public notice, the
Board of Commissioners shall hold a public hearing on the application
for reprieve. The Board of Commissioners, upon reviewing all input
from the public hearing and obtaining any additional data or
information as deemed necessary, will make a decision on the
application and advise the applicant of such decision by transmitting a
copy of the application to the applicant, with the decision and
conditions, if any, imposed by the Board of Commissioners attached.
I. Applicant to obtain other necessary permits. This chapter does not
preclude the necessity of the applicant to obtain the approval or permit
required by any other agency before proceeding with the action
approved under the approved application for reprieve. No action may
be initiated by the applicant until such time that other permits, as may
be required, are issued.
J. Approved application available for inspection. The applicant or his
agent shall have readily available the approved application at the
location or site for which it has been issued and shall show same to any
agent of the Township whenever requested.
K. Activity open to inspection. Activity conducted under the approved
application shall be open to inspection at any time by any agent of the
Township.
L. Powers and duties of the Board of Commissioners.
(1) In determining whether to grant or deny the application, the Board
of Commissioners shall balance the hardship to the applicant, the
community and other persons of not granting the application
against the adverse impact on the health, safety and welfare of
persons affected, the adverse impact on the property affected and
any other adverse impacts of granting approval to the application.
(2) The Board of Commissioners shall have the power to impose
restrictions, conditions and the recording of covenants upon any
sound source site, including time limits on permitted activity, in the
event that it shall grant any reprieve hereunder.
§ 158-5 SHALER CODE § 158-6
1:392
NUISANCE PROPERTIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property Maintenance — See Ch. 171
§ 160-1. Purpose.
The Board of Commissioners hereby finds that nuisance properties place
a substantial and unacceptable threat and burden on the common health,
safety and welfare of the residents of the Township. To this end, the Board
of Commissioners directs the Code Enforcement Officer, as provided in the
following sections, to charge the cost of abatement of nuisance properties
to the property owner in an effort to deter repeated violations of state
and local laws and to ensure restoration of the common health, safety and
welfare of Township residents.
§ 160-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — That official of the Township charged
with the duty of enforcing the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance of the
Township.98
COST OF ABATEMENT — The reasonable cost of abatement of an
enumerated infraction as calculated by the Code Enforcement Officer,
including but not limited to the costs of Police Department and/or the
costs of the Code Enforcement Officer response associated with abating an
enumerated infraction.
COST SCHEDULE — The complete list of costs associated with abating each
enumerated infraction.
NUISANCE PROPERTY — Any property being used as a residence within
the Township with five or fewer units that causes to be issued three citations
and/or legal complaints from the police and/or the Code Enforcement
Officer for any enumerated infraction on three separate occasions within
any 120-day period, or any property being used as a residence with more
than five units that causes to be issued at least three citations and/or
filings of legal complaints from one unit or five citations and/or filings
of legal complaints from the entire building from the police and/or Code
Enforcement Officer for any enumerated infraction on separate occasions
within any 120-day period.
PROPERTY OWNER — Any person or business entity, profit or not for profit,
owning an interest in any property within the boundaries of the Township.
98.Editor's Note: See Ch. 225, Zoning.
§ 158-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-3
1:393
§ 160-3. Enumerated infractions.
An enumerated infraction is any of the following activities, behavior, or
conduct, whenever engaged in by the owner(s), operator(s), tenant(s),
occupant(s) or their invitee(s) occurring within the boundary lines of the
property, or 100 feet or less outside the boundary lines of the property,
including but not limited to:
§ 160-4. Procedure.
A. Any violation of the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
constituting a summary offense, misdemeanor, or felony according to
the Pennsylvania Crimes Code;
B. Any violation of the Code of Ordinances of the Township of Shaler, as
amended from time to time.
A. All enumerated infractions will be reported by the citing police officer
to the Code Enforcement Officer within 72 hours of its occurrence. The
Code Enforcement Officer shall notify the property owner by first-class
mail to the property owner's last known address or cause to be handdelivered
a notice to the property owner's residence or usual place of
business.
B. The Code Enforcement Officer is herewith charged with keeping a log
of such enumerated infractions. The log shall be maintained for the
purposes of recording enumerated infractions from diverse sources
who would not otherwise know of other departments' activities with the
subject property.
C. Whenever the Code Enforcement Officer determines that an owner of a
property being used as a residence with five or fewer units has been
cited or a legal complaint has been filed for an enumerated infraction at
least three times on separate occasions within any 120-day period or an
owner of a property being used as a residence within more than five
units has been cited or a legal complaint has been filed for an
enumerated infraction at least three times from one unit or at least five
times from the entire building on separate occasions within any 120-day
period, the Code Enforcement Officer shall notify the property owner in
writing that the property has been designated as a nuisance property.
D. The notice shall be deemed to be properly delivered if sent either by
first-class mail to the property owner's last known address or if
delivered in person to the property owner. If the property owner cannot
be located, the notice shall be deemed to be properly delivered if a copy
of it is personally served upon a competent member of the property
owner's family at least 17 years of age or a competent adult currently
residing there. If a current address cannot be located, notice shall be
deemed sufficient if posted on the potential nuisance property, and a
copy of the notice is sent via first-class mail to the last known address of
the property owner.
§ 160-3 SHALER CODE § 160-4
1:394
§ 160-5. Costs charged to owner.
E. The notice required by Subsections A and C shall contain:
(1) The street address or legal description sufficient for identification
of the property;
(2) A description of the enumerated infraction(s) that have occurred at
the property and a statement indicating that the property is
declared as a nuisance property as a result of said enumerated
infraction(s);
(3) Notice of the property owner's right to appeal pursuant to § 160-6;
and
(4) A statement that the property owner shall within 10 days respond
to the Code Enforcement Officer, in writing, with either:
(a) The intent of the property owner to appeal the finding of the
Code Enforcement Officer; or
(b) A proposal detailing a course of action by which enumerated
activities will be abated at the property. The Code Enforcement
Officer shall, within 10 days of receipt of said proposal, either
approve or disapprove of the proposal. In the event the Code
Enforcement Officer disapproves of the proposal, the property
owner may appeal pursuant to § 160-6.
F. Whenever the Code Enforcement Officer determines that an additional
enumerated infraction has occurred at a property for which notice has
been issued pursuant to Subsection C of this section, and either the
enumerated infraction has occurred not less than 13 days after notice
has been issued or an approved course of action under Subsection
E(4)(b) has not been completed, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
charge the cost of abatement of the enumerated infraction to the
property owner pursuant to § 160-5 for this and any additional
enumerated infraction, exceptions notwithstanding.
A. On an annual basis, the Code Enforcement Officer shall recommend a
cost schedule for each enumerated infraction to the Board of
Commissioners, and the Board of Commissioners shall adopt such cost
schedule as recommended by the Code Enforcement Officer or adopt a
different cost schedule, as the Board deems appropriate, by resolution
which will be filed in the Township Secretary's office.
B. The Code Enforcement Officer shall impose upon the owner of a
nuisance property the cost of abatement of any enumerated infraction
consistent with § 160-4. Any cost imposed upon the property owner
shall constitute a lien against the property.
C. Each subsequent incident of any enumerated infraction shall be
deemed a separate violation.
§ 160-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-6
1:395
§ 160-6. Appeal.
Appeal of the determination of the Code Enforcement Officer shall be
submitted to the Board of Commissioners within 10 days of service of the
notice of enumerated infraction.
§ 160-7. Exceptions.
§ 160-8. Repealer.
All ordinances, or parts of ordinances, in conflict with the provisions of this
chapter, are hereby repealed.
§ 160-9. Severability.
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Township of Shaler that the
several provisions of this chapter are separable. If any Court of competent
jurisdiction shall declare any words, sections, sentences or provisions of
this chapter to be invalid, such ruling shall not affect any other words,
sections, sentences or provisions of this chapter not specifically intended in
said ruling.
Chapter 165
PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Mass public assemblies — See Ch. 82.
Operation of motorized vehicles — See Ch.
155.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 167.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 212.
A. In the event any property owner, after implementation of a
§ 160-5E(4)(b) plan, demonstrates that Code Enforcement Officer or
police have not responded to an enumerated infraction at a nuisance
property for at least a period of six months, and all other requirements
of this chapter have been complied with, that property shall no longer
be considered a nuisance property.
B. Any citation or complaint issued to a tenant who is already in the
process of being evicted, shall not count towards the number of
citations or complaints that have been issued or filed necessary to be
deemed a "nuisance property" if the property owner can prove that an
eviction action has been commenced in a court of law and if the
property owner is actively prosecuting said eviction action against the
tenant.
§ 160-6 SHALER CODE § 165-1
1:396
§ 165-1. Prohibited acts.
The following uses and acts are prohibited in the parks, athletic fields and
other recreational areas owned and maintained by the Township of Shaler:
A. Grass areas may not be used for roadways, parking or for other
purposes which may injure or destroy the turf and landscaping.
B. Trees, shrubs, hedges, berries or flowers must not be picked, cut,
broken or injured in any way whatsoever.
C. Structures, fences, benches, signs or other property of the Township of
Shaler must not be damaged or defaced in any way.
D. Paper, rubbish or any other refuse must not be thrown away or
discarded except in receptacles provided for that purpose.
E. Firearms and air or gas rifles or pistols may not be used or carried.
F. Animals or birds may not be hunted, injured, killed, abandoned or
molested.
G. No person shall improperly use or falsify documents or other required
proof of residence within the Township of Shaler in order to gain
admission to swimming pools or other areas restricted to residents of
the Township of Shaler. No resident of the Township of Shaler shall
transfer to any other person tickets or tags for such swimming pools or
other restricted areas.
H. Wading and swimming are forbidden in any fountain, lake or other body
of water except in areas designated for such wading or swimming, nor
may any use be made thereof to contaminate or pollute said waters.
I. Lotteries, card games or gambling, drunkenness, disorderly or indecent
conduct and profane or offensive language is prohibited.
J. There shall be no vehicle washing, cleaning, polishing, lubricating or
other vehicle repair or maintenance work done except in an emergency.
K. No person shall voluntarily bring, land or cause to descend or alight any
airplane, helicopter or other airborne vehicle.
L. No intoxicating beverages of any nature shall be permitted.
M. No tickets, commodities or services shall be sold, rented or offered for
sale or rent except by concessionaires or other persons authorized in
writing by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Shaler.
N. No dogs or any other domesticated animals are permitted at any time.
[Amended 6-12-1973 by Ord. No. 1311]
§ 165-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-2
1:397
§ 165-2. Permitted acts.
The following uses and acts are permitted in the parks, athletic fields and
other recreational areas owned and maintained by the Township of Shaler
only in accordance with the following regulations:
A. Fires shall not be built or allowed other than in areas or fireplaces
provided for that purpose. No person shall throw away or discard any
lighted match, cigar or cigarette.
B. Public meetings, assemblies or parades may not take place without the
written permission of the Township of Shaler Board of Commissioners
secured by written application submitted at least 15 days in advance
thereof.
C. Riding or driving of horses or bicycles or any other nonmotor vehicles is
not permitted except on roads and trails provided for that purpose;
provided, however, that the riding or driving of motorbikes or
motorcycles is prohibited entirely. [Amended 8-12-1969 by Ord. No.
1203]
D. Games, contests or sports are permitted only in areas designated for
such uses, and in no case shall such use be permitted in areas where
lawn or plantings may be injured or where such games or contests shall
interfere with other persons.
E. Picnics shall be allowed only in locations provided for that purpose.
Persons holding picnics shall clean up and place all wastepaper and
other refuse in receptacles provided for that purpose.
F. No person or persons shall remain in, enter or be in any Township
parks, athletic fields and other recreational facilities of the Township
between dusk (sunset) and dawn (sunrise) without prior approval from
the Township Manager. [Amended 8-12-1969 by Ord. No. 1203;
4-14-1981 by Ord. No. 1498; 6-13-1989 by Ord. No. 1640]
G. All motor vehicles, other than motorbikes or motorcycles, shall be
operated only on vehicular roadways and at speeds which are proper
under the driving conditions. The riding or driving of motorbikes or
motorcycles is prohibited entirely. [Amended 8-12-1969 by Ord. No.
1203]
H. All persons shall at all times obey the directions of police officers and
parking and traffic signs and instructions.
I. The Vehicle Code of 1959, April 29, P.L. 58, as amended, 75 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 101 et seq., is hereby declared to be in effect in all parks, athletic
fields and other recreational areas of the Township of Shaler, with like
effect as though set forth herein in full, and the traffic rules and
regulations set forth herein are in addition to and supplement the
Vehicle Code. [Amended 5-14-1996 by Ord. No. 1739]
§ 165-2 SHALER CODE § 165-3
1:398
§ 165-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-15-1988 by Ord. No.
1631]
Any person or persons violating the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof before any issuing authority, forfeit and pay a fine of
not more than $600 for each offense and, in default of payment, shall be
imprisoned for a period not exceeding 90 days in the county jail.
§ 165-4. Prohibited acts in Kiwanis Park. [Added 7-9-2013 by Ord.
No. 1919]
The following uses and acts are prohibited in Kiwanis Park:
Chapter 167
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 80.
Noise — See Ch. 158.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 169.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 212.
§ 167-1. Intoxication.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons, while intoxicated, to be
on any street, lane, alley, public highway or other public place within the
limits of the Township of Shaler to the annoyance of any of the peaceable
inhabitants thereof.
§ 167-2. Vagrancy.
It shall be unlawful for vagrants or any persons who have no fixed place of
residence to go about from place to place within the limits of said Township
or to trespass on private property to the annoyance or disturbance of any of
the peaceable inhabitants thereof.
§ 167-3. Noise; disturbances.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons willfully to make or cause to
be made any loud, boisterous and unseemly noise or disturbance near to any
public highway, road, street, lane, alley, park, square or common whereby
the public peace is broken or disturbed or the traveling public annoyed.
A. Kiwanis Park is hereby designated a tobacco-free area. The Director of
Public Works is hereby directed to post the appropriate signage
indicating that Kiwanis Park is a tobacco-free area and that violators
will be ejected immediately from the park. The community shall be
notified of this section.
§ 165-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 167-4
1:399
§ 167-4. Violence; abusive language.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons willfully to create a
disturbance of the public order by an act of violence or by any act likely
to produce violence or to address abusive language or threats to any
person present which creates a clear and present danger of violence for the
purpose of causing public danger, alarm, disorder or nuisance or with the
knowledge that he is likely to create such public danger, alarm, disorder or
nuisance.
§ 167-5. Disorderly conduct.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons willfully to fail to obey a lawful
order of a police officer to disperse or to leave the area, where three or
more persons are committing an act or acts of disorderly conduct in the
immediate vicinity and where the police have made all reasonable efforts to
stop the act or acts of disorderly conduct and where, despite such efforts,
there is an imminent threat of violence should the order of dispersal not be
obeyed. If time permits, the police shall state the necessity for dispersal to
the person or persons ordered to disperse.
§ 167-6. Defacing of property.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons willfully to damage, befoul or
disturb public property or property of another so as to create a hazardous,
unhealthy or physically offensive condition for the purpose of causing public
danger, alarm, disorder or nuisance or with the knowledge that he is likely
to create such public danger, alarm, disorder or nuisance.
§ 167-7. Trespassing.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons willfully to commit a trespass
on private property or on public property for the purpose of causing public
danger, alarm, disorder or nuisance or with the knowledge that he is likely
to create such public danger, alarm, disorder or nuisance. "Trespass," for
the purposes of this chapter, shall mean entering upon or refusing to leave
any private property of another, either where such property has been posted
with "No Trespassing" signs or where, immediately prior to such entry or
subsequent thereto, notice is given by the owner or occupant, orally or in
writing, that such entry or continued presence is prohibited; or entering
upon or refusing to leave any public property in violation of regulations of
the Township or of the Shaler Area School District, where such regulations
have been conspicuously posted on such property or where, immediately
prior to such entry or subsequent thereto, such regulations are made
known, orally or in writing, by an official of said Township or School District,
his agent or a police officer.
§ 167-4 SHALER CODE § 167-8
1:400
§ 167-8. Rioting; unlawful assembly.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons willfully to participate in any
riot, rout, unlawful assembly or affray or willfully to incite others to riot to
the terror of the peaceable residents nearby.
§ 167-9. Disturbing others.
No person shall, by loud and excessive noise in the course of any activity
on private property, unreasonably disturb the peace of others in the
neighborhood, and no person shall knowingly permit such conduct upon any
premises owned or possessed by him or under his control. In considering
the unreasonableness of any such conduct, nuisance or disturbance so
occurring on private property and its effect on disturbing the peace of
others, the factors considered shall include the time of day or night at which
time such disturbance occurs, the number of people involved, the proximity
to others whose peace and tranquility might be disturbed and the nature
of the disturbance. The police are empowered to give a warning if, in their
judgment, the disturbance is a breach of this section; and if the disturbance
shall not abate, the owner or one in possession or control of the premises on
which the disturbance occurs shall be arrested and charged with violation
of this section.
§ 167-10. Loitering.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to loiter or assemble with
others upon or along the public streets, lanes, highways, sidewalks or public
places within the limits of the Township of Shaler in such a manner as to
interfere with, impede or annoy the traveling public.
§ 167-11. Destruction of trees, shrubs and other vegetation.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons willfully or maliciously to
deface, destroy or injure any tree, shrub, bush or vine on or along any
street, lane, alley or highway within the limits of the Township of Shaler.
§ 167-12. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-15-1988 by Ord.
No. 1631]
For each and every violation of the provisions of this chapter, any person or
persons violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction
for a summary offense by the issuing authority for the magisterial district
which includes the Township of Shaler, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
less than $10 nor more than $600 and costs of prosecution and, in default
of payment thereof, may be committed by the issuing authority to prison in
conformity with the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure.
§ 167-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 167-12
1:401
Chapter 169
PEDDLING AND SOLICITATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 158.
§ 169-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate commercial solicitation in the
Township of Shaler and to establish use-of-street restrictions and hours of
canvassing and soliciting for canvassers and solicitors.
§ 169-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings set forth below, unless a different meaning clearly appears from
the text:
CANVASS — The act of going upon the property or approaching people
on property to discuss or explain issues, which shall include religious
proselytizing, exercising an individual's right to freedom of speech, or
campaigning for political votes, that does not include the sale of goods or
products.
CANVASSER — A person who engages in canvassing.
COMMERCIAL SOLICITATION — The practice of going in and upon private
residences and appurtenant lots in the Township by salesmen, solicitors,
peddlers, hawkers, itinerant merchants or transient vendors of merchandise
or services, not having been requested or invited so to do by the owner or
owners, occupant or occupants of said private residences, for the purpose
of soliciting orders for the sale of services, goods, wares or merchandise or
of disposing of or peddling or hawking the same.
MERCHANDISE OR SERVICES — Any goods or services, including but
not limited to magazines, periodicals, books and orders or contracts for
services, home improvements or alterations.
PEDDLE — The act of going on the property or approaching people on
property to sell goods, merchandise, products or services.
PEDDLER — A person who engages in peddling.
PEDDLING — To peddle.
PERSON — Any natural person, corporation, association or organization,
partnership, trust, foundation or other entity, however styled, including
but not limited to business organizations, commercial co-venturers and
commercial solicitors.
§ 167-12 SHALER CODE § 169-2
1:402
SOLICIT — The act of going upon property or approaching people on
property to ask for, request or seek monetary contributions, donations or
support.
SOLICITING — To solicit.
SOLICITOR — A person who engages in soliciting.
§ 169-3. License required for commercial solicitation.
No person, except as otherwise provided herein in § 169-4, shall peddle
or engage in the practice of going in and upon private residences and
appurtenant lots in the Township by salesmen, solicitors, peddlers, hawkers,
itinerant merchants or transient vendors of merchandise or services, not
having been requested or invited so to do by the owner or owners, occupant
or occupants of said private residences, for the purpose of soliciting orders
for the sale of services, goods, wares or merchandise or of disposing of
or peddling or hawking the same, unless such person has obtained a
commercial solicitor's license as required by §§ 169-5 through 169-9 of this
chapter, issued by the Township Manager.
§ 169-4. Exceptions.
Except for § 169-13A (relating to exclusive right to a location) and § 169-13B
(relating to prohibited hours of canvassing and soliciting), nothing in this
chapter shall be held to apply to:
A. Any sales conducted pursuant to statute or by order of any court.
B. Home delivery of daily or weekly newspapers.
C. 99Farmers who themselves or through their employees vend, sell or
dispose products of their own farms or gardens.
D. Soliciting by charitable or religious canvassers when the person is
acting in his or her capacity as a member of a charitable, religious or
nonprofit organization or corporation which has received tax-exempt
status under 26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3) or other similar civic, charitable or
nonprofit organizations.
E. Persons engaged in political or other First Amendment speech or
solicitation.
F. Minors under the age of 18 years of age.
99.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection C, which listed persons having established places of
business within the Township as an exception, was repealed 6-12-2018 by Ord. No. 1946.
This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsections D through G as
Subsections C through F, respectively.
§ 169-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 169-5
1:403
§ 169-5. Verified application required to obtain commercial solicitor
license.
Any person desiring to procure a commercial solicitor license as herein
provided shall file with the Township a verified application.
§ 169-6. Commercial solicitor license application contents.
Each applicant for a commercial solicitor license shall, at the time of
applying, file with the Township Manager an application in writing, which
shall give the following information:
§ 169-7. Fees. [Amended 6-12-2018 by Ord. No. 1946]
Fees for commercial solicitors' licenses under this chapter shall accompany
each commercial solicitor license application and shall be calculated as
follows:
A. Name, age and physical description of applicant and each such agent
and employee.
B. Complete permanent home and local address of applicant and his
agents or employees.
C. Name and address of the organization or person for whom the
commercial solicitation is being made.
D. Description of the nature of the commercial solicitation or a description
of the purpose or causes for which the commercial solicitation is being
made.
E. Two photographs of the applicant and each such agent and employee,
which shall be approximately two inches by two inches in size, showing
the head and shoulders in a clear and distinguishing manner.
F. The days, dates and route of the applicant's commercial solicitation in
the Township of Shaler.
G. A statement as to whether or not the applicant or any of such agents or
employees have been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a felony or
misdemeanor, where and when so convicted, the nature of the offense
and the punishment or penalty, if any.
H. A current background investigation from a qualified agency, valid for
one year accompanied by current valid photo identification to be
submitted at the time application is made. [Amended 6-12-2018 by
Ord. No. 1946]
I. The make, model, year, color and license plate number of automobiles
used by the applicant and such agents and employees during the period
of solicitation within the Township, and the numbers of their drivers'
licenses and the states of issuance.
§ 169-5 SHALER CODE § 169-7
1:404
§ 169-8. Approval or disapproval of commercial solicitor license
applications.
The Township Manager shall approve or disapprove a commercial solicitor
license application within five business days of submission. Approval shall
not be unreasonably withheld. If approved, the commercial solicitor license
shall have fixed upon it one photograph of the applicant, over which shall
be impressed the Official Seal of the Township of Shaler. If the commercial
solicitor license application is denied for any reason, the applicant may
appeal the decision to the Board of Commissioners as provided in § 169-10
of this chapter.
§ 169-9. Display of commercial solicitor licenses; return.
Each licensee shall carry the commercial solicitor license at all times when
in the Township and shall exhibit it to any citizen or Township official
upon request. At the conclusion of the period for which the commercial
solicitor license was issued, said solicitor's license shall be surrendered to
the Township Manager for cancellation.
§ 169-10. Appeal from denial of application or confiscation of
solicitor's license.
In the event that an application for a commercial solicitor license is
disapproved by the Township Manager, or the Township Manager upholds
the suspension or confiscation of a solicitor's license by a police officer for
a violation of this chapter, the applicant may, within five days of the denial,
appeal the decision to the Board of Commissioners, which shall set a time
and place for a hearing. This hearing shall be held within 45 days after the
appeal is taken by applicant, at which hearing the applicant will be given
opportunity to present reasons why the commercial solicitor license should
be issued. The decision of the Board of Commissioners shall be made within
10 days of the appeal hearing.
§ 169-11. List of registered owners.
No person who has obtained a commercial solicitor license or any
salesperson, solicitors, peddlers, hawkers, itinerant merchants or transient
vendors of merchandise or services, not having been requested or invited
so to do by the owner or owners, occupant or occupants of said private
residences for the purpose of soliciting orders for the sale of services,
goods, wares or merchandise or of disposing of or peddling or hawking the
same, shall solicit in the Township without first obtaining from the Township
Manager a list of all persons and their addresses who have specifically
requested that canvassers and solicitors not solicit such persons at any
A. For 30 days or any part thereof: $100, which will include five solicitors'
licenses, and $25 for each additional license.
B. For one year or any part thereof: $200, which will include five solicitors'
licenses, and $25 for each additional license.
§ 169-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 169-11
1:405
time. The Township shall maintain and make the list of registered owners
available to canvassers in the Township electronically without charge.
§ 169-12. No solicitation of registered property owners.
No person shall canvass, solicit, distribute circulars or other matter or call
from house to house or place to place in the Township of any person who has
specifically requested that canvassers and solicitors not solicit such persons
at any time.
§ 169-13. Use-of-street restrictions.
Solicitation and canvassing in the Township are subject to the following
additional requirements:
A. No canvasser or solicitor shall have an exclusive right to any location in
the streets or other public passages of the Township, be permitted a
stationary location thereon, or be permitted to obstruct such streets
and public passages thereby rendering such street or public passage
impassable without unnecessary inconvenience or hazard.
B. No canvasser or solicitor shall be permitted to solicit or canvass before
9:00 a.m. or after 7:00 p.m., prevailing time, Monday through Saturday,
and there will be no soliciting or canvassing on Sundays. [Amended
6-12-2018 by Ord. No. 1946]
C. Any licensee or person, whether as an individual, representative,
principal, agent, employer or employee, obtaining a solicitor's licensee,
shall:
(1) Not falsely or fraudulently misrepresent the quantity, character or
quality of any article offered for sale or offer for sale any tainted or
damaged provisions or merchandise;
(2) Not engage in peddling or soliciting upon any premises or
residence located thereon if such premises or residence is posted
against solicitation by means of a notice, upon which is printed, a
"no solicitors" or a "no trespassing" sign.
(3) Not engage in peddling or soliciting after being asked to leave the
premises or residence by the owner or occupant;
(4) Not peddle or solicit home improvement services without being
compliant with the Pennsylvania Home Improvement Consumer
Protection Act.
D. No registrant shall be permitted to solicit or canvass on any holiday on
which the Allegheny County Courts are closed, or Easter Sunday.
[Added 3-10-2015 by Ord. No. 1932; amended 6-12-2018 by Ord.
No. 1946]
§ 169-11 SHALER CODE § 169-14
1:406
§ 169-14. Transfer of commercial solicitor license prohibited.
No commercial solicitor license issued under the provisions of this chapter
shall be used at any time by any person other than the one to whom it was
issued.
§ 169-15. Suspension and confiscation of solicitor licenses.
A police officer observing a violation of this chapter may take one or more
of the following actions:
§ 169-16. Revocation of commercial solicitor licenses.
A. The officer may issue a verbal or written warning to the violator to
cease and desist the activity that is in violation of this chapter.
B. If the person is in possession of a solicitor's license, the officer may
confiscate the license and return it to the Township Manager within 24
hours with a written explanation of the violation. In the event a
solicitor's license is returned to the Township Manager after
confiscation, the commercial solicitor whose solicitor's license has been
confiscated shall have three working days in which to request an
administrative review of the suspension by the Township Manager. If
the request for administrative review is not made within three working
days, the solicitor's license is revoked.
C. The officer may issue the violator a nontraffic citation for a violation of
this chapter pursuant to the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure
during which proceedings the Magisterial District Judge may revoke
the commercial solicitor license pursuant to § 169-16 hereof.
A. A commercial solicitor license may be revoked by any Magisterial
District Judge having jurisdiction, after notice and hearing, for any of
the following causes:
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in, or
material fact omitted from, the application for license;
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement or material omission
made in the course of soliciting;
(3) Failure to obey a "no trespassing" sign posted by a resident or
failure to obey the no-solicitation list;
(4) Any violation of this chapter;
(5) Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude
by the licensee or any representative of an organization holding a
license; or
(6) Conducting any activities in an unlawful manner or in such a
manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a
menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public.
§ 169-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 169-16
1:407
§ 169-17. Violations and penalties.
Any person, persons, firm, partnership or corporation that violates § 169-3
of this chapter shall, upon conviction by the issuing authority for the
magisterial district which includes the Township of Shaler, be fined not
more than $600, plus costs of prosecution, or imprisoned not more than 90
days, or both. Each and every day that a violation occurs shall constitute
a separate and distinct summary offense under this chapter and shall be
subject to separate and distinct penalties. All other violations of this chapter
shall be subject to a maximum fine of $1,000, plus costs of prosecution, or a
maximum term of imprisonment of 90 days.
Chapter 171
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 87.
Building construction — See Ch. 90.
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 93.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 125.
Solid waste — See Ch. 187.
§ 171-1. Adoption of standards.
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
Building Inspector/Code Enforcement Officer and the Township of Shaler,
being marked and designated as the "International Property Maintenance
Code, 2009 Edition," as published by the International Code Council, be and
is hereby adopted as the Property Maintenance Code of the Township of
Shaler in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania for regulating and governing
the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures;
by providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other
physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe,
sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and for the condemnation of
buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use, and the
demolition of such existing structures as herein provided; providing for the
issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of
the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Property
Maintenance Code on file in the office of the Township of Shaler are hereby
B. Notice of the hearing for revocation of the commercial solicitor license
shall be given in writing at such address as specified on the licensee's
application, setting forth specifically the grounds of complaint and the
time and place of hearing. Such notice shall be transmitted by certified
mail, postage prepaid, to the licensee or organization holding a
commercial solicitor license at least seven days prior to the date set for
hearing.
§ 169-16 SHALER CODE § 171-1
1:408
referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this
chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any,
prescribed in §§ 171-2 and 171-3 of this chapter.
§ 171-2. Amendments and revisions. [Amended 9-11-2012 by Ord.
No. 1911]
The following sections of the International Property Maintenance Code,
2009 Edition, as published by the International Code Council, are hereby
amended and revised:
Chapter 174
RACING AND ENDURANCE FEATS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Motorized vehicles — See Ch. 155. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 212.
§ 174-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MOTOR VEHICLE — Every vehicle, as herein defined, which is selfpropelled,
except tractors, power shovels, road rollers, agricultural
A. Section 101.1 (page 1, second line). Insert: "Township of Shaler."
B. Section 103.5 (page 2, fourth line). "Such fees for activities and services
as set by resolution of the Board of Commissioners."
C. Section 111.1 (Means of Appeal, page 6, third line). Insert: "Shaler
Township Municipal Appeals Board."
D. Section 112.4 (page 7, fifth line). Insert: "$300 or more than $1,000.
Each twenty-four-hour period during which failure to comply continues
shall constitute a separate offense. Nothing contained herein shall be
deemed to preclude the Township to seek other relief or avail itself of
any remedy that may be at law or in equity to prevent continuing
violations of the terms of this chapter."
E. Section 302.4 (page 11, second line). Insert: "Six inches."
F. Section 304.14 (page 13, first line). Insert: "May 1 to October 31."
G. Section 602.3 (page 21, fifth line). Insert: "October 1 to May 1."
H. Section 602.4 (page 21, third line). Insert: "October 1 to May 1."100
100. Editor's Note: Former § 171-3, Deletion and addition, which immediately followed, was
repealed 9-11-2012 by Ord. No. 1911.
§ 171-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 174-1
1:409
machinery and vehicles which move or are guided by a track or travel
through the air.
OPERATOR — Every person who is in actual physical control of a motor
vehicle.
§ 174-2. Prohibited acts.
From and after the effective date hereof, it shall be unlawful for any
operator of any motor vehicle to participate in any physical endurance test,
feats of skill or any race or speed contest with a motor vehicle in any public
or private property within the limits of the Township, except as hereinafter
provided.
§ 174-3. Permit required.
Permits for physical endurance tests, feats of skill or racing motor vehicles
may be issued to properly qualified individuals, firms or corporations by
the Township Manager, in such form as may be prescribed by the Township
Manager, upon receipt of such information and such bond as he may
require, and provided that such endurance tests, feats of skill and racing
motor vehicles shall be of such character and so located as, in the opinion
of the Township Manager, after proper inspection, shall not be hazardous to
property or endanger any person or persons; and provided, further, that the
application for such permit be made at least 30 days in advance of the date
of such endurance test, feat of skill or race of motor vehicles.
Chapter 176
RIGHTS-OF-WAY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 192.
§ 176-1. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of the
terms used in this chapter shall be as follows:
APPLICANT — The person who has applied for a right-of-way permit or a
construction permit.
APPLICATION — The form prescribed by the Township which the applicant
must complete in order to obtain a right-of-way permit.
CONSTRUCTION — The building, erection or installation in, on or under a
right-of-way. It does not include maintenance or repair of equipment in a
right-of-way or a single line extension from equipment in the right-of-way.
§ 174-1 SHALER CODE § 176-1
1:410
CONSTRUCTION PERMIT — The document that must be obtained before a
person may perform construction in a right-of-way.
EMERGENCY — Any interruption of service or a condition that poses a clear
and immediate danger to life or health or a significant loss of property.
EQUIPMENT — Any tangible property located or proposed to be located in
a right-of-way, including, but not limited to, wires, lines, cables, conduits,
pipes, supporting structures or other facilities.
MAINTENANCE — Work of a minor nature that will keep an existing
condition from failure or decline.
PERMIT HOLDER — The person obtaining a right-of-way permit.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or other business entity.
RESTORE or RESTORATION — The process by which a right-of-way is
returned to a state that is as good or better as its condition before
construction.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The surface and space in, on and above any real property
in which the Township has an interest in law or in equity, including, but not
limited to, any public street, boulevard, avenue, road, highway, easement,
freeway, alley, court or any other place, other than real property owned in
fee by the Township.
RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMIT or PERMIT — A written authorization granted by
the Township to an applicant for use of the rights-of-way in the Township
for wires, lines, cables, conduits, pipes, supporting structures and other
facilities.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES — The services offered to customers
involving the transmission of video, data and/or voice communications and/
or content, both active and interactive, and associated usage.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM — A system used or to be used to
provide telecommunications services.
UNDERGROUND EQUIPMENT — All equipment that is located wholly or
partially underneath a right-of-way.
§ 176-2. Requirements for permit.
A. No person shall enter upon or occupy any right-of-way for the purpose
of installing, constructing, maintaining or operating a
telecommunications system without first having obtained a right-of-way
permit. Any person maintaining or operating a telecommunications
system as of the effective date of this chapter shall also obtain a rightof-
way permit.
B. Before a right-of-way permit is issued, the holder of or applicant for a
right-of-way permit shall have applied to any and all regulatory
approvals, permits or authorizations from the appropriate federal and
state authorities, if required. Upon the request of the Township, the
§ 176-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 176-2
1:411
§ 176-3. Application for permit.
§ 176-4. Duration and suspension of permit.
applicant shall submit written evidence of its applications for or receipt
of all such approvals, permits or authorizations.
C. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as a waiver of any ordinances
or regulations of the Township or the Township's right to require
prospective or current right-of-way permit holders to secure and remit
payment for any and all required permits or authorizations.
A. A right-of-way permit shall only be granted after an applicant has
completed an application in the form that has been prescribed by the
Township, which form may be revised from time to time. Upon request,
an applicant shall be provided with a copy of the then current
application for a right-of-way permit. The application shall request
information regarding the applicant's proposed or actual physical use
and occupation of the rights-of-way. Specifically, the application shall
request: a brief description of the telecommunications service or
services to be offered or provided in or through the Township; specific
information regarding the equipment it proposes to place or currently
maintains in the rights-of-way; the expected physical burden that such
equipment will place or does place on the rights-of-way; and whether
the equipment will or does have a detrimental effect on public safety as
it relates to the rights-of-way. If the completed application does not fully
provide such requested information, the Township may request such
additional information as is necessary to enable it to make a
determination regarding the physical use and occupation of the rightsof-
way by the applicant. The application may request less information
from a permit holder applying for a renewal of a right-of-way permit.
B. Upon submission of a fully completed application to the Township and
the accompanying fee, the Township shall review the application as
follows. The Township shall grant or deny such applications within 45
days. If the Township fails to grant or reject such application within the
time period specified above, the application shall be deemed approved.
In each case, the Township shall review the application to determine
whether such use would have a detrimental effect on public safety as it
relates to the rights-of-way or would place an undue physical burden on
the rights-of-way.
C. In considering an application, the Township may use such outside
experts as it deems necessary. In the event that the Township deems it
necessary to employ an outside expert or experts to advise the
Township with respect to a particular application, the reasonable costs
of such expert or experts shall be borne by the applicant.
A. The right-of-way permit shall be issued for a period of one year. Permit
holders may apply for a renewal of a right-of-way permit prior to its
§ 176-2 SHALER CODE § 176-4
1:412
§ 176-5. Requirements for construction permit.
expiration. The Township may suspend such right-of-way permit in the
event that any one or more of the following has occurred:
(1) The permit holder shall have caused damage to Township property
or the right-of-way without the prior consent of the Township
(except in the case of an emergency) and without completing
proper restoration;
(2) The permit holder or the permit holder's equipment in the right-ofway
has had a detrimental effect on public safety as it relates to the
right-of-way;
(3) The permit holder failed to pay any of the fees required under this
chapter;
(4) The permit holder failed to comply with construction standards in
accordance with the provisions contained in § 176-8 below;
(5) The permit holder failed to indemnify, hold harmless and insure the
Township in accordance with the provisions contained in § 176-9
below.
B. If the Township has reason to believe that one or more of the above
events has occurred, it shall notify the permit holder in writing. The
permit holder shall have 30 days to cure the violation, unless the
Township reasonably determines that the event is an emergency, in
which case the Township may impose a shorter time period to cure the
violation.
C. If the permit holder fails to cure the violation within the specified time
period, the Township shall be permitted to immediately suspend the
right-of-way permit. A suspension shall be brought to the attention of
the Board of Commissioners at its next meeting, at which time the
Board shall be permitted to uphold or withdraw the suspension. The
permit holder shall be provided an opportunity to be heard at such
meeting.
A. Except in the case of an emergency, before commencing any
construction in the right-of-way, a person shall submit to the Township
detailed plans of the proposed construction activity. Such plans shall
include the type of construction activity, the equipment proposed to be
installed or erected, the specific locations of the construction activity
and the scheduled beginning and ending dates of all planned
construction. Such plans shall also include the name(s), address(es) and
experience of any and all subcontractors whom the applicant intends to
utilize. Such information may be submitted concurrently with an
application for a right-of-way permit.
B. Upon submission of all such information required in § 176-5A above, the
Township shall review such information and either grant or deny a
§ 176-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 176-5
1:413
§ 176-6. Fees and expenses.
construction permit within 45 days. If the Township fails to grant or
deny the construction permit within such time period, the permit shall
be deemed granted. In each such case, the Township shall review the
information provided herein to determine whether such construction
would have a detrimental impact on public safety as it relates to the
rights-of-way. The Township may impose conditions on the construction
permit regulating the times, locations and manner of construction to
preserve effective traffic flow, prevent hazardous road conditions and/
or minimize noise impacts.
A. Each new applicant for a right-of-way permit shall include with its
application an application fee in the amount of $500. This fee is directly
related to the Township's costs in reviewing the application (excluding
expert costs) and managing the rights-of-way with respect to each
permit holder. Such costs in managing the rights-of-way include, but
are not limited to, inspection costs, administrative costs, costs of
maintaining the rights-of-way and costs of degradation of streets and
right-of-way property. This fee will not be refunded in the event that the
application is denied. If the application is granted, the application fee
will apply to the full term of the right-of-way permit of one year. If the
applicant applies for a construction permit concurrently with the
application for a right-of-way permit, then the application fee contained
herein shall apply to both the right-of-way permit and the construction
permit.
B. Each existing permit holder applying for a renewal of its right-of-way
permit shall include with its application an annual fee in the amount of
$300. This fee is directly related to the Township's costs in managing
the rights-of-way with respect to each permit holder. Such costs
include, but are not limited to, inspection costs, administrative costs,
costs of maintaining the rights-of-way and costs of degradation of
streets and right-of-way property.
C. Each applicant for a construction permit shall include with its
application an application fee in the amount of $200. This fee is directly
related to the Township's costs in reviewing the application and
determining time, place and manner restrictions on the construction
activity. If the application for a construction permit is denied, this fee
shall not be refunded. If the application is granted, then the applicant
shall pay, within 30 days of the presentation of a statement, the
Township's actual costs based on the hourly rate established by
resolution of the Board of Commissioners. Such actual costs include,
but are not limited to, costs of disruption and rerouting of traffic,
inspection costs and administrative costs.
D. Extraordinary expenses. In addition to the fees set forth above, a permit
holder shall pay, within 30 days of the presentation of a statement, any
extraordinary or unusual expenses reasonably incurred by the
Township as a result of the permit holder's use of the rights-of-way,
§ 176-5 SHALER CODE § 176-6
1:414
§ 176-7. Management of rights-of-way.
§ 176-8. Construction standards.
provided that the Township notifies the permit holder of the expected
expenses prior to them being incurred and provides the permit holder
with an opportunity to mitigate such expenses. Examples of
extraordinary or unusual costs include, but are not limited to, the
cost of obtaining and operating a backhoe, dump truck or other heavy
equipment used to repair the right-of-way, overtime or special pay for
public safety personnel, and/or the cost of hazardous waste cleanup or
other emergency services. The statement of such expenses presented
to the permit holder shall be directly related to the Township's actual
costs.
E. In the event that payment of any of the fees identified above is not made
upon submission of the application or by the date due, the applicant or
permit holder shall pay a late payment penalty of simple interest at 10%
annual percentage rate of the total amount past due. Such penalty shall
be in lieu of any other monetary penalty. Acceptance of payment under
this section shall not in any way limit or waive the Township's right to
suspend or terminate the permit according to the terms of this chapter.
A. The Township shall have the right to limit the placement of new or
additional equipment in the right-of-way if there is insufficient space to
reasonably accommodate all requests to occupy and use the rights-ofway.
The Township shall consider requests for occupying and using the
rights-of-way in the order of receipt of fully completed applications for
right-of-way permits. The Township shall strive, to the extent possible,
to accommodate all requests, but shall be guided by the physical
condition of the right-of-way and whether such use would have a
detrimental effect on public safety as it relates to the right-of-way.
B. The Township shall have the right to monitor the telecommunications
systems and the equipment related thereto located in the rights-of-way
in order to prevent interference between and among such systems and
equipment.
C. A permit holder shall allow the Township to make inspections of any
part of the permit holder's telecommunications system located in the
rights-of-way at any time upon three days' notice, or, in case of an
emergency, upon demand.
A. Whenever a permit holder or any of its subcontractors shall disturb any
pavement, sidewalk or other public property in order to perform any
underground activities, the permit holder will fully comply by
registering with Pennsylvania's "One Call" System pursuant to 73 P.S.
§ 176 et seq. Such permit holder shall provide the Township with GPS
information showing planned locations and reference points for
equipment to be installed. Each permit holder shall perform
construction activity in a manner consistent and in compliance with the
§ 176-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 176-8
1:415
§ 176-9. Liability and indemnification.
detailed plans it submitted to the Township and all applicable federal,
state and local laws and regulations.
B. Whenever a permit holder or any of its subcontractors shall cause
damage to the right-of-way or to Township property in the right-of-way,
the permit holder shall restore such right-of-way or property within 30
days, weather permitting.
C. The telecommunications system shall not endanger or interfere with
the safety of persons or property within the Township. All operating,
maintenance, construction and repair personnel shall be thoroughly
trained in the safe use of all equipment and in the safe operation of
vehicles. Such personnel shall follow all safety procedures required by
applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations. The permit
holder shall routinely inspect and maintain all areas of the
telecommunications system so that conditions that could develop into
safety hazards shall be corrected before they become a hazard.
D. Except in the case of an emergency, at least three days prior to the
commencement of any construction activity, permit holder shall notify
nearby residents of such construction activity in a manner which is
satisfactory to the Township. The name of the permit holder shall be
clearly disclosed to such residents.
E. All construction activity shall be performed in an orderly and
workmanlike manner and in close coordination with public utilities
serving the Township, following accepted industry construction
procedures and practices.
F. All wires, cables and other equipment shall be installed, where possible,
parallel with electric and telephone lines, and multiple cable
configurations shall be arranged in parallel and bundles with due
respect for engineering considerations.
G. All wires, cables and other equipment shall be installed underground
where required by municipal ordinance or regulation consistent with
the same requirement being imposed on all other similarly situated
companies, including public utilities.
A. A permit holder shall, at its sole cost and expense, indemnify and hold
harmless the Township, its elected and appointed officials, employees
and agents, at all times against any and all claims for personal injury,
including death, and property damage arising out of the permit holder's
use or occupancy of the rights-of-way. A permit holder shall defend any
actions or proceedings against the Township in which it is claimed that
personal injury, including death, or property damage was caused by the
permit holder's use or occupancy of the rights-of-way. The obligation to
indemnify, hold harmless and defend shall include, but not be limited to,
the obligation to pay judgments, injuries, liabilities, damages,
§ 176-8 SHALER CODE § 176-9
1:416
§ 176-10. Reporting requirements.
§ 176-11. Sale or transfer of rights of permit holder.
A right-of-way permit may be transferred or assigned, upon 30 days' written
notice to the Township, provided that the transferee/assignee agrees in
writing to comply with all of the obligations and requirements contained in
this chapter.
§ 176-12. Performance bond.
A permit holder may be required, prior to construction, to obtain a
performance bond in a reasonable amount set by the Township, based upon
the construction cost of the equipment to be installed in the rights-of-way
and the extent of the disturbance of such rights-of-way. The performance
bond shall ensure the permit holder's faithful performance of its
construction obligations. The Township may reduce or cancel the bond
requirement when construction is completed.
attorneys' fees, reasonable expert fees, court costs and all other costs
of indemnification. A permit holder shall not be required to indemnify
and hold the Township harmless for claims caused by the Township's
negligence, gross negligence or willful misconduct.
B. A permit holder shall at all times during the life of a permit carry and
require its subcontractors to carry liability, property damage, worker's
disability, and vehicle insurance in such form and amount as shall be
determined by the Township as set forth in the permit. A permit holder
shall name the Township as an additional insured on its liability
insurance policies. All required insurance coverage shall provide for 30
days' notice to the Township in the event of material alteration or
cancellation of such coverage prior to the effective date of such
material alteration or cancellation. The permit holder shall provide
appropriate insurance certificates to the Township within 60 days after
the execution of a permit.
A. A permit holder shall annually provide the Township, upon application
for renewal of the permit or upon request, the current maps of the
horizontal and vertical locations of its existing installations and a
summary of all additions and deletions of equipment in the rights-ofway,
unless no changes have occurred in the previous year. If no
changes have occurred in the previous year, the permit holder shall so
inform the Township.
B. A permit holder shall submit to the Township such reasonable
information directly related to the permit holder's use and occupation
of the rights-of-way as the Township may request. All information
provided to the Township shall be maintained by the Township as
proprietary and confidential if such information is designated in good
faith as such prior to the time it is provided to the Township.
§ 176-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 176-13
1:417
§ 176-13. Termination of permit.
§ 176-14. Removal of equipment.
A. In addition to all other rights and powers reserved by the Township, the
Township reserves the right to terminate a permit and all rights and
privileges of a permit holder for any of the following reasons:
(1) A permit holder fails, after 30 days' prior written notice, to comply
with any of the material provisions of the permit or this chapter;
(2) A permit holder becomes insolvent, unable or unwilling to pay its
debts, or is adjudged bankrupt;
(3) All or part of a permit holder's facilities are sold under an
instrument to secure a debt and are not redeemed by the permit
holder within 90 days from such sale;
(4) A permit holder attempts to or does practice any fraud or deceit in
its conduct or relations with the Township under the permit;
(5) The Township condemns all of the property of a permit holder
within the Township by the lawful exercise of eminent domain; or
(6) The permit holder abandons the telecommunications system.
B. No termination shall be effective unless and until the Board of
Commissioners shall have adopted a resolution setting forth the cause
and reason for the termination and the effective date, which resolution
shall not be adopted without 30 days' prior notice to the permit holder
and an opportunity for the permit holder to be heard before the Board
on the proposed resolution.
A. Upon expiration or termination of the permit, if the permit is not
renewed, the permit holder shall, upon 60 days' prior written notice to
the permit holder, remove its equipment from the rights-of-way and
shall restore said areas. If such removal is not completed within six
months of such notice, the Township may deem any property not
removed as abandoned, and the Township may remove it at the former
permit holder's expense. In the event that the permit holder installed
and/or operated any underground conduit or pipe which is six inches or
more in diameter, the permit holder shall fill said conduit or pipe with
material in a manner satisfactory to Township.
B. During the term of the permit, if the permit holder decides to abandon
or no longer use all or part of its telecommunications system, it shall
provide the Township with written notice of its decision at least 30 days
prior to such decision, which notice shall describe the equipment and
its location. Township shall have the right to require the permit holder
to remove the equipment upon 60 days' prior written notice to the
permit holder. If such removal is not completed within six months of
§ 176-13 SHALER CODE § 176-14
1:418
§ 176-15. Violations and penalties.
If the permit holder violates any of the terms of this chapter, it shall be
subject to a fine of up to $100 per day until the violation is cured.
§ 176-16. Police powers.
The Township, by granting any permit under this chapter, does not waive,
lessen, impair or surrender the lawful police powers vested in the Township
under applicable federal, state and local laws pertaining to the regulation
or use of the rights-of-way.
§ 176-17. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall be imposed upon and enforced against
all persons requiring a permit from the Township.
Chapter 181
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees for municipal claims and liens — See Ch.
115.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 190.
Water — See Ch. 218.
such notice, the Township may remove it at the permit holder's
expense.
§ 176-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 176-17
1:419

ARTICLE I
Delinquent Accounts
[Adopted 12-13-1960 by Ord. No. 862]
§ 181-1. Reimbursement to Township. [Amended 6-13-1961 by Ord.
No. 902; 7-10-1962 by Ord. No. 944]
In all cases where the Township of Shaler is required to pay to the Allegheny
County Sanitary Authority any sums for delinquent accounts incurred by
residents of said Township, said residents who incurred said delinquency
and are responsible therefor shall reimburse the Township of Shaler in full
for any and all sums that were required to be paid by the Township to
the Allegheny County Sanitary Authority as a result of said delinquency for
failure to pay the charges assessed by said Authority and, in addition to the
above, said Township shall assess to each and every delinquent account a
quarterly charge of $1.25 to cover the costs and expenses incurred by the
Township in the process and handling of said delinquent account.
§ 181-2. Notification of parties; shutoff.
A. The Secretary of the Board of Commissioners is directed to notify the
party or parties responsible for the delinquency, in writing, setting forth
the total amount that the Township was required to pay to the Authority
on their behalf and request that reimbursement be made forthwith.
B. Upon failure to receive the requested sum or sums as set forth above
within 15 days from date of said notice, then said Secretary, at the
discretion of the Board of Commissioners, is empowered to shut off the
water supply to said party involved or to proceed to collect the sum or
sums involved in the manner provided by law for the collection of such
accounts, whichever in the Board's discretion it deems advisable.
§ 181-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 181-2
1:421

ARTICLE II
Sewer Service Charges
[Adopted 7-14-1970 by Ord. No. 1236]
§ 181-3. Imposition of charges.
The Township of Shaler agrees, pursuant to the provisions of the
aforementioned agreement,101 to pay the aggregate amount of all sewage
service charges imposed by the Allegheny County Sanitary Authority
pursuant to said agreement which otherwise would be payable by sewer
users within the Township of Shaler for the transportation and treatment
service rendered, in consideration of the performance by the Allegheny
County Sanitary Sewer Authority of the legal duty of the Township of
Shaler to cease the pollution of waters of the commonwealth. The Township
of Shaler hereby covenants that it will pay each quarterly statement of
the Allegheny County Sanitary Authority out of current revenues of the
Township of Shaler and within 60 days after the date of billing therefor for
the transportation and treatment services rendered.
§ 181-4. Billing.
The Township of Shaler shall bill all customers of the Allegheny County
Sanitary Authority for the amounts which would be payable otherwise
by sewer users within the Township of Shaler for the transportation and
treatment service rendered by the Allegheny County Sanitary Authority.
§ 181-5. Conditions to be met to change billings.
The aforementioned change in the method of billing and obligations of the
Township of Shaler in connection therewith shall become effective as soon
as possible after all of the following conditions have been met:
A. Approval of the change in method of billing by the Allegheny County
Sanitary Authority.
B. Payment to the Allegheny County Sanitary Authority of any and all
delinquent sanitary sewer service bills rendered to the Township of
Shaler on or prior to the effective date of the change of the billing.
C. Reasonable prior written notice of such change in the billing method to
the Authority's customers in the Township of Shaler.102
101. Editor's Note: The agreement, entered into pursuant to Ord. No. 489, is on file in the
Township offices.
102. Editor's Note: Former Subsection 4, regarding implementation of a computer system,
which immediately followed this subsection, was deleted 5-14-1996 by Ord. No. 1739.
§ 181-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 181-5
1:423

ARTICLE III
Main Line Sewer Extensions
[Adopted 11-13-2007 by Ord. No. 1861103; amended in its entirety
1-7-2008 by Ord. No. 1864]
§ 181-6. Filing of application.
Any person, firm, corporation or other entity owning property not abutting
on any main trunk sanitary sewer laid and constructed throughout the
Township desiring to connect into said sewer by a main line sewer extension
shall file with the Shaler Township Secretary an application, and upon
approval of said application by the proper Township officer, and upon
payment of the fee therefor, a permit will be issued.
§ 181-7. Mandatory sanitary sewer connections.
A. Public sewer system available prior to January 1, 1994. A public sewer
system shall be deemed available to a premises used for human
occupancy if such a premises is on any piece of ground abutting on,
contiguous to or within 150 feet (measured along a street, alley or
easement) of such sanitary sewer system. A connection conforming to
the rules and regulations and standards of the Allegheny County Health
Department, Article XV, Plumbing, shall be made thereto. Where public
sewer systems are made available to the premises, it shall be
mandatory that building systems be connected to available public
systems as a positive measure to protect the health of building
occupants. The Township Building Inspector may issue notices, giving
up to 90 days, to discontinue the use of such private sewer system and
to connect to the public sewer facility.
B. Public sewer line or extension constructed after January 1, 1994. Where
a public sewer line or public sewer line extension is constructed after
January 1, 1994, all premises used for human occupancy within 250 feet
of such sewer line or public sewer line extension shall have building
sewer systems connected to the public facility and discontinue use of
any nonpublic sewage treatment system. The owner of an affected
premises may be given up to 90 days by the Township Building
Inspector to connect to the available public sewer and to discontinue
the use of such private sewer system.
C. Sewer extensions shall be to end of last property to receive service.
Sanitary sewer extensions shall be to the end of the last property to
receive service and shall be designed so as to permit the entire
upstream watershed to be served, based upon the Township's
projections of development in the watershed. Unless there is no
potential for upstream development, it shall include the entire quantity
of pipeline and appurtenant facilities required to and across the entire
103. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Article III, Main Line Sewer
Extensions, adopted 2-8-1977 by Ord. No. 1414, as amended.
§ 181-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 181-7
1:425
§ 181-8. Costs.
In addition to the permit fees herein provided, the property owner shall also
pay all costs, damages, expenses and connection fees required to be paid
with respect to said connection to said sewer.
§ 181-9. Vesting of extension.
The property owner, by acceptance of said permit, agrees that the
ownership of said sanitary sewer extension, when completed, shall vest in
the Township of Shaler, together with an easement of 10 feet on either
side of the center line thereof, for the purpose of repair, replacement,
enlargement or reconstruction of said sanitary sewer extension, and,
further, the owner of the property agrees to execute any and all documents,
in recordable form, as may be required by the Township of Shaler to
evidence such agreement.
§ 181-10. Violations and penalties.
For each and every violation of the provisions of this article, any person or
persons violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction
for a summary offense by the issuing authority for the magisterial district
which includes the Township of Shaler, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
less than $100 nor more than $600 and costs of prosecution and, in default
of payment thereof, may be committed by the issuing authority to prison in
conformity with the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure.
frontage of the last property for which the owner has requested
sanitary sewer service.
§ 181-7 SHALER CODE § 181-10
1:426
ARTICLE IV
Connection to Sanitary Sewer
[Adopted 6-8-1982 by Ord. No. 1528; amended in its entirety
11-13-2007 by Ord. No. 1861]
§ 181-11. Permit required.
Before any house can be connected to any public sanitary sewer, a permit
must first be secured from the Township of Shaler for which a fee of $2,061,
or such other amount as set from time to time by resolution of the Shaler
Township Board of Commissioners, must be paid.
§ 181-12. Inspection.
The lateral sewer from the house to the public sanitary sewer must be
left uncovered until inspected by the Allegheny County Plumbing Inspector
or by his representative or designee. In addition, no surface roof water,
surface, storm or french drain may be permitted to drain into any public
sanitary sewer.
§ 181-13. Waivers.
The Township may waive these requirements if the house in question is
situated in the Girty's Run Watershed. The Township shall determine the
applicable watershed and the applicable permit authority.
§ 181-14. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this article shall,
upon conviction thereof before any issuing authority, forfeit and pay a fine
of not more than $1,000 for each offense and may be sentenced to a period
of incarceration not exceeding 90 days in the Allegheny County Jail. Each
incident in violation of this article shall be considered a separate offense
and may be punishable as the same.
§ 181-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 181-14
1:427

ARTICLE V
Sewer Tap-in Permits
[Adopted 3-12-1985 by Ord. No. 1570]
§ 181-15. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated in this article. Where terms are not defined, they shall
have their ordinarily accepted meanings or such as the context may imply.
AUTHORITY — The Girty's Run Joint Sewer Authority.
BUILDING PERMIT — A building permit to be issued by the Township of
Shaler for:
PERSON — Any individual, agent, firm, corporation, partnership or
association.
§ 181-16. Sewer permit or clearance certificate.
A person requesting the municipality to issue a building permit for a
property located within the Girty's Run Watershed and subject to the
Authority's jurisdiction must submit a valid sewer tap-in permit or clearance
certificate issued by the Authority along with his application for the building
permit. No building permit, as the term is defined herein, shall be issued
without the sewer tap-in permit or clearance certificate.
§ 181-17. Advising authority.
In the event that a building permit is issued pursuant to this article, the
Authority shall be notified and a copy of the application and permit
forwarded to the Authority.
A. New constructions.
Conversion of a single-family residential dwelling unit into a multifamily
unit.
B.
The conversion, enlargement or alteration of a structure that would
require additional plumbing and increase the water usage in the
structure.
C.
§ 181-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 181-17
1:429

ARTICLE VI
Holding Tanks
[Adopted 7-9-1985 by Ord. No. 1577]
§ 181-18. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish procedures for the use and
maintenance of holding tanks designed to receive and retain sewage
whether from residential or commercial uses and it is hereby declared that
the enactment of this article is necessary for the protection, benefit and
preservation of the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of this
municipality.
§ 181-19. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically and clearly indicates otherwise, the meaning
of terms used in this article shall be as follows:
AUTHORITY — Board of Commissioners of the Township of Shaler,
Allegheny County, Pennsylvania.
HOLDING TANK — A watertight receptacle which receives and retains
sewage and is designed and constructed to facilitate ultimate disposal of the
sewage of another site. "Holding tanks" include, but are not limited to, the
following:
IMPROVED PROPERTY — Any property within the Township upon which
there is erected a structure intended for continuous or periodic habitation,
occupancy or use by human beings or animals and from which structure
sewage shall or may be discharged.
MUNICIPALITY — The Township of Shaler, Allegheny Township,
Pennsylvania.
OWNER — Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or
partial, of any property located in the Township.
PORTION — Any individual, partnership, company, association, corporation
or other group or entity.
SEWAGE — Any substance that contains any of the waste products or
excrement or other discharge from the bodies of human beings or animals
and any noxious or deleterious substance being harmful or inimical to the
public health or to animal or aquatic life or to the use of water for domestic
water supply or for recreation.
CHEMICAL TOILET — A toilet using chemicals that discharge to a
holding tank.
A.
RETENTION TANK — A holding tank where sewage is conveyed to it by
a water-carrying system.
B.
VAULT PIT PRIVY — A holding tank designed to receive sewage where
water under pressure is not available.
C.
§ 181-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 181-20
1:431
§ 181-20. Authority; control.
The Authority is hereby authorized and empowered to undertake within the
Township the control and methods of holding tank sewage disposal and the
collection and transportation thereof.
§ 181-21. Rules and regulations.
The Authority is hereby authorized and empowered to adopt such rules and
regulations concerning sewage which it may deem necessary from time to
time to effect the purposes herein.
§ 181-22. Conflicts with other provisions.
All such rules and regulations adopted by the Authority shall be in
conformity with the provisions herein, all other ordinances of the Township
and all applicable laws and applicable rules and regulations of
administrative agencies of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 181-23. Rates and charges.
The Authority shall have the right and power to fix, alter, charge and collect
rates, assessments and other charges in the area served by its facilities at
reasonable and uniform rates as authorized by applicable law.
§ 181-24. Duties of owner.
The owner of an improved property that utilizes a holding tank shall:
§ 181-25. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof by summary proceedings, be sentenced to pay a fine of $1,000
and costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to undergo
imprisonment in the county prison for a period not in excess of 90 days.
§ 181-26. Abatement of nuisances.
In addition to any other remedies provided in this article, any violation
of this article shall constitute a nuisance and shall be abated by the
municipality or the Authority by either seeking appropriate equitable or
legal relief from a court of competent jurisdiction.
A. Maintain the holding tank in conformance with this or any article of the
Township, the provisions of any applicable law and the rules and
regulations of the Authority and any administrative agency of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. Permit only the Authority or its agent to collect, transport and dispose
of the contents therein.
§ 181-20 SHALER CODE § 181-26.1
1:432
§ 181-26.1. Biannual inspections. [Added 10-9-2002 by Ord. No.
1799]
§ 181-26.2. Exclusiveness of rights and privileges. [Added
10-9-2002 by Ord. No. 1799]
§ 181-26.3. Duties of improved property owner. [Added 10-9-2002
by Ord. No. 1799]
The owner of an improved property that utilizes a holding tank shall:
A. All holding tanks shall be inspected biannually by the Authority.
B. The owner shall pay to the Authority such charges for such biannual
inspections as established by the Authority.
A. The collection and transportation of all sewage from any improved
property utilizing a holding tank shall be done solely by or under the
direction and control of the Authority, and the disposal thereof shall be
made only at such site or sites as may be approved by the Department
of Environmental Protection of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. The Authority will receive, review and retain pumping receipts from
permitted holding tanks.
C. The Authority will complete and retain biannual inspection reports from
each permitted tank.
A. Maintain the holding tank in conformance with this or any ordinance of
the Township, the provisions of any applicable law, and the rules and
regulations of the Authority and any administrative agency of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. Permit only the Authority or its agents to inspect the holding tanks on a
biannual basis.
C. Permit only the Authority or its approved agents to collect, transport
and dispose of the contents thereof
§ 181-26.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 181-26.3
1:433

ARTICLE VII
Additional Sewer Service Charges
[Adopted 12-10-1985 by Ord. No. 1583]
§ 181-27. Imposition of additional charge; effective date. [Amended
4-13-1999 by Ord. No. 1764]
A. There is hereby imposed and established an additional charge on each
owner, tenant or occupant utilizing the services of the sewer system
situate within the territorial limits of the Township. The rate of such
charge will continue to be based upon the quantity of water used,
whether the water is furnished by the waterworks of the Township or
secured from any other source, as shown by the consumption readings
or otherwise.
B. Effective January 1, 1998, for each quarter of a year, each residential,
commercial, public and industrial user of the Township's sanitary sewer
collection and conveyance system within the Pine Creek Watershed and
within the Township's boundaries shall be charged the following
additional amounts:
(1) The five-thousand-gallon minimum charge for sewage shall remain
unchanged. The minimum charge shall be the current rental, rate
or charge times 5,000 gallons.
(2) The rental, rate or charge to be imposed on all sanitary sewer
customers for 1,000 gallons of sewage shall be increased from
$0.50 per 1,000 gallons to $1.30 per 1,000 gallons.
(3) A charge of $1.01 per quarter, per garbage grinder.
C. For each quarter of a year, each residential, commercial, public and
industrial user of the Township's sanitary sewer collection and
conveyance system within the Girty's Run Watershed and within the
Township's boundaries shall be charged the following additional
amounts:
(1) The five-thousand-gallon minimum charge for sewage shall remain
unchanged. The minimum charge shall be the current rental, rate
or charge times 5,000 gallons.
(2) The rental, rate or charge to be imposed on all sanitary sewer
customers for 1,000 gallons of sewage shall be the rental, rate or
charge lawfully established by the Girty's Run Joint Sewer
Authority.
(3) A charge of $1.01 per quarter, per garbage grinder.
D. As currently exists, no sanitary sewer customer service fee shall be
imposed.
§ 181-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 181-27
1:435
§ 181-28. Due dates.
Charges for the use of the sewer system shall be made quarterly. All bills
are to be rendered as of the first day of the month following the quarter for
which charges are made and shall be due and payable at face amount if paid
by the last discount date shown on the bill.
§ 181-29. Penalty for late payment.
In the event that the charges for use of the sewer system are not paid by
the last discount date shown on the bill, such charges shall be deemed and
are hereby declared to be delinquent. After such due date, a penalty of
5% shall be added to the bill and also be payable. All payments received
towards such charges will be credited first to any delinquency existing in
said account and thereafter to the currently due bill.
§ 181-30. Responsibility for payment; lien.
The rates and charges herein established shall be imposed upon and
collected from the owner, tenant or occupant of each lot or parcel of land
within or without the territorial limits of the Township from which sewage,
waste or water enter the sewer system. In case any user is not the owner of
the premises from which sewage, waste or water enters the sewer system,
the Township hereby also imposes said sewage service charges upon and
demands payment thereof from the owner of such premises, so that, if
payment is not made promptly, a lien therefor against the premises served
may be filed by the Township.
§ 181-31. Free service prohibited.
There shall be no free use of the sewer system situate within the Township.
All public and nonpublic corporations, all charitable or nonprofit
institutions, all school districts, all political subdivisions and any and all
other entities shall pay for the use of said sewer system in accordance with
the schedule of user fees.
§ 181-32. Water shutoff.
If the owner or occupant of the premises served by any water utility, as
hereinafter defined, shall neglect or fail to pay, for a period of 40 days
from the due date hereof, any charge(s) provided for by this article (or any
amendments thereto), the Township is hereby authorized to shut off the
supply of water to such premises. In the event that water is supplied by
E. As currently exists, no basic fixed charges for sanitary sewage are to be
imposed.
F. The Board of Commissioners is hereby authorized to hereafter
establish, by resolution, said rentals, rates and charges for the use of
the sanitary sewers and sanitary sewer systems within the Pine Creek
Watershed and within the Township's boundaries.
§ 181-27 SHALER CODE § 181-32
1:436
another water utility, such water utility is hereby authorized and required,
at the request of the Township, to shut off the supply of water to such
premises until all such overdue sewer charges, together with any penalty
and interest thereon, shall be paid.
§ 181-33. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of
this article and any amendments or supplements thereto shall be subject to
prosecution in a summary proceeding before the Magisterial District Judge
and shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not in excess of $300
and cost of prosecution and shall be required to pay the amounts of any
delinquencies, penalties and interest and, in default of payment of said fine,
delinquencies, penalties and interest, shall be subject to imprisonment for a
period not in excess of 30 days.
A. In no case shall the water supply be shut off to any premises until 10
days after written notice of an intention to do so has been mailed to the
person liable for payment of the charges.
B. As used in this section, the term "water utility" shall be construed to
include the Township as well as any cities, boroughs, townships,
municipal authorities and public utility companies engaged in the
supplying of water or water service.
C. Where, for any reason, a water utility or the Township is required to
shut off water service to any premises, there shall be levied a service
charge for the shutoff of water service pursuant to the existing service
charges then in effect for water service. Where, for any reason, the
Township or any water utility is required to reinstate and/or turn on
water service to any premises, there shall be levied a service charge
pursuant to the then existing rate. Each of the above service charges
shall be distinct and separate charges.
§ 181-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 181-33
1:437

ARTICLE VIII
Cross-Connections
[Adopted 5-9-1989 by Ord. No. 1638]
§ 181-34. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DOCUMENT OF CERTIFICATION; EVIDENCE OF COMPLIANCE — An
official statement from the Building Inspector of the Township of Shaler,
stating that there are no illegal stormwater or surface water connections
into the sanitary sewer system on the specific property which is being sold.
DYE AND/OR SMOKE TEST — Any commonly accepted method of testing
wherein dye and/or smoke is introduced into the stormwater, surface or
subsurface water collection system and downspouts of real estate property
to determine if any illegal stormwater or surface water is entering the
sanitary sewer system.
ILLEGAL STORMWATER OR SURFACE WATER CONNECTIONS — The
connection of any basement seepage, surface water, subsurface drains,
downspouts, roof drainage or surface areaway drainage into the sanitary
sewer system.
MUNICIPAL LIEN AND PROPERTY TAX VERIFICATION LETTER — A
written letter from the proper official of the Township of Shaler concerning
municipal liens and property taxes.
PERSON — Any person, syndicate, associate, partnership, firm, corporation,
institution, agency, authority or other entity recognized by law as the
subject of rights and duties.
TEMPORARY DOCUMENT OF CERTIFICATION — A temporary statement
of certification from the proper officer of the Township of Shaler, issued
pursuant to the terms of § 181-37 of this article.
§ 181-35. Compliance certificate required for sale. [Amended
4-14-1998 by Ord. No. 1757]
After the effective date of this article, it shall be unlawful for any person
to sell any real estate within the Township of Shaler on which a building
or improvement exists without first delivering to the purchaser a document
of certification or a temporary document of certification from the proper
officers of the Township of Shaler, unless a smoke and dye test certification
was obtained within the previous three years for such real estate.
§ 181-36. Dye testing; certification. [Amended 4-14-1998 by Ord.
No. 1757]
Any person selling real estate located within the Township of Shaler
(hereinafter "applicant") shall make application on a form furnished by
the Township of Shaler at least 14 days before the date of sale unless a
§ 181-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 181-36
1:439
smoke and dye test certification was obtained within the previous three
years. The Township shall then perform a dye test and/or smoke test on
such real estate, unless such property was tested within the previous three
years, said smoke test to involve the use of nontoxic, nonstaining smoke
which is forced through the real estate sewer system by the use of air
blowers. The Township shall complete the appropriate portions on the form
that the property has been dye tested and/or smoke tested and certify the
results of such test. In the event that there are no illegal stormwater or
surface water connections, the Building Inspector or his designate shall
issue a document of certification upon the payment of $15. When an illegal
stormwater or surface water connection is discovered by the means of
the above-mentioned testing, no document of certification will be issued
until the illegal connections are removed, inspected and approved by the
Township.
§ 181-37. Temporary certification.
A temporary document of certification may be issued, at the Township's sole
discretion, only under the following circumstances:
A. When such testing cannot be performed because of weather conditions,
the applicant shall provide the Township with security in the amount of
$200 to guarantee that the appropriate test will be performed. The
Township will make the appropriate test at such time as weather
conditions make such testing possible. In addition, the applicant shall
provide a signed written acknowledgment from the purchaser of the
real estate, agreeing to correct, at the said purchaser's sole expense,
any violations that may be discovered as the result of subsequent tests.
Nothing in this subsection shall prohibit any purchaser from requiring
the applicant to reimburse the purchaser for any costs incurred;
provided, nevertheless, that primary liability shall run with the land,
and no such agreement shall affect the Township's enforcement powers
or excuse the current owner from performance.
B. When illegal stormwater or surface water connections have been
discovered and necessary remedial activities to correct such connection
would require a length of time such as to create a practical hardship for
the applicant, the applicant may apply to the Building Inspector for a
temporary document of certification, which may only be issued when
the applicant provides the Township with all of the following:
(1) Cash security in the amount of the contract for the completion of
the necessary remedial work is posted with the Township.
(2) An agreement by the purchaser to be responsible for all cost
overruns related to the remedial work, together with a license to
the Township to enter upon the property to complete such work in
case of default by the contractor. The Building Inspector shall
determine, by regulation, when such temporary document of
certification shall expire, at which time the security shall be
§ 181-36 SHALER CODE § 181-37
1:440
§ 181-38. Rules and regulations.
§ 181-39. Conflict with police powers.
Nothing in this article shall limit, in any fashion whatsoever, the Township's
right to enforce its ordinances or the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania. Nothing in this article shall be a defense to any citation issued
by any municipal corporation or the commonwealth pursuant to any other
law or ordinance.
§ 181-40. Unlawful connections; removal without unnecessary
delay; violations and penalties. [Amended 6-13-2006 by Ord. No.
1846104]
forfeited, and the Township may use the security to have the
necessary remedial work completed.
A. The Building Inspector is hereby authorized, empowered and directed
to make reasonable rules and regulations for the operation and
enforcement of this article as he deems necessary, which shall include,
but not be limited to:
(1) Establishing acceptable forms of security or guaranties.
(2) Establishing the forms of application, fees and purchaser
acknowledgments.
(3) Limiting the times of year in which temporary documents of
certification are available for reasons of weather.
(4) Such other rules and regulations as are necessary for the operation
and enforcement of this article.
B. All rules and regulations issued pursuant to this section shall be in
writing and be approved by the Board of Township Commissioners prior
to such rules and regulations being effective.
A. Unlawful connections. After the date of this section, it shall be unlawful
for any person to connect any rain leader, roof drain, downspout, gutter,
parking lot drain, driveway drain, interior or exterior sump, french
drain, spring or other collector or source of surface or subsurface
stormwater, including but not limited to the fresh air vent of the
improved and sewered property's sanitary sewer, to the Township's
sanitary sewer system.
B. Removal of all unlawful connections without unnecessary delay. If a dye
or smoke test reveals the existence of one or more surface or
104. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that: "Subsequent dye testing program. This
ordinance shall not preclude the Township of Shaler from conducting dye testing or other
testing or inspection, or implementing a program of dye testing or inspection, within the
Township for purposes of discovering or locating the inflow of surface or subsurface
stormwater to the sanitary sewer system."
§ 181-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 181-40
1:441
subsurface stormwater connections to the Township's sanitary sewer
system, the Township Building Inspector or his designee shall order
the removal of all unlawful surface and/or subsurface stormwater
connections without unnecessary delay and in no event longer than 60
days.
C. Violations and penalties. Any person who shall fail, neglect or refuse to
comply with any of the terms or provisions of this article or any
regulation or requirement pursuant thereto and authorized thereby or
who shall fail, neglect or refuse to remove any unlawful connection
without unnecessary delay shall, upon conviction before any
Magisterial District Judge, be sentenced to pay a fine of $600 per day
for each and every offense as well as costs of prosecution and, in default
of payment thereof, to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days.
Whenever such person shall have been notified that he or she is
committing such a violation of this section, each day that he or she shall
continue such violation after such notification shall constitute a
separate offense punishable by a like fine or penalty.
§ 181-40 SHALER CODE § 181-40
1:442
ARTICLE IX
Dye Testing in Girty's Run
[Adopted 8-11-1992 by Ord. No. 1678]
§ 181-41. Prohibited discharge.
No property owner or property user in the Girty's Run Watershed shall
discharge or permit the discharge of any stormwater, surface water, roof
runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling water or unpolluted industrial process
waters into the sanitary sewer system situate within the Girty's Run
Watershed.
§ 181-42. Authorization for periodic testing.
The Girty's Run Joint Sewer Authority is hereby authorized to conduct
periodic smoke and/or dye tests and any other appropriate test or
inspection, without cost to the residents of Shaler Township, of all existing
sewer systems and structures in the Girty's Run Watershed in Shaler
Township for compliance with this article and other laws pertaining to
sewer systems and structures.
§ 181-43. Certification.
Every owner, lessee or occupier of land within the territory serviced by
the Authority shall submit to smoke and/or dye testing by the Girty's Run
Joint Sewer Authority, which Authority has been irrevocably designated,
authorized, constituted and appointed by the Township of Shaler as its
sole and exclusive agent for such testing purposes, other than as provided
by Article VIII, Cross-Connections, of this chapter. The owner, lessee or
occupier of the land shall permit said testing upon request of the Girty's Run
Joint Sewer Authority to conduct such testing. Testing will not be required
when the owner, lessee or occupier of the land produces a valid document
of certification issued by the Township Building Inspector in accordance
with Article VIII, Cross-Connections, of this chapter, which document of
certification shall be sufficient proof of compliance for purposes of this
article for a period of one year from the date of issuance.
§ 181-44. Responsibility of owner to repair; special arrangements.
A. When illegal stormwater or surface water connections have been
discovered, all necessary remedial work to correct such connection
shall be completed by the owner, lessee or occupier of the premises,
weather permitting, within two months of the date he receives
notification of the illegal connection.
B. In the event that the necessary remedial work would create severe
economic hardship for the owner, lessee or occupier of the premises,
application may be made to the Authority Manager for an extension of
up to an additional six months to complete said remedial work.
§ 181-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 181-44
1:443
§ 181-45. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article and any person
refusing to permit the smoke and/or dye testing as required herein shall,
upon conviction thereof before any Magisterial District Judge or other
issuing authority, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600 for each
and every offense and costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs,
to be imprisoned in the Allegheny County Jail for a period not exceeding
90 days. Whenever such person shall have been notified in writing, by
certified mail, return receipt requested, by the Authority, that such person is
violating this article, each full day that he shall continue such violation after
receipt of such notification shall constitute a separate offense punishable by
a like fine hereunder upon conviction thereof.
C. In the event that the owner, lessee or occupier of the premises who has
established severe economic hardship is unable to effect the necessary
remedial work within the time permitted, including any extension
thereof, the Authority may undertake to have the necessary remedial
work completed at the expense of the owner, lessee or occupier of the
premises and to make any necessary arrangements for the payment of
said work by the owner, lessee or occupier of the premises on an
installment basis, which arrangements shall be mutually satisfactory to
the owner, lessee or occupier. Under such circumstances, in the event
that satisfactory arrangements are not agreed upon by the Authority
and the owner, lessee or occupier, the Authority may file a lien against
such property, which lien shall remain in effect until payment in full or
sale of the property occurs.
§ 181-44 SHALER CODE § 181-45
1:444
ARTICLE X
Additional Prohibitions
[Adopted 2-7-1995 by Ord. No. 1715]
§ 181-46. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
hereafter designated:
ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the "Clean
Water Act," as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
ALCOSAN — Allegheny County Sanitary Authority, including its treatment
facility and any devices and systems used in the storage, treatment,
recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a
liquid nature.
CORROSIVE WASTE — A waste or substance which has any of the following
properties:
HAZARDOUS WASTE — All wastes that are defined as hazardous under the
regulations enacted pursuant to the Resource Conservation and Recovery
Act (RCRA) as specified in 40 CFR 261, or under the regulations
promulgated pursuant to the Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act105
as specified in 25 Pa. Code Chapter 261a.
IGNITABLE WASTE — A waste or substance which can create a fire hazard
in the sewage collection system or the ALCOSAN treatment facility, which
has any of but is not limited to the following properties:
INTERFERENCE — A discharge originating in the Township which, alone or
in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, both:
It is aqueous and has a pH of less than or equal to five or greater than
or equal to 10, as determined by a pH meter.
A.
It is a liquid and corrodes steel (SAE 1020) at a rate greater than 6.35
millimeters (0.250 inch) per year at a test temperature of 55° C. (130°
F.).
B.
It is liquid with a flash point less than 60° C. (140° F.) using the test
methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21.
A.
B. It is an oxidizer as defined in 49 CFR 173.151.
Inhibits or disrupts the ALCOSAN facilities, its treatment processes or
operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and
A.
Therefore, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of ALCOSAN's
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (hereinafter referred
to as "NPDES") permit (including an increase in the magnitude or
duration of a violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use
B.
105. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
§ 181-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 181-46
1:445
PASS-THROUGH — Any discharge of a pollutant through ALCOSAN into
the waters of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in quantities or
concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with other discharges from
other sources, is a cause of violation of any requirement of the ALCOSAN's
NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a
violation).
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint-stock company, trust, estate, governmental
entity or any other legal entity or its legal representatives, agents or
assigns.
pH — The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of
hydrogen ions expressed in grams per liter of solution.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage,
garbage, sewage sludge, emissions, chemical wastes, biological materials,
radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand,
cellar dirt or other industrial, municipal or agricultural waste discharged
into water.
POLLUTION — The man-made or man-induced alteration of the chemical,
physical, biological and/or radiological integrity of water.
REACTIVE/EXPLOSIVE WASTE — A waste or substance which can create
an explosion hazard in the sewage collection system or the ALCOSAN
treatment facility, which has any of but is not limited to the following
properties:
or disposal by ALCOSAN in compliance with the following statutory
provisions and regulations or permits issued thereunder (or more
stringent state or local regulations): Section 405 of the Clean Water
Act, the Solid Waste Disposal Act (including Title 2, or more commonly
referred to as the "Resource Conservation and Recovery Act," and
including state regulations contained in the State Sludge Management
Plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act),
the Clean Air Act and the Toxic Substances Control Act.
It is normally unstable and readily undergoes violent change without
detonating.
A.
B. It reacts violently with water.
C. It forms potentially explosive mixtures with water.
When mixed with water, it generates toxic gasses, vapors or fumes
in a quantity sufficient to present a danger to human health or the
environment.
D.
It is a cyanide- or sulfide-bearing waste which can generate toxic
gasses, vapors or fumes in a quantity sufficient to present a danger to
human health or the environment.
E.
§ 181-46 SHALER CODE § 181-46
1:446
TOXIC POLLUTANT — Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as
toxic in regulations promulgated by the EPA pursuant to Section 307(A) of
the Act.
WASTEWATER — The liquid- and water-carried industrial or domestic
wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities and
institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water and stormwater
that may be present, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed
directly or indirectly into the facilities of ALCOSAN.
WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes,
watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation
systems, drainage systems and other bodies or accumulations of water,
surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are
contained within, flow through or border upon the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or any portion thereof.
§ 181-47. Prohibited acts.
No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced, directly or indirectly,
into the facilities of ALCOSAN or of the Township or into any sewer, pipe or
other conveyance located in the Township and transmitting substances into
the facilities of ALCOSAN or of the Township, any toxic pollutant or other
wastewater which will:
§ 181-48. Additional prohibited acts.
No person shall introduce, permit or cause to be introduced, directly or
indirectly, into the facilities of ALCOSAN or into any piped sewer, pipe or
other conveyance located in the Township and transmitting substances into
the facilities of ALCOSAN, any of the following:
It is capable of detonation or explosive reaction if it is subjected to a
strong initiating source or if heated under confinement.
F.
It is readily capable of detonation, explosive decomposition or reaction
at standard temperature and pressure.
G.
It is a forbidden explosive as defined in 40 CFR 173.51 or a Class A
explosive as defined in 49 CFR 173.53 or a Class B explosive as defined
in 49 CFR 173.88.
H.
A. Cause interference with the operation or performance of ALCOSAN's
treatment plant or other facilities; or
B. Pass through ALCOSAN's treatment plant or other facilities.
A. Any substance which will endanger the life, health or safety of the
treatment plant sewer maintenance and plant operations personnel or
which would preclude safe entry into the sewer system or any portion of
the treatment plant.
§ 181-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 181-48
1:447
§ 181-49. Compliance required; additional standards.
B. Any ignitable, reactive, explosive, corrosive or hazardous waste, except
as provided for by ALCOSAN's rules and regulations.
C. Any wastewater with a temperature greater than 140° F. (60° C.).
D. Any waste which exceeds the naturally occurring background levels for
either alpha, beta or gamma radiation and/or any wastewater
containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration not in compliance with applicable state or federal
regulations.
E. Any solids or viscous substances capable of causing obstruction to the
flow in sewers or other interference with the proper operations of
ALCOSAN's or the Township's or other's facilities discharging into the
ALCOSAN system.
F. Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gasses or solids which, either singly
or by interaction with other wastes, may create a public nuisance or
adversely affect public health or safety or prevent entry into sewers for
maintenance or repair.
G. Pathological wastes from a hospital or other medical establishment.
H. Garbage, whether ground or not, except properly shredded food waste
garbage resulting from the proper use of a garbage grinder or disposer
of a type approved by ALCOSAN and maintained in good operating
condition.
I. Sludges or other materials from septic tanks or similar facilities or from
sewage or industrial waste treatment plants or from water treatment
plants, unless the discharge of such sludges and other materials is
specifically approved by ALCOSAN.
J. Any pollutant, including oxygen-demanding pollutants, released in a
discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which will cause
interference with the ALCOSAN facilities.
K. Any substance which will cause ALCOSAN's effluent or any other
product of the ALCOSAN facilities, such as residues, sludges or scums,
to be unsuitable for reclamation processes, including any substance
which will cause the ALCOSAN facility to be in noncompliance with
sludge use or disposable criteria, guidelines or regulations developed
under Section 405 of the Act; any criteria, guidelines or regulations
promulgated pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air
Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act or state laws or regulations
applicable to the treatment or disposal of such effluent or such product.
A. No person shall take any action or do or cause to be done anything in
violation of any rule or regulation of ALCOSAN or of the Township.
§ 181-48 SHALER CODE § 181-49
1:448
§ 181-50. Violations and penalties; remedies.
Any person violating any provision of this article shall, upon conviction,
be punished by a fine not to exceed the sum of $1,000 for each offense,
recoverable with costs, and, in default of payment of the fine and costs,
shall be subject to imprisonment in the Allegheny County Jail for a period
not exceeding 30 days. Each day a violation is continued shall constitute
separate offense. In addition, any person violating any provision of the
ALCOSAN pretreatment regulations may be subject to administrative and
civil penalties as provided for by the pretreatment regulations and
administered by ALCOSAN. Such penalties may include, but are not limited
to, injunctive relief and penalties of up to $25,000 per day, per violation,
as provided for by the Publicly Owned Treatment Works Penalty Law, 35
P.S. § 752.1 et seq. Authority to so enforce the pretreatment regulations is
granted to ALCOSAN and is in addition to, but not in place of, any other
remedy available to the Township.
B. The pretreatment regulations of the Allegheny County Sanitary
Authority are incorporated into this article by reference as though fully
set forth herein.
§ 181-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 181-50
1:449
Chapter 183
SIGNS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 225.
§ 181-50 SHALER CODE § 181-50
1:450
ARTICLE I
Signs Generally
§ 183-1. Purpose.
This chapter is intended to:
§ 183-2. Applicability.
The regulations of this chapter shall govern and control the erection,
rehabilitation, enlargement, illumination, animation and maintenance of all
signs that are visible from the public right-of-way or from property other
than that on which the subject sign is located. Nothing herein contained
shall be deemed a waiver of the provisions of any other ordinance or
regulation applicable to signs.
§ 183-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABANDONED SIGN — A sign which has not been utilized for a period of
180 days or more, or a sign, the content of which no longer identifies or
advertises a bona fide business, lessor, service, owner, product or activity;
or a sign, the contents of which pertains to a place, time, event or purpose
which no longer exists or applies or which has occurred.
ADVERTISING SIGN — A sign which directs attention to a business,
commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered only
elsewhere than upon the premises where the sign is displayed.
AREA OF SIGN — The entire area within a single continuous perimeter
enclosing the extreme limits of writing, representation, emblem or any
figure or similar character, together with any frame or other materials
or color forming an integral part of the display or used to differentiate
such sign from the background against which it is placed (excluding the
necessary supports or uprights on which the sign is placed or apron
designed to cover such uprights or work board installed to provide a safe
area for servicing such sign). Where a sign has two or more faces on the
same side, the area of all faces shall be included in determining the area of
the sign, except that in the case of back-to-back signs or V-type signs, the
A. Encourage sound practices with respect to size, spacing, lighting, type
and placement of signs for the purpose of safeguarding and enhancing
properties in each of the various types of zoning districts;
B. Provide an environment which will promote the orderly growth and
development of business and industry in the Township;
C. Protect public investment in public structures, open spaces and
thoroughfares; and
D. Promote the safety and welfare of the community.
§ 183-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 183-3
1:451
area of the sign shall be taken as the area of one face if two faces are of
equal area or as the area of the larger face if the two faces are of unequal
area.
AWNING SIGN or CANOPY SIGN — Any sign that is a part of or attached
to an awning, canopy or other fabric, plastic or structural protective cover
over a door, entrance, window or outdoor service area. A marquee is not a
canopy.
BACKLIGHT or BACKLIGHTING — A type of light that illuminates a subject
or letters from behind.
BANNER — A sign intended to be hung either with or without a frame,
possessing characters, letters, illustrations or ornamentations applied to
paper, plastic or fabric of any kind, excluding flags, emblems and insignias
of political, professional, religious or educational organizations displayed
for noncommercial purposes.
BEACON — Any light with one or more beams directed into the atmosphere
or directed at one or more points not on the same lot or site as the light
source; also, any light with one or more beams that rotate or move.
BILLBOARD — An off-premises advertising sign with a changeable message
or display that pertains to a business, organization, event, person, place,
service or product not principally located or sold on the premises upon
which said sign is located. See "off-premises advertising sign."
BUILDING — Any structure having enclosing walls and roofs and requiring
a permanent location on the land.
BUILDING FACADE — See "facade, building."
BUILDING FACADE, FRONT — The facade that includes the primary
entrance is the front facade.
BUSINESS DIRECTORY — A sign used to identify or list:
BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT — Any business, trade, occupation, work,
commerce or profession conducted for profit or benefit, either directly or
indirectly, on any commercial property in the Township.
BUSINESS SIGN — A sign which directs attention to a business, profession
or industry located upon the premises where the sign is displayed; to the
type of products sold, manufactured or assembled; and/or to the service
or entertainment offered on such premises, and includes electronic signs,
projecting signs, supplemental signs and temporary signs.
CANDIDATE — One who seeks or offers himself or herself or is put forth by
others for an office, privilege or honor, by election or appointment.
The names of the individual or organization occupying, leasing or
owning the premises and/or the profession of the occupants; or
A.
The name and/or management of the building for which the sign is
displayed or the name of the major enterprise or principal product or
service on the premises.
B.
§ 183-3 SHALER CODE § 183-3
1:452
CANOPY SIGN — See "awning sign."
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The Code Enforcement Officer of the
Township of Shaler.
COMMUNITY SPECIAL EVENT SIGN — A temporary sign, either portable
or nonportable, displayed for a limited time, which carries information
about a special event or activity, such as an auction, flea market, festival,
carnival, meal, charitable or educational activities or fund-raising event of
interest to the general public.
DIRECTIONAL SIGN or DIRECTIONAL INCIDENTAL SIGN — A sign
generally informational that has a purpose secondary to the use of the lot
or site on which it is located, such as "No Parking," "Entrance," "Exit,"
"One Way," "Loading Only," "Telephone," and other similar directives, and
provided that such sign does not exceed three square feet. Directional,
incidental signs shall be located only in conjunction with site drive
entrances and/or internal traffic drive aisles.
DWELL TIME — The interval of change between each individual static
message, and which shall be at least 10 seconds, and a change of which
must be completed within one second or less. The dwell time shall not
include the one second or less required to change a message. There shall
be no special effects between messages.
ELECTRONIC SIGN — Any sign, video display, projected image, or similar
device or portions thereof with text, images or graphics generated by solid
state electronic components. Electronic signs include, but are not limited
to, signs that use light-emitting diodes (LED), plasma displays, fiber optics,
or other technology that results in bright, high-resolution text, images and
graphics. See "off-premises advertising sign." See also "business sign."
ENFORCEMENT NOTICE — A notice as provided in § 616.1 of the
Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10616.1, sent by the Township to
the owner or occupant of record of a parcel on which a violation of this
chapter has occurred, to any person who has filed a written request to
receive enforcement notices regarding that parcel, and to any other person
requested in writing by the owner or occupant of record, the purpose of
which is to initiate enforcement proceedings.
FACADE, BUILDING — That portion of any exterior elevation on the
building extending from finished grade to top of the parapet, wall or eaves
and the entire width of the building elevation as determined by the Code
Enforcement Officer. For example, the front facade of a building would
include all of the wall area that would be shown on the front elevation of the
building plans.
FLAG — Any fabric, banner or bunting containing distinctive colors,
patterns or symbols, used as a symbol of a government, political
subdivision, or a religious, educational or corporate organization, provided
that such flags are displayed for noncommercial purposes.
§ 183-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 183-3
1:453
FLASHING SIGN — A sign, the illumination of which is intermittently on
and off so as to flash or blink or the intensity of which varies so as to appear
to flash or blink. Such signs are prohibited.
GROUND SIGN — A two-sided, freestanding business sign or business
directory sign that is not attached to any building and that is supported
by upright structural members anchored into the ground. The height of a
ground sign shall be measured from the ground elevation nearest to the
sign to the highest elevation of the sign structure, and the overall height of
the sign shall not exceed a height of 25 feet.
HEIGHT — In the case of buildings, the vertical distance from the mean
level of the ground surrounding the building to the top of the highest roof
beams of a flat roof or the mean level of the highest gable or slope of a hip
roof. When the building faces on more than one street, the height shall be
measured from the average of the grades at the center of each street front.
In case of other structures, the height shall be the vertical distance from the
mean level of the ground surrounding the structure to the highest point of
the structure.
IDENTIFICATION SIGN — A sign used to identify:
ILLEGAL SIGN — Any sign erected, altered, moved, repaired, maintained or
replaced in violation of this chapter.
ILLUMINATED SIGN — Any sign that has characters, letters, figures,
designs or outlines illuminated by electric lights or luminous tubes as a part
of the sign:
INSTITUTIONAL IDENTIFICATION SIGN — A sign or bulletin board which
identifies the name and other characteristics of a public, semipublic or
private institution on the site where the sign is located. Institutions shall
include churches, hospitals, nursing homes, schools and other nonprofit and
charitable organizations.
The name of the individual or organization occupying, leasing or
owning the premises and/or the profession of the occupant; or
A.
The name and/or management of the building on which the sign is
displayed or the name of the major enterprise or principal product or
service on the premises.
B.
Backlighting: Illumination of an outside area or object by any man-made
device that shines from behind the object or area.
A.
Internal lighting: Illumination of an outside area or object by any manmade
device that shines from within the object or area.
B.
External lighting: Illumination of an outside area or object by any manmade
device that shines onto or reflects from said area or object.
C.
Hours of illumination: No billboard or electronic off-premises
advertising sign shall be illuminated between 12:00 midnight and 5:00
a.m., prevailing time.
D.
§ 183-3 SHALER CODE § 183-3
1:454
INSTITUTIONAL INFORMATIONAL SIGN — Any sign giving information to
employees, visitors or delivery vehicles to an institution but containing no
advertising. Such signs may include the name of the institution but must
predominantly represent a directional or informational message.
LARGE VIDEO DISPLAY — An electronic sign that features real-time, fullmotion
or pictorial imagery of television quality or better.
LCD — A liquid crystal display, electronic visual display or video display that
uses light-modulating properties of liquid crystals.
LED — Light-emitting diode. A type of LCD screen; how the LCD screen is
backlit.
LUMINANCE — The photometric quantity most closely associated with the
perception of brightness. Luminance is measured in candelas per square
meters or "nits."
MARQUEE — Any permanent, roof-like structure projecting beyond a
building or extending along and projecting beyond the wall of the building,
generally designed and constructed to provide protection from the weather,
and which provides an area for manual or electronic changeable copy.
MOTION — The depiction of movement or change of position of text, images
or graphics. Motion shall include, but not be limited to, visual effects such
as dissolving and fading text and images, running sequential text, graphic
bursts, lighting that resembles zooming, twinkling or sparkling, changes in
light or color, transitory bursts of light intensity, moving patterns or bands
of light, expanding or contracting shapes, and similar actions.
NITS — Nits are a unit of measure of brightness or luminance. One nit is
equal to one candela/square meter.
NONCONFORMING SIGN — A sign, lawfully existing on the effective date
of this chapter or subsequent amendment hereto, which does not
completely conform to the sign regulations applicable in the district in
which it is located. An illegal sign is not a nonconforming sign.
OFF-PREMISES ADVERTISING SIGN or OFF-PREMISES SIGN — A sign
that directs attention to a business, commodity, service or entertainment
conducted, sold or offered only elsewhere than upon the premises where
the sign is displayed and shall include billboards and electronic signs.
PENNANT — Any lightweight plastic, fabric or other material, whether or
not containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire or string,
usually in a series, designed to move in the wind.
PORTABLE SIGN — Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or
other permanent structure, or a sign designed to be transported, including,
but not limited to, signs designed to be transported by means of wheels;
signs converted to A- or T-frames; sandwich board signs; balloons used as
signs; umbrellas used for advertising; and signs attached to or painted on
vehicles parked and visible from the public right-of-way, unless vehicle is
used in the normal day-to-day operations of the business.
§ 183-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 183-3
1:455
PROJECTING SIGN — A two-sided sign attached perpendicular to the
building face. See "business sign."
RESIDENTIAL IDENTIFICATION SIGN — Any on-site noncommercial sign
located in a district zoned for residential uses that contains no commercial
message and intended to identify the name of the resident and/or the street
number or apartment number of the dwelling unit.
ROOF SIGN — Any sign erected and constructed wholly on and over the
roof of a building, supported by the roof structure and extending vertically
above the top walk or edge of a flat roof, the eaves line of a building with a
gambrel, gable or hip roof or the deckline of a building with a mansard roof.
SIGN — Any device, fixture, placard or structure that uses any color, form,
graphic, illumination, symbol or writing to identify and communicate,
announce the purpose of, or identify the purpose of a person or entity, or to
communicate information of any kind to the public.
SIGNAGE — Signs considered as a group; the design or use of signs.
SIGN, CHANGEABLE COPY — A sign or portion thereof with characters,
letters or illustrations that can be changed or rearranged without altering
the face or the surface of the sign. A sign on which the only copy that
changes is an electronic or mechanical indication of time or temperature
shall be considered a time-and-temperature portion of a sign and not a
changeable copy sign for purposes of this chapter.
STREAMER — A long narrow flag, banner or pennant suspended from one
or more corners, used to draw attention to a business or its signs.
SUPPLEMENTAL SIGN — Any sign identifying special features or services
of a trade or business, including additional corporate or business logos,
entrance or exit signs, or signs identifying functions such as showroom,
sales, service or repairs. See "business sign."
TEMPORARY POLITICAL SIGNS — A sign, placard or sticker which
announces a political candidate seeking office, political parties and/or
political and public issues, contained on an election ballot and includes,
but is not limited to, structures or devices upon which lettered, pictorial
or other visual information is painted, including paper, plastic or cloth
banners, pennants, balloons or other devices designed to attract attention.
TEMPORARY SIGN — A wall, window, awning, projecting or ground sign
that provides decoration and/or identifies advertising or nonadvertising
information, such as a business name, business address, owner, logo and/or
building name, relating to brief activity, the erection or display of which is
not to exceed a period of 30 days in any calendar year and which takes place
not more than one time a year. A temporary sign includes a banner, cloth,
pennant, streamer or other flexible material suspended from a building,
structure or pole. A business establishment may erect or display only one
temporary sign on a lot in any calendar year. See "business sign."
TOTAL SIGNAGE AREA — The area of a sign shall include all lettering,
wording and accompanying designs and symbols, together with the
background, whether open or enclosed, on which they are displayed,
§ 183-3 SHALER CODE § 183-3
1:456
together with any material or color forming an integral part of the
background of the display or used to differentiate the sign from the
backdrop or building against which it is placed, but not including any
supporting framework and bracing that are incidental to the display itself.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Shaler.
TOWNSHIP MANAGER — The Manager of the Township of Shaler.
TWIRL TIME — The time it takes for static text, images and graphics on
an electronic sign to change to a different text, images or graphics on a
subsequent sign face.
VEHICULAR SIGN — Any sign displayed on a parked vehicle, where the
primary purpose of the vehicle is to advertise a product or business or to
direct people to a business or activity during all or part of the day. For the
purposes of this chapter, vehicular signs shall not include business logos,
identification, or advertising on vehicles primarily used for other business
purposes.
WALL SIGN — Any sign painted on, attached or erected against the wall of
a building, the front or sides of a marquee or canopy with the exposed face
of the sign in a place parallel to the plane of the wall or the marquee or
canopy so that only one side is visible.
WINDOW SIGN — Any sign, picture, symbol or combination thereof,
designed to communicate information about an activity, business,
commodity, event, sale or service, that is placed inside a window or upon
the window panes or glass and is visible from the exterior of the window.
§ 183-4. Signs prohibited in all districts.
All signs not expressly authorized under this article or exempt from
regulation hereunder in accordance with the subsequent sections are
prohibited in the Township. Prohibited signs shall include, but are not
limited to:
A. All illegal signs and all signs not in compliance with this chapter or any
other ordinance or regulation of the Township.
B. Signs not in good repair.
C. Signs interfering with or impeding drivers' vision including line of sight
or vehicular traffic or safety signs.
D. Any sign erected closer than five feet to any underground utility line.
E. Obsolete signs and abandoned signs. Each sign shall be promptly
removed when the circumstances leading to its erection no longer
apply.
F. Beacons.
G. Flashing signs.
§ 183-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 183-4
1:457
§ 183-5. Signs permitted in all districts.
The following types of signs are permitted in all districts:
§ 183-6. Signs permitted in residential districts.
The following types of signs are permitted in residential districts:
H. Roof signs.
I. Pennants.
J. Banners.
K. Vehicular signs.
L. Portable signs.
A. "For sale" and "for rent" signs as hereinafter specially regulated in each
district.
B. Political posters and placards, which shall be removed by the person
erecting such sign, the person responsible for the land on which it is
erected, or the candidate or party upon whose behalf the posters and
placards are erected, within seven days after the election.
C. Public service signs of such size and type and in such locations as
required to satisfy the public need in any district, including:
(1) Convenience signs identifying location of rest rooms, freight
entrances and parking areas.
(2) Government signs for the control of traffic and other regulatory
purposes.
(3) Public transit service signs.
(4) Public utility information signs and community special event signs.
(5) Safety signs.
(6) Signs erected by a public agency in the performance of a public
duty.
(7) Signs indicating scenic or historic points of interest.
(8) Street signs.
(9) "No trespassing" signs and "no hunting" signs.
(10) Directional signs without advertising as may be deemed necessary
for the preservation of the public health or safety.
(11) Directional signs with advertising and having a maximum size of no
more than three square feet per entrance or exit.
§ 183-4 SHALER CODE § 183-6
1:458
§ 183-7. Mt. Royal Boulevard and Seavey Road corridors (primarily
zoned NS Neighborhood Shopping).
A. Residential identification signs on residential structures:
(1) Maximum number of signs per building is one sign, or two if
building is on a corner lot.
(2) Maximum size per sign is 1 1/2 square feet.
B. "For sale" and "for rent" signs:
(1) Maximum number of signs per building is one sign, or two if
building is on a corner lot.
(2) Maximum size per sign is 10 square feet.
(3) Minimum distance of the sign from another lot is 15 feet.
C. Institutional identification signs on institutional or public buildings:
(1) Maximum number of identification signs per building is two signs.
(2) Maximum total area of signs is 32 square feet.
D. Institutional directional and informational signs on institutional or
public buildings:
(1) Unlimited number of signs.
(2) Maximum size of each sign is three square feet.
E. There shall be not more than two identification signs erected by
churches, schools or other similar institutions, each of which shall be
located on the premises and shall not exceed 32 square feet in area.
Additional directional and informational signs may be erected on such
premises as necessary, each of which shall not exceed three square feet
in area.
A. For all uses within nonresidential districts along these corridors, each
business establishment is permitted to have one of the following
combinations of signage:
(1) One ground sign and one projecting sign with a total area of 100
square feet.
(2) One ground sign and one awning sign with a total area of 100
square feet.
(3) One wall sign and one projecting sign with a total area of 100
square feet.
(4) One wall sign and one awning sign with a total area of 100 square
feet.
§ 183-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 183-7
1:459
(5) One wall sign and one ground sign with a total area of 80 square
feet.
(6) If granted a special exception for an electronic sign, one electronic
sign and one wall sign with a total maximum area of 80 square feet
for all sign faces.
B. The maximum size of each sign is 50 square feet.
C. Including additional signs and electronic signs, but excluding
supplemental signs, the maximum total signage area of all signs for
each business establishment along these corridors is 100 square feet
for all sign faces.
D. Ground signs must comply with all bufferyard requirements.
E. The maximum height of any sign attached to a building is one foot
above the roofline of the building to which it is attached.
F. The maximum height of any permitted sign not attached to a building is
25 feet above the level of the ground.
G. Supplemental wall signs with a maximum size of six square feet are
permitted.
H. Electronic signs are not permitted except by special exception.
I. For a contiguous group of more than five business establishments, one
additional ground sign is permitted for the group.
(1) The maximum size of the additional ground sign is 50 square feet.
(2) The maximum height of the sign is 25 feet from the level of the
ground.
J. Temporary signs:
(1) The maximum number of temporary signs permitted per business
establishment is one temporary sign within a calendar year.
(2) The maximum size of any temporary sign erected within any
calendar year is 12 square feet.
(3) The maximum length of time a temporary sign may be displayed
per business establishment is 30 days within any calendar year, and
the temporary sign shall be removed within two days following the
last day of the event.
(4) Window signs affixed to the inside of windows are not considered
temporary signs.
K. The minimum distance of any sign from a paved portion of the public
right-of-way, except for a wall sign, is 15 feet.
L. The minimum distance of any sign from a residential lot is 40 feet.
§ 183-7 SHALER CODE § 183-7
1:460
§ 183-8. Babcock Boulevard and Evergreen Road corridors
(primarily zoned GC General Commercial).
M. "For sale" and "for rent" signs:
(1) Maximum number of signs per lot is one sign, or two signs on a
corner lot.
(2) Maximum size is 50 square feet.
(3) Minimum distance from the paved portion of a public right-of-way
is 15 feet.
(4) The signs may not be illuminated.
(5) The sign shall be erected only upon the property for sale or being
rented.
A. For all uses within nonresidential districts along these corridors, each
business establishment is permitted to have one of the following
combinations of signage:
(1) One ground sign and one projecting sign with a maximum total
signage area of 125 square feet for all sign faces.
(2) One ground sign and one awning sign with a maximum total
signage area of 125 square feet for all sign faces.
(3) One wall sign and one projecting sign with a maximum total
signage area of 125 square feet for all sign faces.
(4) One wall sign and one ground sign with a maximum total signage
area of 125 square feet for all sign faces.
(5) One wall sign and one electronic sign with a maximum total
signage area of 125 square feet for all sign faces.
(6) The maximum size of each sign is 100 square feet.
B. Ground signs must comply with all bufferyard requirements.
C. The maximum height of any sign attached to a building is one foot
above the roofline of the building to which it is attached.
D. The maximum height of any permitted sign not attached to a building,
excluding billboards, is 25 feet above the level of the ground.
E. Additional sign. For a contiguous group of more than five business
establishments, one additional ground sign is permitted for the group.
(1) The maximum size of the additional ground sign is 50 square feet.
(2) The maximum height of the sign is 25 feet from the level of the
ground.
§ 183-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 183-8
1:461
§ 183-9. Route 8 and East Ohio Street corridors (primarily zoned I
Industrial and GC General Commercial).
F. Including additional signs and electronic signs but excluding
supplemental signs, the maximum total signage area of all signs for
each business establishment along these corridors is 125 square feet
for all sign faces.
G. Supplemental wall signs with a maximum size of six square feet are
permitted.
H. Electronic signs complying with this chapter are permitted.
I. Temporary signs.
(1) The maximum number of temporary signs permitted per business
establishment is one temporary sign within a calendar year.
(2) The maximum size of any temporary sign erected within any
calendar year is 12 square feet.
(3) The maximum length of time a temporary sign may be displayed
per business establishment is 30 days within any calendar year and
the temporary sign shall be removed within two days following the
last day of the event.
(4) Window signs affixed to the inside of windows are not considered
temporary signs.
J. The minimum distance of any sign from a paved portion of the public
right-of-way, except for a wall sign, is 15 feet.
K. The minimum distance of any sign from a residential lot is 40 feet.
L. "For sale" and "for rent" signs:
(1) Maximum number of signs per lot is one sign, or two signs on a
corner lot.
(2) Maximum size is 50 square feet.
(3) Minimum distance from the paved portion of a public right-of-way
is 15 feet.
(4) The signs may not be illuminated.
(5) The sign shall be erected only upon the property for sale or being
rented.
A. For all uses within nonresidential districts along this corridor, each
business establishment is permitted to have one of the following
combinations of signage:
(1) Wall signs.
§ 183-8 SHALER CODE § 183-9
1:462
(a) Maximum number of wall signs is two.
(b) Maximum distance a wall sign projects from the wall to which
it is attached is one foot.
(c) A wall sign may not exceed the width of the occupied premises
or building in length.
(2) Supplemental wall signs with a maximum size of six square feet are
permitted.
(3) One ground sign and one projecting sign with a total maximum
signage area of 150 square feet for all sign faces.
(4) One ground sign and one awning sign with a total maximum
signage area of 150 square feet for all sign faces.
(5) One wall sign and one projecting sign with a total maximum
signage area of 150 square feet for all sign faces.
(6) One wall sign and one ground sign with a total maximum signage
area of 150 square feet for all sign faces.
(7) One wall sign and one electronic sign with a maximum total area of
150 square feet for all sign faces.
(8) The maximum size of each sign is 100 square feet.
(9) For a building on a corner lot, either frontage may be used for
calculation, but the frontage selected will be the front where the
sign is erected.
B. Ground signs must comply with all bufferyard requirements.
C. The maximum height of any sign attached to a building is one foot
above the roofline of the building to which it is attached.
D. The maximum height of any permitted sign not attached to a building,
excluding billboards, is 25 feet above the level of the ground.
E. Additional sign. For a contiguous group of more than five business
establishments, one additional ground sign is permitted for the group.
(1) The maximum size of the additional ground sign is 50 square feet.
(2) The maximum height of the sign is 25 feet from the level of the
ground.
F. Including additional signs and electronic signs, but excluding
supplemental signs, the maximum total signage area of all signs for
each business establishment along these corridors is 150 square feet
for all sign faces.
G. Lots without buildings are permitted one ground sign with a maximum
size of 50 square feet.
§ 183-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 183-9
1:463
H. Ground signs must comply with all bufferyard requirements.
I. Temporary signs.
(1) The maximum number of temporary signs permitted per business
establishment is one temporary sign within a calendar year.
(2) The maximum size of any temporary sign erected within any
calendar year is 12 square feet.
(3) The maximum length of time a temporary sign may be displayed
per business establishment is 30 days within any calendar year, and
the temporary sign shall be removed within two days following the
last day of the event.
(4) Window signs affixed to the inside of windows are not considered
temporary signs.
J. Electronic signs complying with this chapter are permitted.
K. Billboards complying with this chapter are permitted.
(1) All billboards must be:
(a) The principal use on a lot.
(b) Mounted on a permanent structure but not on a motor vehicle,
fence or a retaining wall.
(2) The face of the sign may not be visible within a ground-level sight
distance of 350 feet of property zoned residential, cemetery or
professional; a public park or playground of 1/4 acre or more; or a
cultural and/or recreation center.
(3) The billboard must be within the lot where the base is erected.
(4) Minimum distance from a public right-of-way is 15 feet.
(5) Maximum height of a billboard sign is 40 feet.
(6) Only one billboard is permitted per lot, but one sign may have a
maximum of two faces arranged back-to-back or deck style.
(7) Maximum size: 240 square feet.
L. Location requirements.
(1) Minimum distance from a ground sign to the paved area of a public
right-of-way is 15 feet.
(2) Projecting signs must be attached directly to the structural
framework of the building.
(3) Minimum distance from any sign to a residential lot is 100 feet.
M. "For sale" and "for rent" signs.
§ 183-9 SHALER CODE § 183-9
1:464
§ 183-10. All other areas zoned nonresidential.
§ 183-11. Illuminated signs.
§ 183-12. Electronic signs.
(1) Maximum number of signs per lot is one sign, or two signs on a
corner lot.
(2) Maximum size is 50 square feet.
(3) Minimum distance from the paved portion of a public right-of-way
is 15 feet.
(4) The signs may not be illuminated.
(5) The sign shall be erected only upon the property for sale or being
rented.
A. Uses within a professional district outside of a signage corridor will use
the signage standards for nonresidential uses in the most restrictive
directly adjacent district or corridor.
B. All other nonresidential uses outside of a signage corridor shall use the
standards for the Babcock Boulevard/Evergreen Road corridors.
A. Illuminated signs complying with this chapter are permitted in each
nonresidential zoning district.
B. All signs may be illuminated with back-, internal or external lighting.
Each sign that is lit entirely by backlighting or external lighting is
permitted to increase the total permitted signage area by 5%.
Backlighting does not include internal lighting.
C. All illumination must be cutoff lighting. All lighting must be limited to a
maximum candlepower of 2 1/2% of the total lamp lumens at an angle of
90° above horizontal and a maximum candlepower of 10% at an angle of
80° above horizontal for any lateral angle around the light.
D. No illuminated off-premises advertising sign shall be illuminated
between 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m., prevailing time.
A. Electronic signs complying with the requirements of this chapter may
be approved by the Code Enforcement Officer in the Route 8 and East
Ohio Street corridors and the Babcock Boulevard and Evergreen Road
corridors in the Township.
B. Electronic signs complying with the requirements of this chapter are
permitted as a special exception in the Mt. Royal Boulevard and Seavey
Road corridors of the Township.
C. All electronic signs in the Township are subject to the following criteria:
§ 183-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 183-12
1:465
§ 183-13. Permits.
(1) No electronic off-premises advertising sign shall be illuminated
between 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m., prevailing time.
(2) Electronic signs with large video display are permitted in the Route
8 and East Ohio Street corridors and the Babcock Boulevard and
Evergreen Road corridors in the Township.
(3) Dwell time. The text, image or display on an electronic sign may not
change more than once every 10 seconds. Twirl time between
subsequent text, images or display shall not exceed 0.25 second.
(4) Brightness. During daylight hours between sunrise and sunset,
luminance shall be no greater than 5,000 nits. At all other times,
luminance shall be no greater than 500 nits.
(5) Location. No electronic sign may be erected except as authorized
herein.
(6) Interference. No electronic sign shall be erected or maintained in
such a manner as to obscure or otherwise physically interfere with
an official traffic sign, signal or device, or to obstruct or physically
interfere with the driver's view of approaching, merging or
intersecting traffic.
(7) Controls; testing; annual certification.
(a) All electronic signs shall be equipped with an automatic
dimmer control or other mechanism that automatically
controls the sign's brightness as provided above.
(b) Prior to approval of any permit to operate an electronic sign,
the applicant shall certify that the sign has been tested and
complies with the motion, dwell time, brightness and other
requirements herein.
(c) The owner and/or operator of an electronic sign shall submit
an annual report to the Township, certifying that the sign
complies with the motion, dwell time, brightness and other
requirements herein.
(8) Maintenance. Routine maintenance of electronic signs is
permitted, including the replacement of solid-state electronic
components, subject to compliance with regulations set forth
herein relating to motion, brightness and dwell time.
A. No sign shall be erected until the owner, occupier or applicant has
received a permit for the erection of the sign and pays to the Township a
fee in such amount as the Board of Commissioners may from time to
time set by resolution.
B. A separate permit is required for the erection of each individual sign.
§ 183-12 SHALER CODE § 183-13
1:466
§ 183-14. Nonconforming signs.
All nonconforming signs in existence prior to the effective date of this
chapter are permitted to continue, provided that no such sign shall be:
§ 183-15. Landscape and bufferyard requirements.
Where a ground sign is permitted and the width of the sign at its base would
extend beyond the bounds of an established or proposed bufferyard, the
bufferyard must be expanded in a "cut out" so that the entire base of the
sign is within a contiguous landscaped area with a minimum distance of two
feet from the edge of the base of the sign to the edge of the landscaped
bufferyard area. The cut out must be circular or semicircular in shape
unless the lot shape and/or public right-of-way do not allow for this shape,
in which case, the cut out should be rounded in shape.
§ 183-16. Signs exempt from regulations.
The following signs shall be exempt from regulations under this chapter:
C. No permit is required for signs with an area of 12 square feet or less.
D. No permit is required for "for sale" or "for rent" signs.
A. Changed, altered or expanded in any way which increases the sign's
nonconformity; or replaced by another nonconforming sign, except that
copy may be changed on an existing sign.
B. Relocated, except in conformance with the requirements of this
chapter.
C. Reestablished after it has been removed or is an abandoned sign.
A. Any public notice or warning required by a valid and applicable federal,
state or local law, regulation or ordinance.
B. Any sign inside a structure not attached to a window or door that is not
legible from a distance of more than three feet beyond the lot line of the
lot or site on which such sign is located.
C. Works of art that do not include a commercial message.
D. Holiday lights and decorations with no commercial message, but only
from November through January.
E. Memorial signs or tablets denoting the date of erection of a building.
F. Auctions, garage or yard sale signs, provided that they do not exceed
five square feet and are removed as soon as the event or activity has
occurred, and provided that they shall not be permitted to be erected
more than seven days prior to the event and only permitted at the site
at which the event will take place and removed within 48 hours of the
conclusion of the event.
§ 183-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 183-16
1:467
§ 183-17. Enforcement.
If it appears to the Township that a violation of any provision of this
chapter has occurred, the Township shall initiate enforcement proceedings
by sending an enforcement notice as provided by 53 P.S. § 10616.1.
§ 183-18. Violations and penalties.
§ 183-19. Conflict.
G. Signs and banners erected by a governmental body or under the
direction of such body.
H. Community special event signs announcing a nonprofit event of a civic
organization for noncommercial purposes, where such sign does not
exceed four square feet in area and banners no more than 60 square
feet in area, for a period not to exceed 30 days prior to the start of the
event, and removed within three days after the conclusion of the event.
A. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated or
permitted the violation of the provisions of this article shall, upon being
found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by
the Township, pay a judgment of not more than $500 plus all court
costs, including reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the Township as
a result thereof. No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or
payable until the date of the determination of a violation by the
Magisterial District Judge. If the defendant neither pays nor timely
appeals the judgment, the Township may enforce the judgment
pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure. Each day that a
violation continues shall constitute a separate violation, unless the
Magisterial District Judge determining that there has been a violation
further determines that there was a good faith basis for the person,
partnership or corporation violating the ordinance to have believed that
there was no such violation, in which event there shall be deemed to
have been only one such violation until the fifth day following the date
of the determination of a violation by the Magisterial District Judge, and
thereafter each day that a violation continues shall constitute a
separate violation. All judgments, costs and reasonable attorneys' fees
collected for the violation of the article shall be paid over to the
Township.
B. The court of common pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of stay,
upon cause shown, tolling the per diem fine, pending a final
adjudication of the violation and judgment.
C. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted to
grant to any person or entity other than the Township the right to
commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this section.
A. With general police powers. If any person, persons, firms or
corporations or other organization carries on any activity within the
§ 183-16 SHALER CODE § 183-19
1:468
§ 183-20. Variances and special exceptions.
Township in violation of the provisions of this chapter, then the
Township, in addition to any other remedies, may institute any legal
action to prevent, restrain or abate any act constituting a violation of
this chapter and to require compliance with its provisions.
B. Discrepancy between text and exhibit. Where a discrepancy exists
between any exhibit attached to this chapter and that which is
described in the text of this chapter, the text of the chapter controls and
shall be the final authority.
A. Variances. The Township Zoning Hearing Board may approve variances
from the requirements of this chapter. Requests for variances from the
requirements of this chapter shall be subject to the application and
approval procedures, requirements and standards for variances under
Article XIV of Chapter 225, Zoning, of the Shaler Township Code, as
amended.
B. Special exceptions. The Township Zoning Hearing Board may approve
special exceptions under this chapter if the express standards and
criteria established by this chapter are met. Requests for special
exceptions shall be subject to the application and approval procedures,
requirements and standards for special exceptions under Article XVIII
of Chapter 225, Zoning, of the Shaler Township Code, as amended.
§ 183-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 183-20
1:469

ARTICLE II
Temporary Political Signs
§ 183-21. Purpose and intent.
In addition to those purposes stated in Article I, this article is adopted for
the following additional purposes:
§ 183-22. Posting or erecting on public property.
Temporary political signs posted or erected on public property located
within the Township are subject to the following general requirements:
A. The Township desires to regulate the placement of temporary political
signs within the Township in order to protect the public health, safety
and welfare of the community in accordance with the provisions of the
First Class Township Code.
B. The Township desires to regulate the placement of temporary political
signs in order to protect automobile drivers from unnecessarily
dangerous distractions, to uphold the property values of the community
by prohibiting unnecessarily obtrusive political signs, and to uphold the
dignity and impartial, nonpartisan manner of public institutions.
C. The Township desires to reasonably regulate the placement of
temporary political signs in order to assure that means will remain open
for political communication within the Township.
A. Number of signs. No more than one temporary political sign shall be
placed on public property on each leg of the intersection of roads or
streets for any one candidate.
B. Area. Temporary political signs on public property shall not exceed an
aggregate gross surface area of 12 square feet per sign.
C. Height. Temporary political signs shall not project higher than four feet,
as measured from the base of the sign or grade of the nearest adjacent
roadway, whichever is higher.
D. Timing. Temporary political signs may be erected or maintained for a
period not to exceed 30 days prior to the date of the election to which
such signs are applicable and shall be removed within seven days
following the termination of the election.
E. Illumination. No temporary political sign shall be illuminated in any
manner.
F. Required consent. The Township reserves the right to deny a request to
post any temporary political sign on public property and to require the
removal of any temporary political sign at any time whatsoever
whenever such temporary political sign poses a threat to the public's
safety, health and welfare, specific prohibitions include, but are not
limited to, the following:
§ 183-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 183-22
1:471
§ 183-23. Posting or erecting on private property.
No temporary political sign shall be placed or erected on any private
property without first obtaining permission from such property owner.
§ 183-24. Removal as public nuisance.
Every prohibited temporary political sign is declared to be a public
nuisance, and the person or persons having authority over the public or
private property may remove the same or cause it to be removed
immediately at the reasonable expense of the person placing, maintaining
or erecting the temporary political sign.
§ 183-25. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or organization who or which
violates any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction in a
summary proceeding, be fined not less than $300 and, in default of the
payment of the fine and costs, shall be committed to the Allegheny County
Jail for a period not to exceed 30 days. Nothing contained herein shall be
deemed to preclude the Township to seek other relief or avail itself of any
remedy that may be at law or in equity to prevent continuing violations of
the terms of this article.
(1) Temporary political signs shall be prohibited within five feet of the
edge of the paved surface of any road or street within the
Township.
(2) Temporary political signs shall be prohibited along any road or
street within the Township where it would obstruct the clear sight
distance of traffic, and no temporary political sign shall be placed
in such a position that it will cause danger to traffic on a street by
obstructing the view.
(3) No temporary political sign or sticker shall be posted, nailed,
wired, attached or affixed to any public property, including, but not
limited to, traffic signs, structures or devices, traffic control boxes,
guardrails, telephone poles, utility posts or Township street signs.
§ 183-22 SHALER CODE § 183-25
1:472
Chapter 185
SMOKING
§ 185-1. Where prohibited.
Smoking or carrying of a lighted pipe, cigarette, cigar or tobacco, in any
form, is prohibited:
§ 185-2. Designation of smoking areas.
The Fire Marshal, with the assistance of the building principal, shall
designate specific, safe locations in any public school buildings in which
smoking may be permitted.
§ 185-3. Posting of signs.
The Fire Marshal is authorized to order posting of "No Smoking" signs in
or on locations described in § 185-1 of this chapter. The content, lettering,
size, color and location of said signs shall be subject to the approval of the
Fire Marshal.
§ 185-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-15-1988 by Ord. No.
1631]
A person found to be in violation of § 185-1 of this chapter shall be subject
to pay a fine not to exceed $600, plus the cost of summary proceedings, the
same to be collected in the name of the Township of Shaler.
Chapter 187
SOLID WASTE
A. In any public school building in the Township of Shaler, except as
provided in § 185-2 of this chapter; and
B. On any bus specifically operated for the purpose of transporting public
school pupils.
§ 183-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-4
1:473

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 187-1. Purpose and goals.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the health, safety and welfare
of the residents of the Township of Shaler by regulating the collection,
storage, transportation, removal, dumping, deposit, disposal and recycling
of solid waste by instituting a comprehensive solid waste management
program and establishing a mandatory recycling program pursuant to the
requirements of Act 101, 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq. Furthermore, the goals
of this chapter are to:
§ 187-2. Definitions and word usage.
The following words and phrases as used in this chapter shall have the
meanings ascribed herein, unless the context clearly indicates a different
meaning:
ACT OR ACT 97 — The Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act of 1980
(P.L. 380, No. 97, July 7, 1980), 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
ACT 101 — The Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste Reduction
Act of 1988, 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
AGRICULTURAL WASTE — Poultry and livestock manure or residual
materials in liquid or solid form, generated in the production and marketing
of poultry, livestock, fur-bearing animals and their products, provided that
such waste is not a hazardous waste. The term includes the residual
A. Require waste reduction and recycling as a means of managing solid
waste, conserving resources and supplying energy.
B. Protect the public health, safety and welfare from the short- and longterm
dangers of collection, transportation, processing and storage of
solid waste.
C. Utilize, wherever feasible, the capabilities of private enterprise in
accomplishing the desired objectives of an effective, comprehensive
solid waste management program.
D. Establish and implement within the Township a recycling program to
return valuable materials to productive use, to conserve energy and to
protect capacity at waste processing and disposal facilities.
E. Recycle solid waste and source-separated recyclable materials
generated in the Township.
F. Maintain the quality and character of the Township neighborhoods.
G. Teach the residents and those individuals working in the Township the
economic, environmental and energy value of recycling and waste
reduction; and encourage, through a variety of means, participation in
such activities.
§ 187-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-2
1:475
materials generated in producing, harvesting and marketing of all
agronomic, horticultural, silvicultural and agricultural crops or
commodities grown on what are usually recognized and accepted as farms,
forests or other agricultural lands.
ALUMINUM CANS — Empty all-aluminum beverage or food cans.
BIMETALLIC CANS — Empty food or beverage cans consisting of steel and
aluminum.
BULKY WASTE — Large items of solid waste, including but not limited to
appliances, furniture, large auto parts, trees, branches or stumps, which
may require special handling due to their size, shape or weight.
COLLECTOR — The entity or entities authorized by the municipality to
collect recyclable materials from residences or authorized by commercial,
industrial, municipal and institutional establishments that do not receive
collection services from the municipality to collect recyclable materials
from those properties.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment engaged in a
nonmanufacturing or nonprocessing business, including, but not limited
to, stores, markets, office buildings, restaurants, shopping centers and
theaters. Multifamily dwellings and townhouses of greater than four units,
not individually owned, mobile home parks, hotels, motels, mixed-use
properties (combined business/residential on a single parcel) and farms
which use commercial dumpsters shall be considered commercial
establishments. The term does not include properties where the primary
permitted use is residential and an accessory use is commercial (i.e., home
occupations).
COMMINGLED — Designated recyclable materials:
COMMUNITY ACTIVITIES — Events that are sponsored by public or private
agencies or individuals that include but are not limited to fairs, bazaars,
socials, picnics and organized sporting events attended by the general
public.
COMPOSTING — The process by which solid organic waste is biologically
decomposed under controlled aerobic or anaerobic conditions to yield a
humus-like product.
CONSTRUCTION DEMOLITION WASTE — All municipal and residual waste
building materials, grubbing waste and rubble resulting from construction,
remodeling, repair and demolition operations on houses, commercial
buildings and other structures and pavements.
CORRUGATED PAPER (CARDBOARD PRODUCTS) — Structural paper
material with an inner core shaped in rigid parallel furrows and ridges,
A. Which have been segregated from municipal waste; and
Which have been placed in a recycling container for the purpose of
collection.
B.
§ 187-2 SHALER CODE § 187-2
1:476
but expressly excluded are used pizza boxes and other cardboard cartons
contaminated with grease or cooking oil.
COVERED DEVICE - ELECTRONIC WASTE — Desktop and laptop
computers, computer monitors, computer peripherals and televisions, as
same are defined by the Covered Device Recycling Act, 35 P.S. 6031.101 et
seq.
DEPARTMENT — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection.
DESIGNATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Those materials specified by
the rules and regulations of Shaler Township to be recycled after public
notice.
DISPOSAL — The incineration, deposition, injection, dumping, spilling,
leaking or placing of solid waste into or on the land or water in a manner
that the solid waste or a constituent of the solid waste enters the
environment, is emitted into the air or is discharged to the waters of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
DOMESTIC WASTE or HOUSEHOLD WASTE — Solid waste, comprised of
garbage and rubbish, which normally originates in the residential private
household or apartment house.
DUMPSTER — Any portable container, receptacle, compactor unit, trailer,
roll-off box, collection bin, tub or similar unit with or without wheels that
is used or designed for temporary storage, containment or transport of
refuse, debris, trash, garbage, food waste, solid waste, recyclable material,
incidental demolition debris or other discarded or like materials. See also
"refuse container or trash container."
ENFORCING ENTITY — The Township Manager or his designee.
FERROUS CONTAINERS — Empty steel or tin-coated food or beverage
containers.
FACADE — All the wall planes of a structure as seen from one side or
view. The exterior face of a building, including but not limited to the wall,
windows and doorways.
FRONT FACADE — The facade of the building adjacent to the front property
line. That portion of the facade of a dwelling fronting on a street or
trafficway, or the portion of the facade most closely complying with that
definition, as in the case of a flag lot. Where a lot has more than one
frontage on a street or trafficway, all such frontages shall be considered the
front facade except where a facade meets the definition of a rear facade.
The front facade of a building would include all of the wall area that would
be shown on the front elevation of the building plans.
GARBAGE — Any solid waste derived from animal, grain, fruit or vegetable
matter that is capable of being decomposed by microorganisms with
sufficient rapidity to cause such nuisances as odors, gases or vectors.
Refuse, except rubbish, or waste of any kind.
§ 187-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-2
1:477
GLASS CONTAINERS — Empty bottles and jars made of clear, green or
brown glass. Expressly excluded are noncontainer glass, plate glass,
automotive glass, light bulbs, blue glass and porcelain and ceramic
products.
HAULER or PRIVATE COLLECTOR — Any person, firm, copartnership,
association or corporation who has been licensed by the Township of Shaler
or its designated representative to collect, transport and dispose of refuse
for a fee in the Township of Shaler.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS OR SUBSTANCES — Any material or substance
which may have a direct or identifiable effect on persons or property within
the municipal boundaries of the Township of Shaler or any such substances
or materials in a quantity or form which, in the determination of the
Township Manager or his authorized representative, pose an unreasonable
or imminent risk to the life, health or safety of persons or property or to
the ecological balance of the environment, and shall include, but not be
limited to, such substances as explosives, radioactive materials, petroleum
products or gases, poisons, etiologic (biologic) agents, flammables,
corrosives or materials listed in the hazardous substance list of the
Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry, the Solid Waste
Management Act, 35 P.S. § 6018.101, and the Worker and Community Rightto-
Know Act, 35 P.S. § 7303. This includes any product or waste or
combination of substances that, because of the quantity, concentration,
physical, chemical or infectious characteristics, if not properly treated,
stored, transported, used or disposed of, or otherwise managed, would
create a potential threat to public health through direct or indirect
introduction into groundwater resources and the subsurface environment,
which includes the soil and all subsequent materials located below. Such
hazardous materials include, but are not limited to, materials which may be
included on one or more of the following lists:
Occupational Safety and Health Act, 29 CFR Part 1910, Subpart Z,
Extremely Hazardous Substance Act.
A.
American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists, Threshold
Limit Values for Chemical Substances and Physical Agents in the Work
Environment (latest edition).
B.
National Toxicology Program, Annual Report on Carcinogens (latest
edition).
C.
International Agency for Research on Cancer Monographs (latest
edition).
D.
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Department of Labor and Industry,
Hazardous Substance List (latest edition).
E.
"Hazardous substances" defined pursuant to Section 311 of the Federal
Clean Water Act.
F.
"Toxic materials" defined pursuant to Chapter 75 of the DEP Rules and
Regulations.
G.
§ 187-2 SHALER CODE § 187-2
1:478
HAZARDOUS WASTE — Any solid waste or combination of solid wastes, as
defined in the Act, which because of its quantity, concentration or physical,
chemical or infectious characteristics may cause or significantly contribute
to an increase in mortality or an increase in morbidity in either an individual
or the total population or pose a substantial present or potential hazard
to human health or the environment when improperly treated, stored,
transported, disposed of or otherwise managed.
HIGH-GRADE OFFICE PAPER — All white paper, bond paper and computer
paper used in commercial, industrial, institutional and municipal
establishments and in residences.
INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment engaging in
manufacturing or processing, including, but not limited to, factories,
foundries, mills, processing plants and refineries, mines and
slaughterhouses.
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENT — Those facilities that house or serve
groups of people, including but not limited to hospitals, nursing homes,
orphanages, day-care centers, schools and universities.
LEAD-ACID BATTERIES — Includes but is not limited to automotive, truck
and industrial batteries that contain lead.
LEAF WASTE — Leaves from trees, bushes and other plants, garden
residues, chipped shrubbery and tree trimmings, but specifically excluding
grass clippings.
LITTER —
MAGAZINES AND PERIODICALS — Printed matter containing
miscellaneous written pieces published at fixed or varying intervals.
Expressly excluded are all other paper products of any nature whatsoever.
MULTIFAMILY HOUSING PROPERTIES — Any properties having more than
four dwelling units per structure.
"Hazardous wastes" defined pursuant to Section 101 of the Federal
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act.
H.
Garbage, refuse, rubbish and trash, as defined herein, covered waste
and all other waste material or leaf waste which, if thrown, discarded,
left, emitted or deposited as herein prohibited, causes or tends to
create:
(1) A danger to public health, safety and welfare; or
An objectionable or unsightly condition caused by the placement of
things lying about in disorder; or
(2)
(3) The expenditure of public funds to correct; or
(4) A hazard to the environment or wildlife.
A.
Litter shall not include sand, anti-skid material, salt or other
appropriate chemicals to treat any icy or slippery condition.
B.
§ 187-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-2
1:479
MUNICIPAL ESTABLISHMENT — Public facilities operated by the
municipality and other governmental and quasi-governmental authorities.
MUNICIPALITY — The Township of Shaler, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania.
MUNICIPAL WASTE — Garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or office
waste and other material, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained
gaseous material resulting from operation of residential, municipal,
commercial, industrial or institutional establishments and from community
activities; and any sludge not meeting the definition of residual or
hazardous waste under the Solid Waste Management Act, 35 P.S. § 6018.101
et seq., from a municipal, commercial, industrial or institutional water
supply treatment plant, wastewater treatment plant or air pollution control
facility. The term does not include source-separated recyclable materials.
NEWSPAPERS — Paper of the type commonly referred to as "newsprint"
and distributed at fixed intervals, having printed thereon news and
opinions, containing advertisements and other matters of public interest.
Expressly excluded are newspapers which have been soiled, color comics,
glossy advertising inserts and advertising inserts printed in colors other
than black and white often included with newspapers.
NEWSPRINT — Paper which has been used for the production of daily,
weekend and special edition publications commonly known as newspapers.
NOT OPEN TO THE PUBLIC — Premises or a use not accessible or available
to the community or the general public.
OPACITY — The quality or fact of being opaque; opaqueness; the property
of a substance whereby it partially or wholly obstructs the transmission of
visible light expressed as the percentage to which light is obstructed; the
degree of light-obscuring capability of emissions of visible air contaminants
expressed as a percentage. Complete obscuration is expressed as 100%
opacity and complete transparency is expressed as 0% opacity.
OPAQUE — Not letting light pass through; not transparent.
OPAQUE BARRIER — A visual screening accomplished by way of
vegetation, wall or fencing not exceeding the height standards set forth in
Chapter 118, Fences, Walls and Hedges, of the Code.
PARK — A park, playground, recreation center or any other public area or
green space in the Township owned or used by the Township and devoted to
active or passive recreation.
PERSON(S) — An individual, partnership, corporation, association,
institution, cooperative enterprise, municipal authority, federal government
or agency, state institution or agency, or any other legal entity whatsoever
which is recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties as well as
owners, lessees and occupants of residences and commercial, industrial,
municipal and institutional establishments. In any provisions of this article
prescribing a fine, imprisonment or penalty, or any combination of the
foregoing, the term "person" shall include the officers and directors of any
corporation, commercial, industrial or institutional establishment or other
legal entity having officers and directors.
§ 187-2 SHALER CODE § 187-2
1:480
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT or PRD — An area of land,
controlled by a landowner, to be developed as a single entity for a number of
dwelling units or a combination of residential and nonresidential uses, the
development plan for which does not correspond in lot size, bulk, type of
dwelling or use, density or intensity, lot coverage and required open space
to the regulations established in any one district created, from time to time,
under the provisions of the Township Code.
PLASTIC CONTAINERS — Empty plastic food and beverage containers
including recyclable plastic products.
PREMISES OPEN TO THE PUBLIC — Any premises open to the general
public, whether publicly or privately owned and whether utilized for
commercial, industrial, institutional, municipal or other public purposes.
Property that is generally open and accessible to the general public.
PRIVATE — Of or pertaining to any building structure, premises, use or
activity owned or operated by a person or nonpublic entity and not open to
the public.
PRIVATE PREMISES — As used in this chapter, "private premises" shall
mean all property which is not a public place and not open to the public,
including but not limited to any house, building or other structure designed
or used, either wholly or in part, for private residential purposes, whether
inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and shall
include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or
mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building or other
structures.
PRIVATE RECYCLING CONTAINER — A recycling container situated on
private premises, not open to the public and maintained for or used for
private residential, commercial, industrial or institutional purposes.
PROCESSING — Any technology used for the purpose of reducing the
volume or bulk of municipal or residual waste or any technology used to
convert part or all of such waste materials for off-site reuse. Processing
facilities include, but are not limited to, transfer facilities, composting
facilities and resource recovery facilities.
PUBLIC — Of or pertaining to the people or community as a whole as well
as any building, structure, use or activity owned or operated by any duly
authorized state, county or local governmental entity, including locations
open to a common use; for the use or benefit of all.
PUBLIC PLACE — As used in this subchapter, premises or property that
is generally open and accessible to the general public; any place open
to or frequented by the public, including but not limited to commercial,
industrial, institutional, municipal or other public locations.
PUBLIC RECYCLING CONTAINER — A recycling container situated at a
public place, open to the public and maintained for or used by the people of
a community.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Materials generated by residences and
commercial, industrial, municipal and institutional establishments, which
§ 187-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-2
1:481
are specified by the municipality and can be separated from municipal
waste and returned to commerce to be reused as a resource in the
development of useful products. Recyclable materials may include, but
are not necessarily limited to, clear glass, colored glass, aluminum, steel
and bimetallic cans, high-grade office paper, newsprint, corrugated paper,
leaf waste, recyclable plastic products and any other items selected by
the municipality or specified in future revisions to Act 101. Designated
recyclable materials shall be selected by the municipality in its rules and
regulations and may be revised from time to time as deemed necessary after
public notice.
RECYCLABLE PLASTIC PRODUCTS — Recyclable plastic products are
identified by a numerical code, within a triangle with arrows, molded
directly on the container. The numerical code and the corresponding plastic
composition are as follows:
Numerical Code Plastic Composition Typical Application
1 Polyethylene terephthalate
(PETE)
Soda bottles
2 High-density polyethylene
(HDPE)
Water bottles and milk
jugs
3 Polyvinyl chloride Plumbing
4 Low-density polyethylene Film, stretch wrap
5 Polypropylene Pediatric containers
6 Polystyrene Styrofoam, plastic plates
7 Composite Milk cartons
RECYCLING — The collection, separation, recovery and sale or reuse of
metals, glass, paper, leaf waste, plastics and other materials which would
otherwise be disposed or processed as municipal waste, or the mechanized
separation and treatment of municipal waste (other than through
combustion) and creation and recovery of reusable materials.
RECYCLING CONTAINER — Any recyclable container that a person
controls, whether owned, leased or operated, including dumpsters, trash
cans, including recyclable materials generated by residences and
commercial, industrial, municipal and institutional establishments, which
are specified by the municipality and can be separated from municipal
waste and returned to commerce to be reused as a resource in the
development of useful products. See also "refuse container or trash
container."
REFUSE — All solid waste materials which are discarded as useless.
REFUSE CONTAINER or TRASH CONTAINER — Any waste container that a
person controls, whether owned, leased or operated, including dumpsters,
trash cans, recyclable containers, garbage pails and plastic trash bags.
For purposes of this chapter, the words trash, garbage, rubbish, recyclable
materials or other refuse shall be deemed to include the container or
containers in which such trash, garbage, rubbish, recyclable materials or
§ 187-2 SHALER CODE § 187-2
1:482
other refuse may be placed, and this chapter shall apply to such containers
whether they may be filled or empty.
RESIDENCES — Any occupied single-family or multifamily dwellings having
up to four dwelling units per structure, for which the municipality provides
municipal waste collection service.
RESIDUAL WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, other discarded material or
other waste, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous
materials resulting from an industrial, mining or agricultural water supply
treatment facility, wastewater treatment facility or air pollution control
facility, provided that it is not hazardous. The term "residual waste" shall
not include coal refuse as defined in the Coal Refuse Disposal Control Act,
52 P.S. § 30.51 et seq. Residual waste shall not include treatment sludges
from coal mine drainage treatment plants, disposal of which is being carried
on pursuant to and in compliance with a valid permit issued pursuant to the
Clean Streams Law, 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
RUBBISH — All nonputrescible municipal waste except garbage and other
decomposable matter. This category includes but is not limited to ashes,
bedding, cardboard, cans, crockery, glass, paper, wood and yard cleanings.
SCAVENGING — The unauthorized and uncontrolled sorting, gathering,
collecting, extracting, removal, reclamation or disturbance of garbage,
rubbish or refuse materials placed at the curb for collection or from a solid
waste processing or disposal facility.
SCREEN — A method of reducing the impact of noise and unsightly vision
intrusions with less offensive or more harmonious elements, such as plants,
berms, fences, walls or any appropriate combination thereof.
SEWAGE TREATMENT RESIDUES — Any coarse screenings, grit and
dewatered or air-dried sludges from sewage treatment plants and pumpings
from septic tanks or septage which are a municipal solid waste and require
proper disposal under Act 97.
SOLID WASTE — Any waste, including but not limited to municipal residual
or hazardous wastes, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous
material.
SOURCE-SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Those materials
separated at the point of origin for the purpose of being recycled.
STEEL CANS — The ferrous metal food or beverage containers commonly
known as tin cans.
STORAGE — The containment of any waste on a temporary basis in such
a manner as not to constitute disposal of such waste. It shall be presumed
that the containment of any waste in excess of one year constitutes disposal.
This presumption can be overcome by clear and convincing evidence to the
contrary.
SUSTAINED PUBLIC EDUCATION PROGRAM — The ongoing effort of
Shaler Township to inform the general public concerning the requirements
of this article and the rules and regulations promulgated pursuant hereto.
§ 187-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-2
1:483
TOWNSHIP BUILDING INSPECTOR — The person authorized to act as the
building official, or any assistant to such person, who enforces the Township
Zoning Ordinance.106
TRANSFER STATION — Any supplemental transportation facility used as an
adjunct to solid waste route collection vehicles.
TRANSPORTATION — The off-site removal of any solid waste at any time
after generation.
TRASH — Worthless or discarded materials or objects, as well as refuse or
rubbish, and including but not limited to empty bottles and cans, cigarette
butts as well as food wrappers and containers, whether made of aluminum,
glass, plastic, rubber, paper or other natural or synthetic material, or any
combination thereof.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is
or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices used
exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
WASTE — A material whose original purpose has been completed and which
is directed to a disposal or processing facility or is otherwise disposed. The
term does not include source-separated recyclable materials or material
approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection for
beneficial use.
YARD WASTE — All garden residues, leaves, shrubbery, tree trimmings and
sod, but specifically excluding grass clippings.
§ 187-3. Authority to remove and correct.
A. The Township of Shaler is hereby authorized and empowered to notify
the owner and/or occupant of any open or vacant private premises or
any occupied or unoccupied private or business premises within the
Township, or the agent of such owner or occupant, to correct all things
and any condition which in its opinion may have a tendency to imperil
the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the Township. Such
notice shall be by certified mail, addressed to said owner and/or
occupant at his last known address or served personally by the
Township Building Inspector or his designee upon such owner or
occupant.
B. Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any owner or occupant so notified
to correct the thing or condition which may have a tendency to imperil
the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the Township within
three days after receipt of the written notice provided for in Subsection
A above, or three days after the date of such notice in the event that the
same is returned unserved, said Township Building Inspector or his
designee is hereby authorized and empowered to order the correction
of such condition using Township funds or Township personnel to
accomplish such correction, and may charge the costs thereof to the
106. Editor's Note: See Ch. 225, Zoning.
§ 187-2 SHALER CODE § 187-3
1:484
violator. Collection of such costs by the Township may be made by lien
or otherwise as authorized by law.
§ 187-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-3
1:485

ARTICLE II
Use of Township Trash Containers
§ 187-4. Prohibited acts.
It shall be unlawful for any person, persons, commercial or industrial
services to use, to place or cause to be placed any garbage, lumber or other
building materials in any corralled municipal receptacle.
§ 187-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person or persons, corporation, partnership or association who violates
this article shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $50 nor more
than $600, plus the cost of proceedings, for each offense and, in default
of the payment of the fine and costs shall be committed to the Allegheny
County Jail for a period not to exceed 90 days.
§ 187-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-5
1:487

ARTICLE III
Placement for Collection
§ 187-6. Prohibited activities and presumptions.
§ 187-7. Removal.
The resident, owner, person or occupant in charge of the property from
where the trash or private recyclable materials has been picked up shall
remove or cause the emptied containers to be removed from the curbline
or front yard and shall cause the emptied containers to be placed or stored
either inside a garage or behind the front facade line of the dwelling no later
than 12:00 midnight on the day of pickup.
§ 187-8. Violations and penalties.
Any resident, occupant or person in charge of any property in the Township
who neglects, fails or refuses to comply with this article shall, upon
conviction thereof by any Magisterial District Judge or other court of
competent jurisdiction in Allegheny County, Pennsylvania, be sentenced to
pay not more than $600 for each offense, plus costs. Each day the offense
continues shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as the
same.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to place or allow to be placed any
prohibited article or material, designated recycling material, covered
devices, tire or wheel in his waste or at curbside for garbage collection.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of any waste or recycling
material in the municipality except in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter.
C. It shall be presumed that any designated recycling material, covered
device, wheel or tire found commingled with waste on the property of a
person is the property of such person if identifiable indicia of ownership
is contained therein.
§ 187-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-8
1:489

ARTICLE IV
Scavenging
§ 187-9. Prohibited activities.
§ 187-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction,
be guilty of a summary offense, and shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not
less than $300 nor more than $600, plus costs of prosecution, or, in default
of payment of such fine, then by imprisonment for a period of not more than
90 days, or both. Each day a violation occurs shall be considered a separate
and distinct offense.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, other than an owner, hauler or
private collector, to haul, transport, collect or remove any garbage,
refuse or rubbish from public or private property within the Township of
Shaler without first securing a license to do so from the Township of
Shaler.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person, other than an owner, hauler or
private collector, to scavenge any materials from any garbage, refuse or
rubbish that is stored or disposed for collection with the Township of
Shaler without the prior approval to sift, sort, separate, remove,
scavenge, take possession of or otherwise disturb any garbage, refuse
or rubbish on public or private property.
§ 187-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-10
1:491

ARTICLE V
Recycling
§ 187-11. Establishment; grant of power.
§ 187-12. Franchise or license agreements.
The Township may enter into (an) agreement(s) with public or private
agencies or firms to authorize them to collect all or part of the recyclable
materials from curbside.
§ 187-13. Prohibited activities and presumptions.
A. The Township has established, pursuant to the Act of June 24, 1931, P.L.
1206, Art. XV, 1502, cl. XXVII, as amended, 53 P.S. 56527 of the First
Class Township Code, a recycling program for the mandatory
separation and collection of recyclable materials by persons and the
separation, collection and composting of yard waste from all residences
and all commercial, industrial, municipal and institutional
establishments located in the municipality for which waste collection is
provided by the municipality or any other collector. Collection of the
residential recyclable materials shall be made weekly by the
municipality, its designated agent or any other solid waste collectors
operating in the municipality and authorized to collect recyclable
materials from residences.
B. Commercial, industrial, municipal and institutional establishments shall
provide for recycling by a hauler or private collector.
C. Collection of residential yard waste shall be made once per month and
only during the months of March through November and only with an
advanced call in for collection. Leaf waste shall be collected only from
residences on the designated fall schedule each year. The recycling
program shall also contain a sustained public information and
education program.
D. The Board of Commissioners of the Township of Shaler is empowered to
make changes to program regulations as necessary, as described in
§ 187-21 (relating to enforcement and administration). Subsequent
changes in the program regulations, including the establishment of a
covered devices recycling program, may be made through approval of
the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Shaler and public notice
and notification of all affected parties.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to place or allow to be placed any
designated recycling material or covered devices in his waste for
garbage collection.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of any waste in the
municipality except in accordance with the provisions of this article.
§ 187-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-13
1:493
§ 187-14. Separation and collection.
C. It shall be presumed that any designated recycling material or covered
device found commingled with waste on the property of a person is the
property of such person if identifiable indicia of ownership is contained
therein.
A. All persons who are residents of the municipality shall separate all of
those recyclable materials designated by the municipality from all other
municipal waste produced at their homes, apartments and other
residential establishments, store such materials for collection and shall
place the same for collection in accordance with the guidelines
established hereunder.
(1) Persons in residences must separate recyclable materials from
other refuse. Except as provided in § 187-18 (relating to ownership
of recyclable materials) and § 187-19 (relating to existing recycling
operations), all recyclable materials shall be placed at the curbside
in containers provided to residences for collection. Any containers
provided to residences for collection of recyclable materials shall
be the property of the municipality and shall be used only for the
collection of recyclable materials. Any resident who moves from the
municipality shall be responsible for conveying the recycling
containers to a subsequent owner in interest of the property or
shall pay the replacement cost of said containers. Use of recycling
containers for any purpose other than the designated recycling
program or use of the recycling containers by any persons other
than the person allocated such containers shall be a violation of this
article.
(2) An owner, landlord or agent of an owner or landlord of a
multifamily rental housing property with more than four units may
comply with its recycling responsibilities by establishing a
collection system at each property. The collection system must
include suitable containers for collecting and sorting the recyclable
materials, easily accessible locations for the containers and written
instructions to the occupants concerning the use and availability of
the collection system. Owners, landlords and agents of owners or
landlords who comply with this article shall not be liable for
noncompliance of occupants of their buildings.
(3) If recyclable materials are collected by a collector other than the
municipality or its authorized agent, owners, landlords and agents
of owners or landlords shall submit an annual written report to the
Township Manager each year no later than January 30, reporting
the tonnage of materials recycled during the previous year as
certified by the hauler.
B. All persons must separate yard waste from other municipal waste
generated at their houses, apartments and other residential
§ 187-13 SHALER CODE § 187-14
1:494
§ 187-15. Storage and date and time of placement for collection in
R-1, R-2 and R-3 residential districts.
§ 187-16. Commercial, industrial, institutional establishments and
community activities.
establishments for collection unless those persons have otherwise
provided for composting of leaf waste.
C. Persons must separate high-grade office paper, aluminum, corrugated
paper, glass containers, plastic containers and such other materials as
may be designated by the municipality generated at commercial,
industrial, municipal and institutional establishments and from
community activities and store the recyclable materials until collection.
A person may be exempted from this section if that person submits
annually written documentation to the municipality from its recycling
collector, indicating that the designated recyclable materials are being
recycled pursuant to the rules and regulations promulgated hereunder.
D. If recyclable materials are collected by a collector other than the
municipality or its authorized agent, occupants of said establishments
shall submit an annual written report to the Township Manager each
year no later than January 30, reporting the tonnage of materials
recycled during the previous year as certified by the hauler.
A. In all R-1 Limited One-Family, R-2 One-Family or R-3 Two-Family
Districts, all trash containers, all private recyclable containers and all
refuse containers on noncollection days shall be stored either inside or
shall be located behind the front facade line of the dwelling. Where a lot
has more than one frontage on a street or trafficway, all refuse
containers, trash containers and private recyclable containers on
noncollection days shall be stored either inside or placed behind the
front facade line on all sides of the dwelling adjacent to any street or
trafficway.
B. Trash containers and private recyclable containers may be placed in the
front yard or at the curbline commencing at 4:00 p.m. on the day
preceding the day designated for the pickup of trash and recyclable
materials.
A. Recycling of designated recyclable materials. All commercial, industrial
and institutional establishments as well as all community activities in
the Township including volunteer fire departments in all zoning
districts shall separate all of those recyclable materials designated by
the municipality from all other municipal waste produced at their
establishments, store such materials for collection and shall place the
same for collection in accordance with the guidelines established
hereunder.
B. Containers. Municipal waste, recyclable materials and yard waste
accumulated on commercial, industrial and institutional properties,
§ 187-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-16
1:495
including volunteer fire departments, in all zoning districts shall be
separately stored in containers or detachable containers.
C. Securing materials for collection. Commercial, industrial and
institutional properties, including volunteer fire departments, in all
zoning districts storing recyclable materials outside of containers shall
tie the material securely in bundles of a size that can be readily handled
for collection and in a manner that minimizes litter, safety hazards and
fire hazards.
D. Location of containers. Detachable containers for the storage and
collection of municipal waste, recyclables and yard waste at
commercial, industrial or institutional properties as well as volunteer
fire departments shall be located on the premises, which location and
buffering, if required, shall be in compliance with zoning or other
applicable municipal requirements for the location of such containers.
Such locations shall not interfere with public or private sidewalks,
walkways, driveways, roads, streets, highways, alleys or entrances and
exits of public or private building.
E. Screening required of all dumpsters, trash containers and private
recyclable containers. Dumpsters, trash containers and private
recyclable containers on all commercial, industrial and institutional
properties, including volunteer fire departments, in all zoning districts
that are not stored inside a structure shall be screened to hide the
entire dumpster, trash container or private recyclable container from
public view.
(1) The screening shall be of sufficient height and density to
completely hide the dumpster, trash containers and private
recyclable containers from public view.
(2) All screening corrals shall be permanently affixed to the ground
and shall consist of either fencing or vegetation.
(3) Public recycling containers situated on premises open to the public
are exempt from the screening requirements of this chapter.
F. Collection. All owners and occupants of commercial, industrial and
institutional properties, including volunteer fire departments, shall
provide for the regular collection and removal of municipal waste,
recyclable materials and yard waste from the property through a
contract with a licensed hauler.
G. Community activities. All property owners and/or organizers of
community activities shall provide containers for the storage and
collection of municipal waste and recyclable materials and shall make
proper arrangements for the removal of such municipal waste and
recyclable materials from the property through a contract with a
licensed hauler.
§ 187-16 SHALER CODE § 187-17
1:496
§ 187-17. Duties and reporting requirements for commercial,
industrial, institutional establishments and community activities.
§ 187-18. Ownership of recyclable materials.
All recyclable materials placed by persons for collection by the municipality
or authorized collector pursuant to this article shall, from time of placement
at the curb, become the property of the municipality. Nothing contained in
this article shall be deemed to impair the ownership of separated recyclable
materials by persons unless and until such materials are placed at the
curbside for collection.
§ 187-19. Existing recycling operations.
Any residence or commercial, industrial, municipal or institutional
establishment may donate or sell recyclable materials to any person, firm or
corporation, whether operating for profit or not. Nothing contained in this
A. Community activities. It shall be the duty and responsibility of every
owner of property, every place of business within the Township, and the
organizer of any community activities where municipal waste is
produced and is accumulated to contract with a licensed hauler for
garbage, recyclables and yard waste collection services to the extent
provided by this article.
B. Commercial, industrial and institutional establishments. Commercial,
industrial and institutional establishments shall submit annually, on
forms provided by the Township, a report to the Township or its
designated agent which contains the following information concerning
compliance to the recycling requirements of this article:
(1) Commercial/industrial or institutional name, address, telephone
number, contact person and owner's name.
(2) Company name, address, telephone number, and contact person for
entity providing the recycling service.
(3) Description of materials recycled, frequency of collection, method
of storage and end market.
(4) Weigh slips or other certification which show by weight and type of
material recycled. If weigh slips are not used, the form of
certification requires the prior approval of the Township.
(5) Form of certification to assure proper processing/marketing of
recyclable materials.
(6) Other information as may be required by the Township agent,
which may be required to assure the proper disposition of
recyclable materials.
(7) Required information is due within 30 days of the end of the
reporting period, to wit, January 30.
§ 187-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-19
1:497
article shall be interpreted to impair any existing recycling operations or
prohibit the use of public recycling containers open to the public.
§ 187-20. Disposal.
Disposal by persons of recyclable materials with waste is prohibited and
shall be a violation of this article. The collected recyclable materials shall be
taken to a recycling facility. Disposal by collectors or operators of recycling
facilities of source-separated recyclable materials in landfills or to be
burned in incinerators is prohibited unless a prior exemption is obtained
in writing from the enforcing entity prior to the incineration or landfilling
thereof.
§ 187-21. Enforcement and administration.
The Township Manager is hereby authorized and directed to make
reasonable rules and regulations for the operation and enforcement of this
article as deemed necessary, including, but not limited to:
§ 187-22. Violations and penalties.
A. Establishing recyclable materials to be separated for collection and
recycling by residences and additional recyclable materials to be
separated by commercial, industrial, municipal and institutional
establishments.
B. Establishing collection procedures for recyclable materials and
providing for reasonable inspections thereof.
C. Establishing reporting procedures for amounts of materials recycled.
D. Establishing procedures for the distribution, monitoring and collection
of recyclable containers.
E. Establishing procedures and rules for the collection of yard waste.
F. Designating of person(s) to enforce the provisions of this article.
A. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate the provisions of this
article shall receive an official written warning of noncompliance for
the first offense. Thereafter, all such violations shall be subject to the
penalties hereinafter provided.
B. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a summary offense and shall be sentenced to pay
a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $300 plus costs of
prosecution or, in default of payment of such fine, then by imprisonment
for a period of not more than 10 days. Each day a violation occurs shall
be considered a separate and distinct offense.
C. The municipality reserves the right not to collect municipal waste
containing recyclable materials in combination with nonrecyclable
materials.
§ 187-19 SHALER CODE § 187-22
1:498
ARTICLE VI
Hazardous Waste
§ 187-23. Dumping of hazardous waste prohibited.
The Township of Shaler does hereby prohibit the dumping of any hazardous
materials or substances upon or into properties within the municipal
boundaries of the Township of Shaler.
§ 187-24. Abatement and cleanup; remedies.
The Township of Shaler hereby authorizes and directs its various emergency
services, Township employees or any other persons employed by the
Township for such purposes to clean up or abate, or cause to be cleaned up
or abated, the effects of any hazardous materials or substances deposited
upon or into properties or facilities within the municipal boundaries of the
Township of Shaler, including such properties and activities as, but not
limited to, traffic control, evacuation, relocation, substance monitoring and
establishment of medical-care facilities, and to recover from such persons
responsible for the same any and all costs incurred in the mitigation of
the situation. Any person or persons who intentionally or accidentally or
negligently caused such deposit shall be liable for all costs incurred by the
Township of Shaler or incurred by the Township in the cleanup or abatement
activities. The remedies provided by this article shall be in addition to all
other remedies provided by other laws or ordinances of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania and the Township of Shaler.
§ 187-25. Costs.
For purposes of this article, costs incurred by the Township of Shaler shall
include, but are not limited to, actual labor cost of Township personnel,
including worker's compensation benefits, fringe benefits, administrative
overhead, cost of equipment operation, cost of special fire-extinguishing
agents used and cost of any contracted labor and materials; and, further,
it shall include any costs incurred by volunteer fire companies, emergency
medical companies, the Department of Police of the Township of Shaler and
any other agency or contractor engaged in the abating or cleaning up of
the effects of any such hazardous materials of substances deposited upon or
into properties, facilities, roads or streets of the Township of Shaler.
§ 187-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-25
1:499

ARTICLE VII
Disposal on Private Property
§ 187-26. Prohibited activities.
§ 187-27. Standards for storage.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to accumulate or permit to
accumulate upon any public or private property within the municipality
any garbage, rubbish, bulky waste or any other municipal or residual
solid waste except in accordance with the provisions of this article, any
Department rules and regulations adopted pursuant to Act 97, and the
Health Department Rules and Regulations, Article VIII.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to burn any solid waste or covered
devices within the municipality except in accordance with the
provisions of this article, any Department rules and regulations adopted
pursuant to Act 97, and the Health Department Rules and Regulations,
Article VIII.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of any solid waste or
covered devices in the municipality except in accordance with the
provisions of this article, any Department rules and regulations adopted
pursuant to Act 97, and the Health Department Rules and Regulations,
Article VIII.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person to haul, transport, collect or remove
any solid waste from public or private property within the municipality
without first securing a license to do so in accordance with the
provisions of this article.
E. It shall be unlawful for any person to scavenge any materials from any
solid waste that is stored or deposited for collection within the
municipality without the prior approval of the municipality.
F. It shall be unlawful for any person to salvage or reclaim any solid
wastes within the municipality except at an approved and permitted
resource recovery facility under Act 97 and any Department rules and
regulations adopted pursuant to Act 97.
G. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, place or deposit or cause or
permit to be thrown, placed or deposited any solid waste in or upon any
street, alley, sidewalk, body of water, public or private property within
the municipality, except as provided in this article.
H. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, place, sweep, blow or
deposit or cause or permit to be thrown, placed, swept, blown or
deposited any leaf waste or grass clippings in or upon any street, alley,
sidewalk, body of water or public right-of-way of property within the
municipality, except as provided in this article.
§ 187-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-27
1:501
A. The storage of all solid waste shall be practiced so as to prevent the
attraction, harborage or breeding of insects or rodents and to eliminate
conditions harmful to public health or which create safety hazards,
odors, unsightliness or public nuisances.
B. Any person producing municipal waste shall provide a sufficient
number of approved containers to store all waste materials generated
during periods between regularly scheduled collections and shall place
and store all waste materials therein.
C. Any person storing municipal waste for collection shall comply with the
following preparation standards:
(1) All municipal waste shall be drained of free liquids before being
placed in storage containers.
(2) All garbage or other putrescible waste shall be securely wrapped in
paper, plastic or similar material or placed in properly tied plastic
bags.
(3) All cans, bottles or other food containers should be rinsed free of
food particles and drained before being placed in storage
containers.
(4) Garden clippings and tree trimmings shall be placed in approved
containers or shall be cut and tied securely into bundles. Bundles
shall be not more than four feet in length, not more than two feet in
diameter, and not more than 40 pounds in weight.
(5) Leaf waste shall be placed in approved containers or shall be
disposed of a sufficient distance away from any public right-of-way
so as not to become a traffic safety hazard upon any highway or
trafficway.
(6) Newspapers and magazines shall be placed in approved containers
or shall be tied securely into bundles of not more than 40 pounds in
weight.
(7) When specified by the municipality or its designated
representative, special preparation and storage procedures may be
required to facilitate the collection and resource recovery of
certain waste materials.
D. All municipal waste shall be stored in containers approved by the
municipality or its designated representative. Individual containers and
bulk containers utilized for storage of municipal waste shall comply
with the following standards:
(1) Reusable containers shall be constructed of durable, watertight,
rust- and corrosion-resistant material, such as plastic, metal or
fiberglass, in such a manner as to be leakproof, weatherproof,
insectproof and rodentproof.
§ 187-27 SHALER CODE § 187-27
1:502
(2) Reusable containers for individual residences shall have a tightfitting
cover and suitable lifting handles to facilitate collection.
(3) Reusable containers for individual residences shall have a capacity
of not less than 10 gallons nor more than 40 gallons and a loaded
weight of not more than 40 pounds.
(4) Disposable plastic bags or sacks are acceptable containers,
provided that the bags are designated for waste disposal. Plastic
bags shall have sufficient wall strength to maintain physical
integrity when lifted by the top, shall be securely tied at the top for
collection and shall have a capacity of not more than 30 gallons and
a loaded weight of not more than 35 pounds.
(5) All containers, either reusable or disposable, shall also comply with
the minimum standards established by the National Sanitation
Foundation.
E. Any person storing municipal waste for collection shall comply with the
following storage standards:
(1) Containers shall be kept tightly sealed or covered at all times. Solid
waste shall not protrude or extend above the top of the container.
(2) Reusable containers shall be kept in a sanitary condition at all
times. The interior of the containers shall be thoroughly cleaned,
rinsed, drained and disinfected as often as necessary to prevent the
accumulation of liquid residues or solids on the bottom or sides of
the containers.
(3) Containers shall be used and maintained so as to prevent public
nuisances.
(4) Containers that do not conform to the standard of this article or
which have sharp edges, ragged edges or any other defect that may
hamper or injure collection personnel shall be promptly replaced
by the owner upon notice from the municipality or its designated
representative.
(5) Containers shall be placed by the owner or customer at a collection
point specified by the municipality or its designated representative.
(6) With the exception of pickup days when the containers are placed
out for collection, the containers shall be properly stored on the
owner's or customer's premises at all times.
(7) Bulk waste items such as furniture, automobile parts, machinery
and appliances shall be stored in a manner that will prevent the
accumulation or collection of water, the harborage of rodents,
safety hazards and fire hazards.
F. The storage of all municipal waste from multifamily residential units,
commercial establishments, institutions and industrial lunchroom or
§ 187-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-27
1:503
§ 187-28. Standards and regulations for collection.
office waste sources is subject to the regulations and standards set
forth in this article. The type, size and placement requirements for bulk
containers shall be determined by the waste generator and the waste
hauler and are subject to approval by the municipality.
A. The municipality shall provide for the collection of all garbage, rubbish
and bulky waste from individual residences and multifamily residential
sources with less than four units, or it may contract with a private
collector or collectors to provide this essential residential collection
service.
B. All household and homeowners shall utilize the residential collection
service provided by the municipality.
C. All multifamily residential sources (with more than four units),
commercial, institutional and industrial establishments shall negotiate
and individually contract collection service for rubbish and recycling
with the municipality's collector or any other properly licensed waste
hauler of their choice.
D. All residential garbage and rubbish shall be collected at least once a
week. Bulky wastes shall be collected following prior arrangement with
the municipality's collector and payment of any required special fees.
E. All commercial, institutional, public and industrial lunchroom and office
waste containing garbage shall be collected at least once a week.
Rubbish collection from these sources shall be made as often as
necessary to control health hazards, odors, flies and unsightly
conditions. The municipality reserves the right to require more
frequent collection when deemed necessary.
F. Residential collection schedules shall be published regularly by the
municipality or its contracted hauler.
G. All solid waste collection activity shall be conducted from Monday
through Friday between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. or on
Saturdays between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., unless prior
approval or any exception has been granted by the municipality. No
collection, hauling or transporting of solid waste shall be permitted on
Sunday.
H. All licensed haulers and haulers under contract with the municipality
shall comply with the following standards and regulations:
(1) All municipal waste collected within the municipality shall
ultimately be disposed only at a landfill cited in the Allegheny
County Solid Waste Plan - 1990, or on subsequent revisions thereto.
(2) Any trucks or other vehicles used for the collection and
transportation of municipal waste must comply with the
§ 187-27 SHALER CODE § 187-28
1:504
§ 187-29. Collection and disposal charges.
§ 187-30. Administrative appeals.
requirements of Act 97 and any Department regulations adopted
pursuant to Act 97 and must be licensed by the Allegheny County
Health Department.
(3) All collection vehicles conveying domestic waste and garbage shall
be watertight and suitably enclosed to prevent leakage, roadside
littering, attraction of vectors, the creation of odors and other
nuisances.
(4) Collection vehicles for rubbish and other nonputrescible solid
waste shall be capable of being enclosed or covered to prevent
roadside litter and other nuisances.
(5) All solid waste shall be collected and transported so as to prevent
public health hazards, safety hazards and nuisances.
(6) All solid waste collection vehicles shall be operated and maintained
in a clean and sanitary condition.
A. The governing body of the municipality shall be authorized to make
funds available, in accordance with the laws and procedures of the
municipality, for the establishment, maintenance and operation of a
municipal solid waste collection and disposal system or for the
contracting of such service to a private collector.
B. Annual fee schedules (if appropriate) shall be published by the
municipality on any competitively bid residential collection service
contract that may be awarded by the municipality.
C. The municipality's contracted hauler and other licensed haulers shall
be responsible for the collection of any fees for solid waste collection
and disposal services provided to residential, commercial, institutional
or industrial sources within the municipality.
A. All appeals shall be made in writing to the governing body of the
municipality.
B. Pending a reversal or modification, all decisions of the municipality
shall remain effective and enforceable.
C. Appeals may be made by the following persons: Any person who is
aggrieved by a new standard or regulation issued by the municipality
may appeal within 10 days after the municipality gives notice of its
intention to issue the new standard or regulation.
D. The notice of appeal shall be served in writing and sent by certified mail
with return receipt requested. Within 20 days after receipt of the notice
of appeal, the municipality shall hold a public hearing. Notice of the
hearing shall be sent to both parties in time to adequately prepare for
§ 187-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-30
1:505
§ 187-31. Injunction powers.
The municipality may petition the Court of Common Pleas of Allegheny
County for an injunction, either mandatory or prohibitive, to enforce any of
the provisions of this article.
§ 187-32. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article is guilty of a summary
offense and shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less
than $300 nor more than $600, plus costs of prosecution, or, in default of
payment of such fine, then by imprisonment for a period of not more than
90 days, or both. Each day of violation shall be considered a separate and
distinct offense.
the hearing. Notice shall be sent to the parties by certified mail with
return receipt requested at the last known address in addition to
publication in the local newspaper.
§ 187-30 SHALER CODE § 187-32
1:506
Chapter 190
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 90.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 130.
Grading, excavating and filling — See Ch. 140.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
195.
Water — See Ch. 218.
Waterways — See Ch. 220.
Wellhead protection areas — See Ch. 222.
Zoning — See Ch. 225.
§ 187-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-32
1:507

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 190-1. Statement of findings.
The Board of Commissioners of the Township of Shaler finds that:
§ 190-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health, safety and general
welfare of the residents of the Township as well as to protect, sustain and
enhance the surface water and groundwater resources of the Township.
Drainage and stormwater management practices shall be utilized as
directed herein to achieve the following goals and objectives:
A. Inadequate management of accelerated stormwater runoff resulting
from development throughout a watershed increases flood flows and
velocities, contributes to erosion and sedimentation, overtaxes the
carrying capacity of existing streams and storm sewers, greatly
increases the cost of public facilities to convey and manage stormwater,
undermines floodplain management and flood reduction efforts in
upstream and downstream communities, reduces groundwater
recharge, and threatens public health and safety.
B. A comprehensive program of stormwater management, including
reasonable regulation of development and activities causing
accelerated erosion and loss of natural infiltration, is fundamental to
the public health, safety, welfare and the protection of the people of the
Township and all the people of the commonwealth, their resources, and
the environment.
A. Accommodate site development and redevelopment in a manner that
protects public safety and which is consistent with (or reestablishes)
the natural hydrologic characteristics of each watershed and sustains
groundwater recharge, stream base flows, stable stream channel
(geomorphology) conditions, the carrying capacity of streams and their
floodplains, groundwater and surface water quality, and aquatic living
resources and their habitats.
B. Reduce and minimize the volume of stormwater generated.
C. Protect natural infiltration and groundwater recharge rates in order to
sustain groundwater supplies and stream base flows.
D. Maintain runoff characteristics of the site after completion of
development that are consistent with the carrying capacity and stable
channel conditions of the receiving streams.
E. Protect water quality by removing and/or treating pollutants prior to
discharge to groundwaters and surface waters throughout the
Township and to protect, restore and maintain the chemical, physical
and biological quality of groundwaters and surface waters.
§ 190-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-2
1:509
§ 190-3. Statutory authority.
F. Protect in-stream channels and geomorphology conditions of the
receiving streams, protect their flood-carrying capacity and aquatic
habitats and to reduce in-stream erosion and sedimentation.
G. Reduce flooding impacts and prevent a significant increase in surface
runoff rates and volumes, predevelopment to post development, which
could worsen flooding downstream in the watershed, enlarge
floodplains, erode stream banks and create other flood-related, healthwelfare-
property losses; in general, to preserve and restore the natural
flood-carrying capacity of streams and their floodplains.
H. Protect adjacent lands from adverse impacts of direct stormwater
discharges.
I. Ensure effective long-term operation and maintenance of all permanent
stormwater management facilities.
J. Maintain natural drainage patterns and encourage the use of natural
drainage systems.
K. Treat and release stormwater as close to the source of runoff as
possible using a minimum of structures and maximizing reliance on
natural processes.
L. Maintain the existing water balance in all watersheds, subwatersheds
and streams in the Township, and protect and/or restore natural
hydrologic characteristics and habitats wherever possible throughout
the watershed systems.
M. Address certain requirements of the Municipal Separate Storm Sewer
System (MS4) National Pollution Discharge Elimination System
(NPDES) Phase II Stormwater Regulations.
N. Reduce the impacts of runoff from existing developed sites undergoing
redevelopment while encouraging development and redevelopment in
urban areas and areas designated for growth.
O. Prevent scour and erosion of stream banks and streambeds.
P. Meet legal water quality requirements under state law, including
regulations at 25 Pa. Code § 93.4a, to protect and maintain existing
uses and maintain the level of water quality to support those uses in all
streams, and to protect and maintain water quality in special protection
streams.
A. Primary authority. The Township is empowered to regulate these
activities by the authority of the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act
167), 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq., as amended, the Storm Water Management
Act, and the First Class Township Code.
§ 190-2 SHALER CODE § 190-3
1:510
§ 190-4. Applicability.
The standards contained herein shall apply to all regulated activities within
the Township. In addition, all local, county and state erosion and
sedimentation control approvals must be in place to proceed with any
regulated activity.
§ 190-5. Compatibility with other ordinance requirements.
Permits and approvals issued pursuant to this chapter shall not relieve the
applicant of the responsibility to comply with or to secure other required
permits or approvals for activities regulated by any other applicable code,
rule, act, statute or ordinance. This chapter shall not preclude the inclusion
B. Secondary authority. The Township also is empowered to regulate land
use activities that affect runoff by the authority of the Act of July 31,
1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code,
as amended.107
A. Activities regulated by this chapter include, but are not limited to, the
following:
(1) Land development and redevelopment.
(2) Subdivision.
(3) Construction of new or additional impervious or semipervious
surfaces (driveways, parking lots, etc.).
(4) Construction of new buildings or additions to existing buildings.
(5) Diversion or piping of any natural or man-made stream channel.
(6) Installation of stormwater management facilities or appurtenances
thereto.
(7) Any earth disturbances or any activities that involve the alteration
or development of land or removal of tree and vegetation in a
manner that may affect post-construction stormwater runoff.
B. Redevelopments shall conform to the requirements contained in
§ 190-14C(3) when more than a two-thousand-square-foot area of an
existing facility is reconstructed following the demolition or partial
demolition of the existing facility. The area determination shall be made
using the footprint of the area being reconstructed, including all
impervious surfaces proposed in the reconstructed area and the area of
the parking lot required to support the reconstructed facility. The area
of the parking lot required to support the reconstructed facility shall be
determined using the Municipal Zoning Ordinance108 requirements for
parking.
107. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
108. Editor's Note: See Ch. 225, Zoning.
§ 190-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-5
1:511
in such other permit of more stringent requirements concerning regulation
of stormwater and erosion. Where a conflict exists between a provision
within this chapter and that of the PADEP Phase II NPDES regulations,
as amended, or any other ordinance of the Township, the more stringent
requirements shall govern.
§ 190-6. Exemptions; waivers.
A. With the approval of Township's governing body, the following activities
may be exempted from on-site stormwater runoff control. An exemption
shall apply only to the requirement for on-site stormwater facilities and
the preparation of a stormwater management plan. All other
stormwater management design elements, such as a storm sewer
system, road culverts, erosion and sedimentation control, and runoff
quality, shall be required. All exemption requests must be filed with the
Township Zoning Officer and approved by the Municipal Engineer.
(1) Regulated activities smaller than 400 square feet are exempt from
the requirements of this chapter to implement SWM BMPs, unless
the activity is found to be a significant contributor to pollution of
the waters of this commonwealth.
(2) Small project exemption. Activities having a disturbed area of less
than 5,000 square feet are exempt from the peak rate control
requirements of this chapter. These projects shall comply with the
water quality volume standards contained in § 190-14C(1) and the
extended detention requirement contained in § 190-16A(1). The
"Small Project Standardized SWM Guidance" document provided in
Appendix F was prepared to assist applicants in meeting this
requirement for individual lots only.109 The reduced site plan
requirements contained in the "Small Project Standardized SWM
Guidance" document shall apply. These projects shall be
accompanied by an E&S plan that has been reviewed and approved
by the Township.
(3) Emergency exemption. Emergency maintenance work performed
for the protection of public health, safety and welfare may be
exempted from the requirements in this chapter to obtain approval
for a stormwater management plan before commencement of the
activity; however, a written description of the scope and extent of
any emergency work performed shall be submitted to the Township
within two calendar days of the commencement of the activity. If
the Township finds that the work is not an emergency, then the
work shall cease immediately and may not resume until a written
stormwater management plan is submitted and approved.
(4) Maintenance exemption. Any maintenance to an existing
stormwater management system made in accordance with plans
109. Editor's Note: Appendix F is on file in the Township offices.
§ 190-5 SHALER CODE § 190-6
1:512
and specifications approved by the Municipal Engineer or
Township.
(5) Gardening. Use of land for gardening for home consumption.
(6) Agricultural activities. Agriculture, when operated in accordance
with a conservation plan, nutrient management plan or erosion and
sedimentation control plan approved by the Allegheny County
Conservation District, including activities such as growing crops,
rotating crops, the tilling of soil and grazing animals. Installation of
new or expansion of existing farmsteads, animal housing, waste
storage and production areas having impervious surfaces that
result in a net increase in impervious surface of less than 1,000
square feet are exempt from the requirement to submit a written
stormwater management plan.
(7) Forest management. Forest management operations which are
consistent with a sound forest management plan as filed with the
Municipal Zoning Officer and which follow the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection's management practices
contained in its publication "Soil Erosion and Sedimentation
Control Guidelines for Forestry." Such operations are required to
have an erosion and sedimentation control plan.
B. Waivers.
(1) The provisions of this chapter are the minimum standards for the
protection of the public health, safety, property and welfare.
(2) If an applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the county or its
designee that any mandatory provision of this chapter is
unreasonable or causes unique or undue unreasonableness or
hardship as it applies to the proposed project, or that an alternate
design may result in a superior result within the context of
§§ 190-2, 190-14A and 190-14B of this chapter, the county or its
designee, upon obtaining the comments and recommendations of
the Township and the Allegheny County Conservation District, may
grant a waiver or relief so that substantial justice may be done and
the public interest is secured, provided that such waiver will not
have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of this chapter.
(3) Applicants shall refer to the Pennsylvania Stormwater Best
Management Practices Manual, Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection (DEP) No. 363-0300-002 (2006), as
amended and updated, or the Erosion and Sediment Pollution
Control Program Manual, Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection (DEP) No. 363-2134-008 (2000), as
amended and updated, or other appropriate references, for
guidance in the design of stormwater management facilities most
appropriate to individual site conditions. References to the
Maryland Manual, if not deleted, should be to specific sections of
Maryland's manual in order to minimize NPDES permitting
§ 190-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-6
1:513
conflicts with the guidance provided by the Pennsylvania
Stormwater BMP Manual. The applicant shall state in full the facts
of unreasonableness or hardship on which the request is based,
the provision or provisions of the chapter that are involved, and
the minimum waiver or relief that is necessary. The applicant shall
state how the requested waiver and how the applicant's proposal
shall result in an equal or better means of complying with the intent
of §§ 190-2, Purpose; 190-14A, Design goals; and 190-14B, General
principles, of this chapter.
(4) The applicant shall submit all waiver requests to Allegheny County
or its designee for review and approval. Copies of the waiver
request shall also be submitted to the Township.
(5) The governing body shall keep a written record of all actions on
waiver requests.
(6) The governing body may charge a fee for each waiver request,
which shall be used to offset the administrative costs of reviewing
the waiver request. The applicant shall also agree to reimburse the
Township, the county and the Allegheny County Conservation
District for reasonable and necessary fees that may be incurred in
any review of a waiver request.
(7) In granting waivers, the county or its designee may impose
reasonable conditions that will, in its judgment, secure
substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements that
are to be modified.
(8) The county or its designee may grant applications for waivers when
the following findings are made:
(a) That the waiver shall result in an equal or better means of
complying with the intent of §§ 190-2, 190-14A and 190-14B of
this chapter.
(b) That the waiver is the minimum necessary to provide relief.
(c) That the applicant is not requesting a waiver based solely on
cost considerations.
(d) That existing off-site stormwater problems will not be
exacerbated.
(e) That runoff is not being diverted to a different drainage area.
(f) That increased flooding or ponding on off-site properties or
roadways will not occur.
(g) That potential icing conditions will not occur.
(h) That increase of post-development peak flow from the site will
not occur and will, in fact, be reduced by the appropriate
§ 190-6 SHALER CODE § 190-6
1:514
amount if the site is in a subbasin having a release rate of less
than 100%.
(i) There will be no increase of the post-development total runoff
volume for all storms equal to or less than the two-year, twentyfour-
hour storm event.
(j) That adverse impact to water quality will not result.
(k) That increased one-hundred-year floodplain levels will not
result.
(l) That increased or unusual municipal maintenance expenses
will not result from the waiver.
(m) That the amount of stormwater generated has been minimized
to the greatest extent allowed.
(n) That infiltration of runoff throughout the proposed site has
been provided where practicable and predevelopment
groundwater recharge protected at a minimum.
(o) That peak flow attenuation of runoff has been provided.
(p) That long-term operation and maintenance activities are
established.
(q) That no receiving streams and/or water bodies within 2,000
feet downstream will be adversely impacted in flood-carrying
capacity, aquatic habitat, channel stability or erosion and
sedimentation.
(9) Waivers or modifications of the requirements of this chapter may
be approved by the Township if enforcement will exact undue
hardship because of unique physical circumstances or conditions
peculiar to the land in question, provided that the modifications will
not be contrary or detrimental to the public interest and will
achieve the intended outcome and that the purpose of the chapter
is preserved. Hardship must be due to such unique physical
circumstances or conditions and not to circumstances or conditions
generally created by the provisions of the Stormwater
Management Ordinance. Cost or financial burden shall not be
considered a hardship. Modifications shall not substantially or
permanently impair the appropriate use or development of
adjacent property. A request for modifications shall be in writing
and accompany the stormwater management site plan submission.
(10)No waiver or modification of any regulated stormwater activity
involving earth disturbance greater than or equal to one acre may
be granted by the Township. Townships are responsible for
reviewing proposed waivers/modifications. The waiver must come
from the landowner and be presented in writing along with a
stormwater management site plan. The designated plan reviewer
§ 190-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-6
1:515
§ 190-7. General requirements.
shall determine if the plan meets the requirement of the chapter.
If the proposed disturbance is one acre or greater, it must be
approved by the Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) or
the delegated county conservation district.
A. The management of stormwater on site, both during and upon
completion of the disturbances associated with activities permitted
under § 190-4, shall be accomplished in accordance with the standards
and criteria of this chapter. The design of any temporary or permanent
facilities and structures and the utilization of any natural drainage
systems shall be in full compliance with this chapter. The intent of these
design standards is to encourage environmentally sound stormwater
management practices that provide necessary drainage facilities while
protecting the hydrologic characteristics and water quality of the site
and watershed. Developments shall be required to incorporate
stormwater management controls. Stormwater management design
shall blend into the natural environment and be aesthetically integrated
into the site design.
B. Applicants shall refer to the Pennsylvania Stormwater Best
Management Practices Manual, as amended; Pennsylvania Handbook of
Best Management Practices for Developing Areas (PACD, 1998); the
2000 Maryland Stormwater Design Manual (MDE, 2000); or other
appropriate references for guidance in the design of stormwater
management facilities most appropriate to individual site conditions.
Objectives for design are to reduce the volume of stormwater
generated, infiltrate runoff at its source to the maximum extent
possible, achieve water quality improvement at the source or during
conveyance, and provide for peak flow attenuation; applicants shall
examine design alternatives by viewing them in a series. In addition,
applicants are strongly encouraged to use structural and nonstructural
stormwater management practices that reduce or eliminate the need
for detention basins.
C. All SWM design work must be completed by a qualified design
professional. All designs proposing the use of a SWM retention or
detention facility with outlet structure(s) shall be completed by a
professional engineer licensed in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
D. All development activity within a special flood hazard area designated
by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) shall comply
with Chapter 225 of the Township Code (relating to the Township
Zoning Ordinance) and Chapter 130 of the Township Code (relating to
floodplain management) and this chapter. All development shall be
designed to maintain the flood-carrying capacity of the floodway such
that the base flood elevations are not increased, either upstream or
downstream, unless an approval is received from PADEP. The natural
conveyance characteristics of the site and the receiving floodplain shall
§ 190-6 SHALER CODE § 190-7
1:516
be incorporated into the stormwater management practices proposed
for the site.
E. The stormwater management system shall not create an adverse impact
on stormwater quantity or quality in either upstream or downstream
areas. Off-site areas which discharge to or across a site proposed for
development shall be addressed in the stormwater management plan
prepared for the development. No stormwater management plan shall
be approved until it is demonstrated that the runoff from the project
shall not adversely impact downstream areas.
F. Wetlands shall not be used to meet the minimum design requirements
for stormwater management or stormwater runoff quality treatment,
except when used as part of a treatment train that incorporates a
portion of the outer zone (filter strip) of the wetland's riparian buffer as
a stormwater outfall.
G. All proposed stormwater management systems shall be designed to
prevent the pollution of groundwater resources by stormwater, promote
safety, minimize health hazards, preserve natural features and provide
infiltration and groundwater recharge where appropriate. Neither
submission of a plan under the provisions herein nor compliance with
the provisions of these regulations shall relieve any person from
responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed
by law.
H. Where deemed necessary by the Municipal Engineer or as addressed in
an approved Act 167 stormwater management plan, the applicant shall:
(1) Construct storm drains to handle on-site runoff;
(2) To the maximum extent permitted under the Municipalities
Planning Code and Act 167, or any amendments thereto, provide
on-site/off-site drainage easements; and
(3) Provide for the conveyance of off-site runoff to an acceptable outlet
in the same watershed.
I. Where watercourses traverse a development site, drainage easements
shall be provided conforming to the line of such watercourses. The
terms of the easements shall prohibit excavation, the placing of fill or
structures, except as needed for roadways, driveways and walkways, or
any alterations that may adversely affect the flow of stormwater within
any portions of the easement, and require the establishment and
protection of riparian buffers.
J. For all regulated activities, stormwater management BMPs shall be
designed, implemented, operated and maintained to meet the purposes
and requirements of this chapter and to meet all requirements under
Pennsylvania Code Title 25, the Clean Streams Law, and the Storm
Water Management Act.
§ 190-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-7
1:517
K. Any regulated activity that may affect the stormwater flows toward or
onto a state or county highway right-of-way or facility shall be designed,
implemented, operated and maintained in accordance with the
regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
(PennDOT) or Allegheny County, as the case may be.
L. At the time of application for a building permit for any approved lot
created by a subdivision and/or improved as a land development
project, issuance of the permit shall be conditioned upon adherence to
the terms of this chapter.
M. Stormwater discharges to critical areas with sensitive resources (e.g.,
special protection waters, cold-water fisheries, recharge areas, water
supply reservoirs, etc.) may be subject to additional performance
criteria or may need to utilize or restrict certain stormwater
management practices.
N. For all regulated earth disturbance activities, erosion and sediment
control BMPs shall be designed, implemented, operated and maintained
during the regulated earth disturbance activities (e.g., during
construction) to meet the purposes and requirements of this chapter
and to meet all requirements under the Pennsylvania Code Title 25 and
the Clean Streams Law. Various BMPs and their design standards are
listed in the Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control Program Manual
(E&S Manual), Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Department of
Environmental Protection, No. 363-2134-008, as amended and updated.
O. No regulated earth disturbance activities within the Township shall
commence until the requirements of this chapter are met.
P. Post-construction water quality protection shall be addressed as
required by the stormwater management requirements contained in
this chapter.
Q. Operations and maintenance of permanent stormwater BMPs shall be
addressed as required by Article V.
R. All best management practices (BMPs) used to meet the requirements
of this chapter shall conform to the state water quality requirements
and any more stringent requirements as required by the Township.
S. Techniques described in Appendix B (Nonstructural Stormwater
Management Practices) of this chapter are encouraged because they
reduce the costs of complying with the requirements of this chapter and
the state water quality requirements.110
T. In selecting the appropriate BMPs or combinations thereof the
applicant shall consider the following:
(1) Total contributing area.
110. Editor's Note: Appendix B is on file in the Township offices.
§ 190-7 SHALER CODE § 190-7
1:518
§ 190-8. Permit requirements by other government entities.
The following permit requirements apply to certain land development
activities and must be met prior to municipal approval of subdivision or land
development plans or issuance of building or occupancy permits, where
applicable:
(2) Permeability and infiltration rate of the site soils.
(3) Slope and depth to bedrock.
(4) Seasonal high-water table.
(5) Proximity to building foundations and wellheads.
(6) Erodibility of soils.
(7) Land availability and configuration of the topography.
(8) Peak discharge and required volume control.
(9) Stream bank erosion.
(10) Efficiency of the BMPs to mitigate potential water quality
problems.
(11) The volume of runoff that will be effectively treated.
(12) The nature of the pollutant being removed.
(13) Maintenance requirements.
(14) Creation/protection of aquatic and wildlife habitat.
U. Transference of runoff from one DEP-designated Act 167 watershed to
another shall be prohibited unless approved by the Township.
V. SWM site plans approved by the Township shall be on site throughout
the duration of the regulated activity.
A. All regulated earth disturbance activities subject to permit
requirements by DEP under regulations at 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102.
B. Work within natural drainageways subject to permit by DEP under 25
Pa. Code Chapter 105.
C. Any stormwater management facility that would be located in or
adjacent to surface waters of the commonwealth, including wetlands,
subject to permit by DEP under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 105.
D. Any stormwater management facility that would be located on a state
highway right-of-way, or require access from a state highway, shall be
subject to approval by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
(PennDOT).
§ 190-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-8
1:519
§ 190-9. Erosion and sediment control during regulated earth
disturbance activities.
E. Culverts, bridges, storm sewers or any other facilities which must pass
or convey flows from the tributary area and any facility which may
constitute a dam subject to permit by DEP under 25 Pa. Code Chapter
105.
A. No regulated earth disturbance activities within the Township shall
commence until the Township receives a copy of all required approvals
from the Conservation District or DEP for an erosion and sediment
control plan.
B. DEP requires an erosion and sediment control plan for any earth
disturbance activity of 5,000 square feet or more under 25 Pa. Code
§ 102.4(b).
C. In addition, under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 92,111 a DEP NPDES
construction activities permit is required for regulated earth
disturbance activities.
D. Evidence of all necessary permit(s) for regulated earth disturbance
activities from the appropriate DEP regional office or county
conservation district shall be provided to the Township.
E. A copy of the erosion and sediment control plan and all required
permits, as required by DEP regulations, shall be available at the
project site at all times.
F. Additional erosion and sediment control design standards and criteria
are recommended to be applied where infiltration BMPs are proposed
and shall include the following:
(1) Areas proposed for infiltration BMPs shall be protected from
sedimentation and compaction during the construction phase to
maintain maximum infiltration capacity.
(2) Infiltration BMPs shall not be constructed nor receive runoff until
the entire contributory drainage area to the infiltration BMP has
achieved final stabilization.
G. Erroneous permit. Any permit or authorization issued or approved
based on false, misleading or erroneous information provided by an
applicant is void without the necessity of any proceedings for
revocation. Any work undertaken or use established pursuant to such
permit or other authorization is unlawful. No action may be taken by a
board, agency or employee of the Township purporting to validate such
a violation.
111. Editor's Note: Former 25 Pa. Code Ch. 92 was repealed effective 10-9-2010. See now 25 Pa.
Code Ch. 92a.
§ 190-8 SHALER CODE § 190-10
1:520
§ 190-10. Authorized and prohibited discharges and connections.
A. No person in the Township shall allow or cause to allow stormwater
discharges into the Township's separate sanitary sewer system and/or
waters of this commonwealth which are not composed entirely of
stormwater, except:
(1) As provided in § 190-10B below; and
(2) Discharges allowed under a state or federal permit.
B. The following discharges are authorized unless they are determined to
be significant contributors to pollution to the waters of this
commonwealth:
(1) Discharges or flows from firefighting activities.
(2) Discharges from potable water sources, including waterline
flushing and fire hydrant flushing, if such discharges do not contain
detectable concentrations of total residual chlorine (TRC).
(3) Noncontaminated irrigation water, water from lawn maintenance,
landscape drainage and flows from riparian habitats and weltands.
(4) Diverted stream flows and springs.
(5) Noncontaminated pumped groundwater and water from foundation
and footing drains and crawl space pumps.
(6) Noncontaminated HVAC condensation and water from geothermal
systems.
(7) Residential (i.e., not commercial) vehicle wash water where
cleaning agents are not utilized.
(8) Noncontaminated hydrostatic test water discharges, if such
discharges do not contain detectable concentrations of TRC.
(9) Dechlorinated swimming pool and hot tub discharges, as long as
the PADEP guidelines for swimming pool water discharges are
followed.
C. In the event that the Township determines that any of the discharges
identified in § 190-10B significantly contribute to pollution of waters of
the commonwealth, or is so notified by the DEP, the Township or PADEP
shall notify the responsible person to cease the discharge.
D. Nothing in this chapter shall affect a discharger's responsibilities under
state law.
E. Existing roof drain, underdrain and sump pump discharge shall be
directed to lawn area or other pervious areas. If required by the
Township, the discharge shall be directed to a stone sump or infiltration
§ 190-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-10
1:521
BMP. If approved by the Township, the discharge may also be directly
connected to the storm sewer system.
§ 190-10 SHALER CODE § 190-10
1:522
ARTICLE II
Terms Defined
§ 190-11. Word usage.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms and words used herein shall
be interpreted as follows:
§ 190-12. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated.
AASHTO — American Association of State Highway and Transportation
Officials. The website home page for AASHTO is
http://www.transportation.org.
ACCD — Allegheny County Conservation District.
ACHD — Allegheny County Health Department.
ACT 167 — The Storm Water Management Act (Act of October 4, 1978, P.L.
864, No. 167; 32 P.S. §§ 680.1 to 680.17, as amended).
ACT 167 PLAN or WATERSHED PLAN — The plan for managing stormwater
runoff throughout a designated watershed adopted by Allegheny County as
required by the Pennsylvania Storm Water Management Act.
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY — The work of producing crops, including
tillage, land clearing, plowing, disking, harrowing, planting, harvesting
crops, or the pasturing and raising of livestock and installation of
conservation measures. Construction of new buildings or impervious area is
not considered an agricultural activity.
A. Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the singular
number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the
singular; words of masculine gender include feminine gender; and
words of feminine gender include masculine gender.
B. The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the
specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other
instances of like kind and character.
C. The word "person" includes an individual, firm, association,
organization, partnership, trust, company, corporation or any other
similar entity.
D. The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory; the words "may" and
"should" are permissive.
E. The words "used or occupied" include the words "intended, designed,
maintained or arranged to be used, occupied or maintained."
§ 190-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-12
1:523
APPLICANT — A landowner, developer or other person who has filed an
application for approval to engage in any regulated earth disturbance
activity at a project site in the Township.
AQUIFER — A geologic formation, group of formations, or part of a
formation that contains sufficient saturated, permeable material to yield
useful quantities of groundwater to wells and springs.
ATTENUATE — To reduce the magnitude of the flow rate by increasing the
time it takes to release a specified volume of runoff (for example the oneyear,
twenty-four-hour storm event). Attenuation is a method of reducing
the peak flow rates for post-development compared to the peak flow rates
in predevelopment.
BASEFLOW — Portion of stream discharge derived from groundwater; the
sustained discharge that does not result from direct runoff or from water
diversions, reservoir releases, piped discharges or other human activities.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP) — Activities, facilities, designs,
measures, or procedures used to manage stormwater impacts from
regulated activities, to meet state water quality requirements, to promote
groundwater recharge, and to otherwise meet the purposes of this chapter.
Stormwater BMPs are commonly grouped into one of two broad categories
or measures: "structural" or "nonstructural." In this chapter, nonstructural
BMPs or measures refer to operational and/or behavior-related practices
that attempt to minimize the contact of pollutants with stormwater runoff,
whereas structural BMPs or measures are those that consist of a physical
device or practice that is installed to capture and treat stormwater runoff.
Structural BMPs include, but are not limited to, a wide variety of practices
and devices, from large-scale retention ponds and constructed wetlands,
to small-scale underground treatment systems, infiltration facilities, filter
strips, low-impact design, bioretention, wet ponds, permeable paving,
grassed swales, riparian or forested buffers, sand filters, detention basins,
and manufactured devices. Structural stormwater BMPs are permanent
appurtenances to the project site.
CFS — Cubic feet per second.
CHANNEL — A natural or artificial watercourse that conveys, continuously
or periodically, flowing water.
CONCENTRATED STORM RUNOFF — Surface runoff from rainfall events
which converges and flows primarily through water conveyance features,
such as swales, gullies, waterways, channels or storm sewers and which
exceeds the maximum specified flow rates of filters or perimeter controls
intended to control sheet flow.
CONSERVATION DESIGN — A series of holistic land development design
practices that maximize protection of key land and environmental
resources, preserve significant concentrations of open space and
greenways, evaluate and maintain site hydrology, and ensure flexibility
in development design to meet community needs for complementary and
aesthetically pleasing development. Conservation design encompasses the
following objectives: conservation/enhancement of natural resources,
§ 190-12 SHALER CODE § 190-12
1:524
wildlife habitat, biodiversity corridors and greenways (interconnected open
space); minimization of environmental impact resulting from a change in
land use (minimum disturbance, minimum maintenance); maintenance of a
balanced water budget by making use of site characteristics and infiltration;
incorporation of unique natural, scenic and historic site features into the
configuration of the development; preservation of the integral
characteristics of the site as viewed from adjoining roads; and reduction
in maintenance required for stormwater management practices. Such
objectives can be met on a site through an integrated development process
that respects natural site conditions and attempts, to the maximum extent
possible, to replicate or improve the natural hydrology of a site.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — A conservation district, as defined in Section
3(c) of the Conservation District Law [3 P.S. § 851(c)], which has the
authority under a delegation agreement executed with the Department to
administer and enforce all or a portion of the erosion and sediment control
program in this commonwealth.
DEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
DESIGN STORM — The magnitude and temporal distribution of
precipitation from a storm event measured in probability of occurrence
(e.g., a five-year storm) and duration (e.g., 24 hours), used in the design and
evaluation of stormwater management systems.
DETENTION BASIN — An impoundment designed to collect and retard
stormwater runoff by temporarily storing the runoff and releasing it at
a predetermined rate. Detention basins are designed to drain completely,
shortly after any given rainfall event, and are dry until the next rainfall
event.
DETENTION or TO DETAIN — The prevention of or to prevent the
discharge, directly or indirectly, of a given volume of stormwater runoff into
surface waters by temporary storage.
DEVELOPMENT SITE (SITE) — See "project site."
DISCHARGE — To release water from a project, site, aquifer, drainage basin
or other point of interest (verb); the rate and volume of flow of water, such
as in a stream, generally expressed in cubic feet per second (volume per
unit of time) (noun).
DISTURBED AREA — An unstabilized land area where an earth disturbance
is occurring or has occurred.
DITCH — An artificial waterway for irrigation or stormwater conveyance.
DRAINAGE AREA — That land area contributing runoff to a single point and
that is enclosed by a ridgeline.
DRAINAGE SYSTEM — All facilities and natural features used for the
movement of stormwater through and from a drainage area, including, but
not limited to, any and all of the following: conduits, pipes and appurtenant
features, channels, ditches, flumes, culverts, streets, swales, gutters as well
as all watercourses, water bodies and wetlands.
§ 190-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-12
1:525
EARTH DISTURBANCE — A construction or other human activity which
disturbs the surface of the land, including, but not limited to, clearing and
grubbing; grading; excavations; embankments; road maintenance; building
construction; the moving, depositing, stockpiling, or storing of soil, rock or
earth materials.
EASEMENT — A right to use a specified portion of land of another for a
specified purpose.
ENGINEER — A professional engineer duly appointed as the engineer for
the Township.
EPA — Environmental Protection Agency.
EROSION — The wearing away of land surface by water or wind, which
occurs naturally from weather or runoff but is often intensified by human
activity.
EXISTING CONDITION — The dominant land cover during the five-year
period immediately preceding a proposed regulated activity.
FEMA — Federal Emergency Management Agency.
FIRST-ORDER STREAM — Uppermost perennial tributary in a watershed
that has not yet confluenced with another perennial stream. The confluence
of two first-order streams forms a second-order stream.
FLOODPLAIN — Any land area susceptible to inundation by water from any
natural source or delineated by applicable Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA) maps and studies as being a special flood hazard area.
FLOODWAY — The channel of the watercourse and those portions of the
adjoining floodplains that are reasonably required to carry and discharge
the one-hundred-year flood. Unless otherwise specified, the boundary of
the floodway is as indicated on maps and flood insurance studies provided
by FEMA. In an area where no FEMA maps or studies have defined the
boundary of the one-hundred-year floodway, it is assumed, absent evidence
to the contrary, that the floodway extends from the stream to 50 feet from
the top of the bank of the stream.
FOREST MANAGEMENT/TIMBER OPERATIONS — Planning and activities
necessary for the management of forestland. These include timber
inventory and preparation of forest management plans, silvicultural
treatment, cutting budgets, logging road design and construction, timber
harvesting, site preparation and reforestation.
FREEBOARD — The difference between the elevation of the design flow in
the emergency spillway (usually the one-hundred-year peak elevation) and
the top elevation of the settled basin embankment (that is, top of berm). The
minimum freeboard shall be one foot.
GREEN INFRASTRUCTURE — Systems and practices that use or mimic
natural processes to infiltrate, evapotranspire, or reuse stormwater on the
site where it is generated.
§ 190-12 SHALER CODE § 190-12
1:526
GROUNDWATER — Water that occurs in the subsurface and fills or
saturates the porous openings, fractures and fissures of underground soils
and rock units.
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE — The replenishment of existing natural
underground water supplies from precipitation or overland flow.
HOT SPOTS — An area where land use or activities generate highly
contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those
typically found in stormwater.
HYDROGRAPH — A graph of discharge versus time for a selected point in
the drainage system.
HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP (HSG) — Infiltration rates of soils vary widely
and are affected by subsurface permeability as well as surface intake rates.
Soils are classified into four HSGs (A, B, C and D), according to their
minimum infiltration rate, which is obtained for bare soil after prolonged
wetting. The Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) of the United
States Department of Agriculture defines the four groups and provides a list
of most of the soils in the United States and their group classification. The
soils in the area of the development site may be identified from a soil survey
report that can be obtained from local NRCS offices or conservation district
offices. Soils become less pervious as the HSG varies from A to D.
HYDROLOGY — The study of the properties, distribution, circulation and
effects of water on the Earth's surface, soil and atmosphere.
IMPERVIOUS COVER — See "impervious surface."
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface (area) which has been compacted or
covered with a layer of material so that it is resistant to infiltration by
water. It includes semipervious surfaces, such as compacted clayey soils,
as well as most conventionally surfaced streets, roofs, sidewalks, parking
lots, and other similar surfaces. Net increase of impervious surface refers
to the difference between the existing impervious coverage and the total
impervious surface proposed.
INFILTRATION — Movement of surface water into the soil where it is
absorbed by plant roots, evaporated into the atmosphere, or percolates
downward to recharge groundwater.
INVASIVE SPECIES — DCNR defines invasive plants as those species that
are not native to the state, grow aggressively, and spread and displace
native vegetation. (see http://www.dcnr.state.pa.us/cs/groups/public/
documents/document/dcnr_010314.pdf for a list of invasive species).
INTENSITY — The depth of accumulated rainfall per unit of time.
INTERMITTENT STREAM — A defined channel in which surface water is
absent during a portion of the year as groundwater levels drop below the
channel bottom.
KARST — A type of topography that is formed over limestone or other
carbonate rock formations by dissolving or solution of the rock by water and
that is characterized by closed depressions, sinkholes, caves, a subsurface
§ 190-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-12
1:527
network of solution conduits and fissures through which groundwater
moves and no perennial surface drainage features.
LAND DEVELOPMENT (DEVELOPMENT) — Inclusive of any or all of the
following meanings:
LEVEL SPREADER — A low earthen berm constructed perpendicular to
the direction of slope and extending across the width of the slope for the
purpose of intercepting surface runoff and spreading it behind the berm
to enhance infiltration and reduce erosion and runoff from the slope. The
purpose of a level spreader is to prevent concentrated, erosive flows from
occurring and to spread out stormwater runoff uniformly over the ground
as sheet flow.
LOADING — The total amount (generally measured in pounds or kilograms
per acre per year) of material (sediment, nutrients, oxygen-demanding
material, or other chemicals or compounds) brought into a lake, stream or
water body by inflowing streams, runoff, direct discharge through pipes,
groundwater, the air (aerial or atmospheric deposition) and other sources
over a specific period of time (often annually).
LOW-IMPACT DEVELOPMENT (LID) — Site design approaches and smallscale
stormwater management practices that promote the use of natural
systems for infiltration, evapotranspiration, and reuse of rainwater. LID can
be applied to new development, urban retrofits, and revitalization projects.
LID utilizes design techniques that infiltrate, filter, evaporate, and store
runoff close to its source. Rather than rely on costly large-scale conveyance
and treatment systems, LID addresses stormwater through a variety of
small, cost-effective landscape features located on site.
MAINTENANCE — The action taken to restore or preserve the as-built
functional design of any facility or system.
MEADOW CONDITION — A natural ground cover with less than one viable
tree of a DBH of six inches or greater per 1,500 square feet within 10 years
of application; a cover condition for which SCS curve numbers have been
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
(1) A group of two or more buildings; or
The division or allocation of land or space between or among
two or more existing or prospective occupants by means of or for
the purpose of streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums,
building groups or other features.
(2)
A.
B. Any subdivision of land.
Development in accordance with Section 503(1.1) of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.112
C.
112. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10503(1.1).
§ 190-12 SHALER CODE § 190-12
1:528
assigned or to which equivalent Rational Method runoff coefficients have
been assigned.
MS4 — Municipal separate storm sewer system.
MUNICIPALITY — The Township of Shaler.
NATIVE VEGETATION — Plan Species that have historically grown in
Pennsylvania and are not invasive species as defined herein.
NATIONAL POLLUTION DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) —
Created in 1972 under the Clean Water Act to authorize discharges to local
receiving waters only pursuant to governmental permits, in an effort to
reduce point source and nonpoint source pollutants.
NEW DEVELOPMENT — Any activity regulated by this chapter that is not
considered a redevelopment as defined in this chapter.
NOAA — National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.
NONSTRUCTURAL STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PRACTICES — Passive
site design approaches or regulatory approaches that positively impact
water quality and reduce or minimize the generation of stormwater runoff
without requiring the construction of specific or discrete stormwater
management control structures.
NRCS — Natural Resources Conservation Service.
OPEN CHANNEL — Any natural or man-made watercourse or conduit in
which water flows with a free surface.
OPEN VEGETATED CHANNEL — Also known as "swales, grass channels
and biofilters." These systems are used for the conveyance, retention,
infiltration and filtration of stormwater runoff.
PACD — Pennsylvania Association of Conservation Districts
PADEP — Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
PASTURE CONDITION — A ground cover of grassland or range with
continuous forage for grazing and greater than 75% ground cover and
lightly or only occasionally grazed; a cover condition for which the SCS
curve numbers have been assigned or to which equivalent Rational Method
runoff coefficients have been assigned.
PEAK DISCHARGE — The maximum rate of stormwater runoff from a
specific storm event.
PENNDOT — Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
PERCOLATION RATE — The rate of movement of water under hydrostatic
pressure through interstices of rock or soil. For stormwater analysis, it is
typically measured as a distance per unit of time (e.g., inches per hour).
PERVIOUS AREA — Any area not defined as impervious.
PREDEVELOPMENT ASSUMPTION — The ground cover assumption used
when analyzing the stormwater runoff characteristics of a drainage area
prior to the proposed development.
§ 190-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-12
1:529
PROJECT SITE — The specific area of land where any regulated activities in
the Township are planned, conducted or maintained.
QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL — Any person licensed by the Pennsylvania
Department of State or otherwise qualified by law to perform the work
required by this chapter.
RAINFALL INTENSITY — The depth of accumulated rainfall per unit of
time.
RATE — Volume per unit of time.
RECEIVING WATERS — Any water bodies, watercourses or wetlands into
which surface waters flow.
RECHARGE — The replenishment of groundwater through the infiltration
of rainfall, other surface waters, or land application of water or treated
wastewater.
REDEVELOPMENT — An existing, developed property and/or a graded,
altered and compacted site (as of or after the date of adoption of this
chapter) that is proposed for reconstruction, involving the demolition or
partial demolition of the property.
REGULATED ACTIVITIES — Any earth disturbances or any activities that
involve the alteration or development of land in a manner that may affect
post-construction stormwater runoff.
REGULATED EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — Activity involving earth
disturbance subject to regulation under 25 Pa. Code Chapters 92113 and 102
or the Clean Streams Law.
RELEASE RATE PERCENTAGE — The percentage of predevelopment peak
rate of runoff from a watershed subarea (as delineated in the Act 167
watershed plan) which defines the allowable post-development peak
discharge from any development site in that subarea.
RETENTION BASIN — An impoundment designed to collect and retard
stormwater runoff by temporarily storing the runoff and releasing it at a
predetermined rate. Retention basins may also be designed to permanently
retain additional stormwater runoff. Retention basins are designed to retain
a permanent pool of water during dry weather.
RETENTION or TO RETAIN — The prevention of direct discharge of
stormwater runoff into receiving waters or water bodies by temporary or
permanent containment in a pond or depression; examples include systems
which discharge by percolation to groundwater, exfiltration and/or
evaporation processes and which generally have residence times of less
than three days.
RETURN PERIOD — The average interval, in years, within which a storm
event of a given magnitude can be expected to occur one time. For example,
113. Editor's Note: Former 25 Pa. Code Ch. 92 was repealed effective 10-9-2010. See now 25 Pa.
Code Ch. 92a.
§ 190-12 SHALER CODE § 190-12
1:530
the twenty-five-year return period rainfall would be expected to occur on
average once every 25 years.
RIPARIAN — Pertaining to anything connected with or immediately adjacent
to the banks of a stream or other body of water.
RIPARIAN BUFFER — An area of land adjacent to a body of water and
managed to maintain the integrity of stream channels and shorelines; to
reduce the impact of upland sources of pollution by trapping, filtering and
converting sediments, nutrients and other chemicals; and to supply food,
cover and thermal protection to fish and other wildlife.
RUNOFF — See "stormwater."
SCS — Soil Conservation Service (now the Natural Resources Conservation
Service).
SEDIMENT — Fragmented material that originated from weathering rocks
and decomposing organic material that is transported by, suspended in, and
eventually deposited in the streambed.
SEDIMENTATION — Occurs when sediment particles that have been
suspended within flowing water are deposited on the stream bottom or
floodplain.
SHEET FLOW — A flow process associated with broad, shallow water
movement on sloping ground surfaces that is not channelized or
concentrated.
SLAMM (SOURCE LOADING AND MANAGEMENT MODEL) — This model
is based on small-storm hydrology and pollutant runoff from urban land
uses. Pollutant sources are identified, and both structural and nonstructural
stormwater practices can be accounted for in the model.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — Those areas identified by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), Federal Insurance
Administration (FIA) as floodway area (FW), flood-fringe area (FF), and
general floodplain area (FA); where determined by the Township, identified
alluvial soils may be included as well.
STATE WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS — The regulatory requirements
to protect, maintain, reclaim, and restore water quality under Pennsylvania
Code Title 25 and the Clean Streams Law.
STORM EVENT — The storm of a specific duration, intensity and frequency.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BMPS — Abbreviated as "SWM BMPs" or
"BMPs" throughout this chapter.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — The approved detailed analysis,
design and drawings of the stormwater management system required for all
construction.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PRACTICES — The designed and/or
constructed features which infiltrate, treat, collect, convey, channel, store,
inhibit or divert the movement of stormwater; such practices include
structural and nonstructural practices.
§ 190-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-12
1:531
STORMWATER or RUNOFF — The flow of water overland and/or in water
bodies that results from and occurs during and immediately following a
rainfall event.
STRUCTURAL STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PRACTICES — Any
measures that require the design and construction of a facility to help
reduce or eliminate a nonpoint source of pollution and control stormwater.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or installed with a fixed location on
the ground or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground.
SUBAREA (SUBBASIN) — A portion of the watershed (basin) that has
similar hydrological characteristics and drains to a common point.
SUBDIVISION — As defined in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247.114
SUBGRADE — The top elevation of graded and compacted earth underlying
roadway pavement.
SWALE — An artificial or natural waterway which may contain contiguous
areas of standing or flowing water only following a rainfall event; or is
planted with or has stabilized vegetation suitable for soil stabilization,
stormwater treatment, and nutrient uptake; or is designed to take into
account the soil erodibility, soil percolation, slope, slope length and
contributing drainage area so as to prevent erosion and reduce the
pollutant concentration of any discharge.
SWMM (STORM WATER MANAGEMENT MODEL) — The model developed
by EPA to analyze stormwater quantity and quality associated with runoff
from urban areas. Both single-event and continuous simulation can be
performed on catchments having storm sewers, or combined sewers and
natural drainage, for prediction of flows, stages and pollutant
concentrations. Information on SWMM is available at http://www2.epa.gov/
water-research/storm-water-management-model-swmm.
TOTAL SITE AREA (SITE AREA) — Total area of the parcel(s) being
developed.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Shaler.
USDA — United States Department of Agriculture.
USDOT FHWA — United States Department of Transportation Federal
Highway Administration.
WATER BODY — Any natural or artificial pond, lake, reservoir or other
area which ordinarily or intermittently contains water and which has a
discernible shoreline and receives surface water flow.
WATERCOURSE — A permanent or intermittent stream or other body of
water, whether natural or man-made, which gathers or carries surface
water.
114. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 190-12 SHALER CODE § 190-12
1:532
WATERSHED — Region or land area drained by a river, watercourse, or
other surface water of this commonwealth.
WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — Any and all rivers, streams, creeks,
rivulets, impoundments, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes,
dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs, and all other bodies or channels
of conveyance of surface water and underground water, or parts thereof,
whether natural or artificial, within or on the boundaries of this
commonwealth.
WATER TABLE — The uppermost level of saturation of pore space or
fractures by subsurface water in an aquifer. Seasonal high-water table
refers to a water table that rises and falls with the seasons due either to
natural or man-made causes.
WETLANDS — Land areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water
or groundwater with a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and
that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions (wetlands generally
include swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas); or areas that are defined
and delineated in accordance with the Federal Manual for Identifying and
Delineating Jurisdictional Wetlands, dated January 10, 1989, and as may be
amended from time to time; or as further defined and delineated by the
United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Environmental
Protection Agency, or the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection.
WOODLAND CONDITION — A natural ground cover with more than one
viable tree of a DBH (diameter at breast height) of six inches or greater
per 1,500 square feet which existed within 10 years of application; a cover
condition for which SCS curve numbers have been assigned or to which
equivalent Rational Method runoff coefficients have been assigned.
§ 190-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-12
1:533

ARTICLE III
Stormwater Management Plan
§ 190-13. Stormwater management plan requirements.
The applicant shall submit a stormwater management plan and report
prepared by a professional engineer licensed in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania for all regulated activities not eligible for exemptions pursuant
to § 190-6 of this chapter. In addition to paper copies, copies of all final
plans, specifications and reports shall also be submitted to the Township in
Adobe PDF format. The stormwater management plan shall contain, but not
be limited to, the following:
A. A suitable map of the watershed for any and all named streams within
which the project is proposed (a United States Geological Survey
quadrangle map is usually sufficient) with existing and proposed
development areas presented on the map.
B. Suitable maps and drawings showing all existing natural and
constructed drainage facilities affecting the subject property.
C. Hydrologic (watershed) and water feature boundaries, including all
areas flowing to the proposed project, existing streams (including firstorder
and intermittent streams), springs, lakes, ponds or other bodies
of water within the project area.
D. Sufficient topographical information with elevations to verify the
location of all ridges, streams, etc. (two-foot contour intervals within
the project's boundaries and for proposed off-site improvements; for
slopes greater than 15%, five-foot contour intervals).
E. Notes pertaining to and locations of existing standing water, areas of
heavy seepage, springs, wetlands, streams and hydrologically sensitive
areas. The Chapter 93 water quality standards use designation shall
also be provided on the plan.115
F. General type of soils with hydrologic soil group noted, estimated
permeability in inches per hour, and location and results of all required
soil tests and borings.
G. One-hundred-year flood elevations for any special flood hazard areas on
or within 100 feet of the property. For redevelopment sites, the plan
shall also show the ten-year and twenty-five-year flood elevations for
any special flood hazard areas on or within 100 feet of the property. The
source of these elevations shall also be shown on the plans.
H. Description of current and proposed ground cover and land use. The
total area and percent impervious cover shall be noted.
115. Editor's Note: See 25 Pa. Code Chapter 93.
§ 190-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-13
1:535
I. A wetland delineation report for the project site with a location map
identifying wetland areas if any were found.
J. A plan of the proposed stormwater drainage system attributable to the
activity proposed, including runoff calculations, stormwater
management practices to be applied both during and after
development, and the expected project time schedule.
K. The design computations for all proposed stormwater drainage
systems, including storm drain pipes, inlets, runoff control measures
and culverts, drainage channels, and other features, facilities and
stormwater management practices.
L. A grading plan, including all areas of disturbance of the subject activity.
The total area of disturbance shall be noted in square feet and acres.
Topographic contours showing the existing and proposed final contours
at an interval of two feet; in areas having slope of greater than 15%, a
five-foot contour interval may be used.
M. A plan of the erosion and sedimentation procedures to be utilized as
required by local ordinance and state regulations.
N. The effect of the project (in terms of runoff volumes and peak flows) on
adjacent properties and on all other stormwater collection systems that
may receive runoff from the project site and specifics of how erosion
and flooding impacts to adjacent properties will be avoided or
otherwise mitigated.
O. An operation and maintenance plan consistent with the requirements of
Article V. Such a plan shall clearly explain how the proposed facilities
operate and the functions they serve.
P. The name of the development, the name and address of the property
owner and applicant, and the name and address of the individual or firm
preparing the plan.
Q. A North arrow, the submission date, graphic scale and the revision
dates, as applicable, shall be included on each page of all plans
submitted.
R. Complete delineation of the flow paths used for calculating the time of
concentration for the predeveloped and post-developed conditions.
S. Construction details sufficient to express completely the intended
stormwater design components consistent with this chapter.
T. A listing of all permits required for the site, providing the status of the
permit application(s) and approval(s).
U. The following signature block for the Township:
"Township Engineer on this date (Signature date), has reviewed and
hereby certifies that the SWM site plan meets all design standards and
§ 190-13 SHALER CODE § 190-13
1:536
criteria of the Township Ordinance No. (number assigned to ordinance),
except where waivers have been granted as noted on the Plan. The
review is based on a survey and plan prepared by others and assumes
that all information is correct and valid as submitted."
§ 190-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-13
1:537

ARTICLE IV
Permanent Stormwater Management Design Standards
§ 190-14. Design goals, principles and standards.
A. Design goals. Applicants shall adhere to a holistic design process
incorporating the goals listed below. The objective is to achieve postdevelopment
hydrologic conditions that are consistent with the
predevelopment ground cover assumption for new development (refer
to § 190-15B) and improve the runoff conditions for redevelopment
[refer to § 190-14C(3)]. The design goals are:
(1) Minimize the volume of runoff that must be collected, conveyed,
treated and released by stormwater management facilities;
(2) Maintain the natural infiltration process and rate, and infiltrate
runoff at its source when appropriate;
(3) Remove and/or treat pollutants at the source or during conveyance;
(4) Provide for peak flow attenuation, as needed; and
(5) Attenuate runoff to protect the in-stream channel of the receiving
stream.
B. General principles. The following general principles shall apply to all
applicable activities pursuant to § 190-4:
(1) Incorporate conservation design practices to minimize the amount
of stormwater generated on a site, encourage the disconnection of
impervious land cover, and maximize the use of pervious areas for
stormwater treatment and on-site rainfall infiltration.
(2) Infiltration of surface water runoff at its source is to be a
mechanism for stormwater management based on hydrologic soil
group (or infiltration testing). Infiltration practices include, but are
not limited to, those referenced in § 190-16B(1) and as outlined in
the publications listed in § 190-16. Infiltration practices shall
adhere to the following criteria:
(a) In choosing methods of infiltration, preference shall be given to
a combination of surface and subsurface infiltration methods.
(b) Applicants shall first consider minimum disturbance/minimum
maintenance techniques combined with site grading that
distributes runoff to reduce concentration. Next, applicants
shall consider depression areas combined with subsurface
infiltration practices followed by other subsurface measures,
including, but not limited to, porous paving and perforated
pipe storage.
(c) The use of multiple infiltration features and facilities that
provide for the following is encouraged:
§ 190-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-14
1:539
[1] Discourage concentration of flows;
[2] Encourage disconnection of flows;
[3] Infiltrate as close to the source of runoff as possible; and
[4] Reduce visual impact.
(d) Where high-water tables, subsurface contamination, slope
stability concerns, or other site constraints preclude achieving
the required infiltration volume, additional conservation
design practices and alternative stormwater management
practices shall be implemented to reduce, to the maximum
extent practicable, the total volume of stormwater released to
streams. The applicant shall follow the stormwater runoff
hierarchy of § 190-16A(1).
(e) Infiltration areas shall be designed to maintain any broad and
even infiltration pattern which existed prior to development.
Such facilities shall use the natural topography and vegetation
in order to blend in with the site. Infiltration designs which do
not provide this may be used if the applicant demonstrates to
the Township's satisfaction that alternative approaches would
be more effective, more harmonious with their existing
environment and as easily maintained.
(f) Aboveground stormwater infiltration facilities shall be as
shallow as possible while still achieving the requirements of
this chapter.
(3) Water quality improvement shall be achieved in conjunction with or
as part of infiltration practices. Water quality improvements shall
also be provided for drainage areas not otherwise addressed by
infiltration practices either at the source of runoff and/or during
conveyance away from the source of runoff.
(4) To reduce the need for large retention and/or detention basins
designed to satisfy the peak flow attenuation and extended
detention requirements, other innovative stormwater management
practices located close to the source of runoff generation shall be
considered, including a combination of practices (e.g., rooftop
storage, open vegetated channels, bioretention, pervious pavement
systems and infiltration trenches).
(5) When designing stormwater management facilities to satisfy the
peak flow attenuation and extended detention requirements [refer
to § 190-14C(2)(b)], the effect of structural and nonstructural
stormwater management practices implemented as part of the
overall site design may be taken into consideration when
calculating total storage volume and release rates.
§ 190-14 SHALER CODE § 190-14
1:540
(6) Site hydrology and natural infiltration patterns shall guide site
design, construction and vegetation decisions. All channels,
drainageways, swales, natural streams and other surface water
concentrations shall be considered and, where possible,
incorporated into design decisions.
(7) A justification, acceptable to the Township Official or Township
Engineer, must be included in the SWM site plan if BMPs other
than green infrastructure methods and LID practices are proposed
to achieve the volume, rate and water quality controls under this
chapter.
C. Minimum performance criteria.
(1) The following minimum performance standards shall apply to all
applicable activities, whether they are new development or
redevelopment, pursuant to § 190-4A:
(a) Water quality treatment of stormwater runoff shall be provided
for all discharges prior to release to a receiving water body. If a
stormwater management practice does not provide water
quality treatment, then water quality best management
practices shall be utilized prior to the runoff entering the
stormwater management practice.
(b) Water quality management shall be provided through the use
of structural and/or nonstructural stormwater management
practices. Water quality stormwater management practices
shall be designed to reduce or eliminate solids, sediment,
nutrients, and other potential pollutants from the site. It is
presumed that a stormwater management practice complies
with this requirement if it is:
[1] Designed according to the specific performance criteria
outlined in § 190-7B;
[2] Constructed in accordance with all permits and approved
plans and specifications; and
[3] Maintained pursuant to an approved operation and
maintenance plan or agreement or, in lieu of that, in
accordance with customary practices.
(c) Stormwater discharges from land uses or activities with higher
potential for pollutant loadings (hot spots) may require the use
of specific structural stormwater management practices and
pollution prevention practices. In addition, stormwater from a
hot spot land use shall be provided with proper pretreatment
prior to infiltration. For the purpose of this chapter, the sites/
facilities listed in § 190-14C(1)(d) below are considered hot
spots.
§ 190-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-14
1:541
(d) Certain industrial sites may be required to prepare and
implement a stormwater pollution prevention plan and file
notice of intent as required under the provision of the EPA
industrial stormwater NPDES permit requirements. Other
industrial sites storing significant quantities of chemicals/
wastes shall also prepare a prevention plan. Sites that are
required by EPA to prepare a plan include, but are not limited
to:
[1] Vehicle salvage yards and recycling facilities;
[2] Vehicle and equipment cleaning facilities;
[3] Fleet storage areas for buses, trucks etc.;
[4] Marinas (service and maintenance); or
[5] Facilities that generate or store hazardous materials.
(e) Conveyance structures/channels shall be designed and
adequately sized so as to protect the properties receiving
runoff from impacts of flooding and erosion. Where necessary,
and to the maximum extent permitted under the Municipalities
Planning Code116 and Act 167, or any amendments thereto, a
drainage easement from adjoining properties shall be obtained
to ensure the integrity of the drainageway and the protection
of adjoining properties and shall also establish the operation
and maintenance requirements for the drainageway.
(f) All stormwater management practices shall have an operation
and maintenance plan, pursuant to § 190-21 of this chapter,
and if to be privately owned, an enforceable operation and
maintenance agreement, pursuant to § 190-22 of this chapter,
to ensure the system functions as designed and to provide
remedies for system failure.
(g) Stormwater runoff generated from development and
discharged directly into a jurisdictional wetland or waters of
the United States and their adjacent wetlands shall be treated
by an approved stormwater management practice prior to
release into a natural wetlands and shall not be used to meet
the minimum design requirements for stormwater
management or stormwater runoff quality treatment, except
when used as part of a treatment train that incorporates a
portion of the outer zone (filter strip) of the wetland's riparian
buffer as a stormwater outfall. In such instances, the discharge
velocity from the terminal end of a pipe or associated energy
dissipation practice shall not exceed two feet per second for
the two-year-frequency storm event. Where such a
management strategy is used, all feasible methods shall be
116. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 190-14 SHALER CODE § 190-14
1:542
used to convert concentrated flow to uniform, shallow sheet
flow before entering the outer zone of the wetland's riparian
buffer. In addition, it shall be demonstrated that such an
approach will not cause erosion.
(2) The following minimum performance standards shall apply to all
applicable new development activities pursuant to § 190-4A.
(a) Water quality improvement shall be achieved in conjunction
with or as part of infiltration practices (if used). Water quality
improvements shall also be provided for drainage areas not
otherwise addressed by infiltration practices either at the
source of runoff and/or during conveyance away from the
source of runoff. Stormwater quality management practices
shall be designed to capture and treat stormwater runoff
generated by the one-inch rainfall event. Refer to § 190-16A(2)
for water quality volume design standards and assumptions.
Stormwater quality management practice selection, design
and implementation shall be based upon appropriate reference
materials, as provided in § 190-7B.
(b) The post-development peak discharge rate shall not exceed the
predevelopment peak discharge rate multiplied by the
subbasin release rate percentage (where determined in Act
167 watersheds) for the two-year, ten-year, twenty-five-year
and one-hundred-year twenty-four-hour storm events pursuant
to the predevelopment cover assumption described in
§ 190-15B. Refer to Appendix A for release rate percentages
information.117
(c) Facilities capable of attenuating rainfall runoff shall be
provided and be designed to attenuate the runoff volume from
the one-year twenty-four-hour storm event for at least 24
hours.
(d) Stormwater shall be infiltrated and/or discharged within the
same drainage area of the stream receiving the runoff from the
development site prior to development.
(e) Structural and nonstructural stormwater management
practices that make best possible use of infiltration on site
shall be considered in all site designs, when appropriate.
(3) The following minimum performance standards shall apply to all
applicable redevelopment activities, pursuant to § 190-4B:
(a) One of the following minimum performance standards shall be
accomplished. Selection of the performance standard shall be
whichever is most appropriate for the given site conditions:
117. Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the Township offices.
§ 190-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-14
1:543
§ 190-15. Stormwater runoff calculation criteria.
In addition to the infiltration and water quality requirements of this chapter,
peak flow from those activities resulting in increases in impervious surface
and/or regrading and compaction shall be attenuated consistent with the
following stormwater calculation methods:
[1] Reduce the total impervious cover on the site (e.g., by
using pervious pavement, replacement of pavement with
pervious planting areas or green roof systems) by at least
25%, based on a comparison of existing impervious cover
to proposed impervious cover; or
[2] Provide facilities designed to attenuate the runoff volume
from the one-year twenty-four-hour post-development
storm event for at least 24 hours; or
[3] Provide facilities to ensure that the post-development peak
discharge rate shall not exceed the predevelopment peak
discharge rate multiplied by the subbasin release rate
percentage (where determined in Act 167 watersheds) for
the two-year and ten-year twenty-four-hour storm events.
A predevelopment cover CN of 71 shall be assumed.
(b) In addition to the minimum performance standards for
redevelopment areas in § 190-14C(3) above, water quality
improvements shall be provided for drainage areas not
otherwise addressed by infiltration practices either at the
source of runoff and/or during conveyance away from the
source of runoff. Stormwater quality management facilities
shall be designed to capture and treat 0.25 inch of runoff from
all pavement areas (i.e., parking lots, pavements and
noncovered sidewalks). Roof area may be excluded from this
calculation.
A. The following design storms shall be used for analysis of the
predevelopment and post-development conditions. These values are
applicable to the Soil-Cover-Complex Method:
Return Period
(years)
24-Hour Storm
(inches)
1 2.00
2 2.35
5 2.88
10 3.30
25 3.91
50 4.40
100 4.92
§ 190-14 SHALER CODE § 190-15
1:544
NOTES: The precipitation values for each frequency storm listed above
were abstracted from the precipitation frequency estimates developed
by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration as set forth
in NOAA Atlas 14, Volume 2 (NOAA, June 2004). The NOAA data is
available from the Hydrometeorological Design Studies Center of the
National Weather Service.
B. The following assumptions shall be used for runoff calculations:
(1) For new development sites, the ground cover used as the
predevelopment assumption for runoff calculations shall be as
follows:
(a) Wooded sites shall use a ground cover of woodland in good
condition. Portions of a site having more than one viable tree of
a DBH (diameter at breast height; DBH is the diameter of the
tree stem 4 1/2 feet above the ground) of six inches or greater
per 1,500 square feet shall be considered wooded where such
trees existed within 10 years of application. If there is evidence
of logging within the ten-year period, the logged area shall be
considered as woodland in good condition.
(b) Agricultural sites shall use a ground cover of pasture in good
condition.
(c) All other portions of a site shall use a ground cover of meadow
in good condition.
(d) All watershed areas contributing to the point of interest,
including off-site area, shall be considered.
(e) For redevelopment sites, see § 190-14C(3).
(2) The runoff curve numbers listed in the table below shall be used in
developing the runoff calculations for the ground covers noted in
§ 190-15B(1). These values are referenced from the Urban
Hydrology for Small Watersheds Technical Release No. 55 (USDA,
1986). Coefficients for equivalent ground cover conditions shall be
used if a runoff method other than the Soil-Cover-Complex Method
is used.
Hydrologic Soil Group Curve Numbers
Ground
Cover A B C D
Woodland 30 55 70 77
Meadow 30 58 71 78
Grass 39 61 74 80
(3) Impervious cover shall have a curve number of 98.
(4) Gravel pavement shall have a curve number of 89.
§ 190-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-15
1:545
(5) Average antecedent moisture conditions, or AMC II, shall be used
(for the Soil-Cover-Complex Method only, for example, TR-55,
TR-20).
(6) A Type II distribution storm (for the Soil-Cover-Complex Method
only, for example, TR-55, TR-20).
(7) For time of concentration calculations, sheet flow lengths shall not
exceed 100 feet and shallow concentrated flow lengths shall not
exceed 1,000 feet.
(8) The kinematic "n" value in the sheet flow equation shall be applied
as per the following table. (Values taken from TR-55.)
Surface Value
Impervious surfaces 0.011
Agricultural lands 0.17
Grass, lawn, or open space 0.24
Wooded areas 0.40
C. In all plans and designs for stormwater management systems and
facilities submitted to the Municipal Engineer for approval, stormwater
peak discharge and runoff shall be determined through the use of the
NRCS Soil-Cover-Complex Method, as set forth in Urban Hydrology for
Small Watersheds, Technical Release No. 55 (USDA, 1986), with
specific attention given to antecedent moisture conditions, flood
routing, time of concentration, and peak discharge specifications
included therein and in Hydrology National Engineering Handbook,
Section 4 (USDA, 1985), both by the United States Department of
Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service. Note that when
TR-55 is used for natural system-based approaches and practices
encouraged herein, calculations must be performed on a detailed small
subarea basis. Use of Technical Release No. 20 and other methods
listed in Table 1 is also acceptable. The design professional's selection
of a specific method shall be based on the suitability of the method for
the given project site conditions with due consideration to the
limitations of the method chosen. Table 1 herein summarizes the
computational methods available.
§ 190-15 SHALER CODE § 190-15
1:546
Table 1
Acceptable Computation Methodologies for Stormwater
Management Plan
Method Source Applicability
TR-20 or commercial
package based on
TR-20
USDA NRCS When use of full model
is desirable or
necessary
TR-55 or commercial
package based on
TR-55
USDA NRCS Applicable for plans
within the model's
limitations
HEC - HMS U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers
When use of full model
is desirable or
necessary
PSRM Penn State University When use of full model
is desirable or
necessary
VT/PSUHM Virginia Polytechnic
Institute and Penn
State University
When use of full model
is desirable or
necessary
Modified Rational
Method or commercial
package based on this
method
Emil Kuiching (1889) For sites less than 20
acres
SWMM or commercial
package based on
SWMM
U.S. EPA Most applicable in
urban areas
Small-storm hydrology
method (as included
in SLAMM)
PV & Associates or
the website
www.winslamm.com
Calculation of runoff
volume from urban and
suburban areas
D. A modified Rational Method analysis may be used for drainage areas
smaller than two acres when permitted by the Municipal Engineer. The
term "modified Rational Method" used herein refers to a procedure for
manipulation of the basic Rational Method techniques to reflect the fact
that storms with a duration greater than the normal time of
concentration for a basin will result in a larger volume of runoff even
though the peak discharge is reduced. The methodology and model
chosen for use shall be well documented as being appropriate for use in
this region, and all relevant assumptions, methodologies, calculations
and data used shall be provided to the Municipal Engineer for review.
Information on the modified Rational Method is presented in the
Recommended Hydrologic Procedures for Computing Urban Runoff
from Small Watersheds in Pennsylvania (PADEP, 1982).
E. Rainfall intensities used for the modified Rational Method shall be
based on the precipitation frequency estimates developed by the
§ 190-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-15
1:547
§ 190-16. Standards for stormwater management practices.
The Pennsylvania Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual shall
serve as a guide for the design of stormwater management practices.
Additional design guidance may also be obtained from other related
sources, including the 2000 Maryland Stormwater Design Manual, Volumes
I and II (MDE, 2000), Design of Stormwater Filtering Systems (CWP, 1996),
and the American Society of Civil Engineers Manual and Report on
Engineering Practice, No. 87, Urban Runoff Quality Management (ASCE,
1998), for the design of stormwater runoff quality control features for site
development. The water quality volume design measures used herein are
based partially on the methodology expressed in the Maryland manual
referenced above. Pursuant to the design options recommended in the
above documents, the following standards shall be adhered to:
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration as set forth in NOAA
Atlas 14.
F. The Rational Method (that is, Q = CIA) shall be used for calculations of
the peak rate of runoff for the design of storm sewers and drainage
swales but not for the design of stormwater management facilities
where a full hydrograph is needed. The equation representing the
Rational Method is comprised of the following (in English units):
Q = Peak flow rate, cubic feet per second (cfs).
C = Runoff coefficient, dependent on land use/cover.
I = Design rainfall intensity, inches per hour.
A = Drainage area, acres.
G. Runoff characteristics of off-site areas that drain through a proposed
development shall be considered and be based on the existing
conditions in the off-site area.
A. Extended detention, water quality volume, infiltration and
nonstructural BMP credits criteria. The following sizing criteria shall be
followed at all sites required to meet the standards of this chapter:
(1) Extended detention.
(a) The one-year twenty-four-hour design storm shall be detained
using the SCS Type II distribution. Provisions shall be made so
that the one-year storm takes a minimum of 24 hours to drain
from the facility from a point where the maximum volume of
water from the one-year storm is captured (i.e., the maximum
water surface elevation is achieved in the facility). Release of
water can begin at the start of the storm (i.e., the invert of the
water quality orifice is at the invert of the facility). The design
of the facility shall consider and minimize the chances of
clogging and sedimentation potential.
§ 190-15 SHALER CODE § 190-16
1:548
(b) Detention ponds shall detain the one-year storm event and
allow it to naturally infiltrate and recharge the groundwater
table. All subsequent orifices for the two-, ten-, twenty-five- and
one-hundred-year storm events shall be placed above the
maximum water surface elevation of the one-year storm.
(c) Flow from off-site areas must be considered as pass-through
flow if it is conveyed through the BMP and shall be modeled as
"present condition" for the one-year storm event.
(d) Normally dry, open top, storage facilities should completely
drain both the volume control and rate control capacities over
a period of time not less than 24 and not more than 72 hours
from the end of the design storm.
(e) The length of overland flow used in time of concentration (tc)
calculations is limited to no more than 100 feet for postdevelopment
conditions.
(f) The models TR-55 and TR-20 (or approved equivalent) may be
used for determining peak discharge rates.
(2) Water quality volume.
(a) Treatment of the water quality volume (WQv) of stormwater
prior to its release to receiving waters or water bodies shall be
provided at all developments where stormwater management
is required. The WQv equals the storage volume needed to
capture and treat the runoff from storms of one inch or less.
Runoff from the first one inch of rainfall transports most of the
total pollutant load. The WQv is based on the following
equation:
WQv = [(P)(Rv)(A)]/12 (acre-feet)
Where
P = Rainfall depth in inches (set to 1 inch).
Rv = Volumetric runoff coefficient, 0.05 + 0.009(I),
where I is percent impervious cover.
A = Site area (acres).
(b) The formula assumes approximately 5% runoff from pervious
surfaces and 90% runoff from impervious surfaces. A minimum
of 0.2 inch per acre of runoff volume shall be met at sites or in
drainage areas that have less than 15% impervious cover.
(c) Drainage areas having no impervious cover and no proposed
disturbance during development may be excluded from the
WQv calculations. However, designers are encouraged to
incorporate water quality treatment practices for these areas.
§ 190-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-16
1:549
(d) Stormwater quality treatment. The final WQv shall be treated
by an acceptable stormwater management practice from those
described in this section or as approved by the Township.
(e) For new developments and redevelopments, infiltration is
considered an acceptable method of satisfying part or all of the
water quality volume.
(f) For new developments, the WQv requirements of this section
shall be sized and designed in conjunction with the standards
under § 190-16A(1).
(g) As a basis for design, the following assumptions may be made:
[1] Multiple drainage areas. When a project contains or is
divided by multiple drainage areas, the WQv volume shall
be addressed for each drainage area.
[2] Off-site drainage areas. The WQv shall be based on the
impervious cover of the proposed site. Off-site existing
impervious areas may be excluded from the calculation of
the water quality volume requirements.
(3) Infiltration volume. Where possible, all of the water quality volume
shall be treated using infiltration BMPs. The following calculation
shall be used to determine the minimum recharge goal for the site:
Recharge volume (Rev), (acre-feet)
Fraction of WQv, depending on soil hydrologic group
Rev = (S)(A1)
Where
S = Soil-specific recharge factor in inches.
A1 = The measured impervious cover.
Hydrologic Soil Group
Soil-Specific Recharge Factor
(S)
(inches of runoff)
A 0.40
B 0.25
C 0.10
D 0.05
(a) Infiltrated volume may be subtracted from the total site WQv.
(b) Infiltration shall not be considered for sites or areas of sites
that have activities that may allow pollution to be infiltrated.
For example, the use of infiltration for the runoff of a service
§ 190-16 SHALER CODE § 190-16
1:550
station's paved lot would not be appropriate, although roof
water from the service station may be infiltrated.
(c) Infiltration shall only be used when, in the opinion of a
professional engineer, it will not contribute to slope instability
or cause seepage problems into basements or developed
downgradient areas.
(d) If more than one hydrologic soil group is present at a site, a
composite recharge volume shall be computed based upon the
proportion of total site area within each hydrologic soil group.
(e) All infiltration facilities shall be set back at least 15 feet from
all structures with subgrade elements (e.g., basements,
foundation walls).
(4) Credits for use of nonstructural BMPs. The developer may obtain
credits for the use of nonstructural BMPs using the procedures
outlined below. Examples of nonstructural credit calculations are
provided in Appendix E.118
(a) Volume reduction method No. 1: natural area conservation. A
water quality volume reduction may be taken when
undisturbed natural areas are conserved on a site, thereby
retaining their predevelopment hydrologic and water quality
characteristics. Under this method, a designer would be able
to subtract the conservation areas from the total site area
when computing the water quality protection volume. An
added benefit is that the post-development peak discharges
will be smaller, and hence, water quantity control volumes will
be reduced due to lower post-development curve numbers or
rational formula "C" values.
[1] Rule: Subtract conservation areas from total site area
when computing water quality protection volume
requirements.
[2] Criteria.
[a] The conservation area cannot be disturbed during
project construction and must be protected from
sediment deposition. The conservation area shall be
protected with a safety fence until construction has
been completed. After construction, the area shall be
posted with signage indicating that it is a conservation
area.
[b] The conservation area shall be protected by limits of
disturbance clearly shown on all construction
drawings.
118. Editor's Note: Appendix E is on file in the Township offices.
§ 190-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-16
1:551
[c] The conservation area shall be located within an
acceptable conservation easement instrument that
ensures perpetual protection of the proposed area.
The easement must clearly specify how the natural
area vegetation shall be managed and boundaries will
be marked. [Note: Managed turf (e.g., playgrounds,
regularly maintained open areas) is not an acceptable
form of vegetation management.]
[d] The conservation area shall have a minimum
contiguous area requirement of 10,000 square feet.
[e] Rv is kept constant when calculating WQv.
[f] The conservation area must be forested or have a
stable, natural ground cover.
(b) Volume reduction method No. 2: stream buffers. This reduction
may be taken when a stream buffer effectively treats
stormwater runoff. Effective treatment constitutes treating
runoff through overland flow in a naturally vegetated or
forested buffer. Under the proposed method, a designer would
be able to subtract areas draining via overland flow to the
buffer from total site area when computing water quality
protection volume requirements. The design of the stream
buffer treatment system shall use appropriate methods for
conveying flows above the annual recurrence (one-year storm)
event.
[1] Rule: Subtract areas draining via overland flow to the
buffer from total site area when computing water quality
protection volume requirements.
[2] Criteria.
[a] The minimum undisturbed buffer width shall be 50
feet from top of bank.
[b] The maximum contributing length shall be 150 feet for
pervious surfaces and 75 feet for impervious surfaces.
[c] The average contributing slope shall be 3% maximum
unless a flow spreader is used. In no case shall the
average contributing slope be greater than 10%.
[d] Runoff shall enter the buffer as overland sheet flow. A
flow spreader may be installed to ensure this.
[e] Buffers shall remain as naturally vegetated or forested
areas and shall require only routine debris removal or
erosion repairs.
[f] Rv is kept constant when calculating WQv.
§ 190-16 SHALER CODE § 190-16
1:552
[g] Not applicable if overland flow filtration/groundwater
recharge reduction is already being taken.
(c) Volume reduction method No. 3: enhanced swales. This
reduction may be taken when enhanced swales are used for
water quality protection. Under the proposed method, a
designer would be able to subtract the areas draining to an
enhanced swale from total site area when computing water
quality protection volume requirements. An enhanced swale
can fully meet the water quality protection volume
requirements for certain kinds of low-density residential
development (see volume reduction method No. 5). An added
benefit is the post-development peak discharges will likely be
lower due to a longer time of concentration for the site.
[1] Rule: Subtract the areas draining to an enhanced swale
from total site area when computing water quality
protection volume requirements.
[2] Criteria.
[a] This method is typically only applicable to moderateor
low-density residential land uses (three dwelling
units per acre maximum).
[b] The maximum flow velocity for water quality design
storm shall be less than or equal to 1.0 foot per
second.
[c] The minimum residence time for the water quality
storm shall be five minutes.
[d] The bottom width shall be a maximum of six feet. If a
larger channel is needed, use of a compound cross
section is required.
[e] The side slopes shall be 3:1 (horizontal:vertical) or
flatter.
[f] The channel slope shall be 3% or less.
[g] Rv is kept constant when calculating WQv.
(d) Volume reduction method No. 4: overland flow filtration/
groundwater recharge. This reduction may be taken when
overland flow filtration/infiltration zones are incorporated into
the site design to receive runoff from rooftops or other small
impervious areas (e.g., driveways, small parking lots, etc.).
This can be achieved by grading the site to promote overland
vegetative filtering or by providing infiltration or rain garden
areas. If impervious areas are adequately disconnected, they
can be deducted from total site area when computing the water
quality protection volume requirements. An added benefit will
§ 190-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-16
1:553
be that the post-development peak discharges will likely be
lower due to a longer time of concentration for the site.
[1] Rule: If impervious areas are adequately disconnected,
they may be deducted from total site area when computing
the water quality protection volume requirements.
[2] Criteria.
[a] Relatively permeable soils (hydrologic soil groups A
and B) shall be present.
[b] Runoff shall not come from a designated hot spot.
[c] The maximum contributing impervious flow path
length shall be 75 feet.
[d] Downspouts shall be at least 10 feet away from the
nearest impervious surface to discourage
reconnections.
[e] The disconnection shall drain continuously through a
vegetated channel, swale or filter strip to the property
line or structural stormwater control.
[f] The length of the disconnection shall be equal to or
greater than the contributing length.
[g] The entire vegetative disconnection shall be on a slope
less than or equal to 3%.
[h] The surface impervious area tributary to any one
discharge location shall not exceed 5,000 square feet.
[i] For those areas draining directly to a buffer, reduction
can be obtained from either overland flow filtration or
stream buffers (see method No. 2).
[j] Rv is kept constant when calculating WQv.
(e) Volume reduction method No. 5: environmentally sensitive
large-lot subdivisions. This reduction may be taken when a
group of environmental site design techniques are applied to
low- and very-low-density residential development [e.g., one
dwelling unit per two acres (du/ac) or lower]. The use of this
method can eliminate the need for structural stormwater
controls to treat water quality protection volume
requirements. This method is targeted towards large lot
subdivisions and will likely have limited application.
[1] Rule: targeted towards large-lot subdivisions (e.g., twoacre
lots and greater). The requirement for structural
facilities to treat the water quality protection volume may
be waived.
§ 190-16 SHALER CODE § 190-16
1:554
[2] Criteria.
[a] For single-lot development:
[i] Total site impervious cover is less than 15%.
[ii] Lot size shall be at least two acres.
[iii] Rooftop runoff is disconnected in accordance with
the criteria in method No. 4.
[iv] Grass channels are used to convey runoff versus
curb and gutter.
[b] For multiple lots:
[i] Total impervious cover footprint shall be less than
15% of the area.
[ii] Lot areas shall be at least two acres, unless
clustering is implemented. Open space
developments shall have a minimum of 25% of the
site protected as natural conservation areas and
shall be at least a half-acre average individual lot
size.
[iii] Grass channels shall be used to convey runoff
versus curb and gutter (see method No. 3).
[iv] Overland flow filtration/infiltration zones shall be
established (see method No. 4).
B. Stormwater infiltration/practices.
(1) In selecting the appropriate infiltration BMPs, the applicant shall
consider the following:
(a) Permeability and infiltration rate of the site soils.
(b) Slope and depth to bedrock.
(c) Seasonal high-water table.
(d) Proximity to building foundations and wellheads.
(e) Erodibility of soils.
(f) Land availability and topography.
(g) Slope stability.
(h) Effects on nearby properties and structures.
(2) A detailed soils evaluation of the project site shall be performed to
determine the suitability of infiltration BMPs. The evaluation shall
be performed by a qualified professional and, at a minimum,
§ 190-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-16
1:555
address soil permeability, depth to bedrock and slope stability. The
general process for designing the infiltration BMP shall:
(a) Analyze hydrologic soil groups as well as natural and manmade
features within the watershed to determine general
areas of suitability for infiltration BMPs.
(b) Provide field testing data to determine appropriate percolation
rate and/or hydraulic connectivity.
(c) Design infiltration BMPs for required stormwater volume
based on field-determined capacity at the level of the proposed
infiltration surface.
(3) Soil characteristics are subject to the following specific
considerations:
(a) Infiltration BMPs are particularly appropriate in hydrologic soil
groups A and B, as described in the Natural Resources
Conservation Manual TR-55.
(b) Low-erodibility factors ("K" factors) are preferred for the
construction of basins.
(c) There shall be a minimum depth of 48 inches between the
bottom of any facility and the seasonal high-water table and/or
bedrock (limiting zones), except for infiltration BMPs receiving
only roof runoff, which shall be placed in soils having a
minimum depth of 24 inches between the bottom of the facility
and the limiting zone.
(d) There shall be an infiltration and/or percolation rate sufficient
to accept the additional stormwater load and to drain
completely as determined by field tests.
(e) The infiltration system shall have positive overflow controls to
prevent storage within one foot of the finished surface or
grade.
(f) Infiltration rates shall not be used in computing the storage
volume of the infiltration system.
(g) Surface inflows shall be designed to prevent direct discharge
of sediment into the infiltration system.
(4) The recharge volume provided at the site shall be directed to the
most permeable hydrologic soil group available, except where
other considerations apply, such as in limestone geology.
(5) Any infiltration BMP shall be capable of completely infiltrating the
impounded water within 48 hours. The forty-eight-hour period is to
be measured from the end of the twenty-four-hour design storm.
§ 190-16 SHALER CODE § 190-16
1:556
(6) The Township may require additional analyses for stormwater
management facilities proposed for susceptible areas, such as:
(a) Strip mines.
(b) Storage areas for salt, chloride, other materials for winter
deicing.
(c) Unstable slopes.
(7) During the period of land disturbance, runoff shall be controlled
prior to entering any proposed infiltration area. Areas proposed for
infiltration BMPs shall be protected from sedimentation and
compaction during the construction phase, so as to maintain their
maximum infiltration capacity.
(8) Infiltration BMPs shall not be constructed nor receive runoff until
the entire contributory drainage area to the infiltration BMP has
received final stabilization.
(9) Infiltration facilities shall be selected based on suitability of soils
and site conditions. Acceptable infiltration facilities include, but
are not limited to, filter strips or stormwater filtering systems (for
example bioretention facilities, sand filters); open vegetated
channels (that is, dry swales and wet swales); infiltration trenches;
dry wells; infiltration basins; porous paving systems; retention
basins; wet extended detention ponds; riparian corridor
management; riparian forested buffers; rooftop runoff management
systems; and sand filters (closed or open).
(10) Where sediment transport in the stormwater runoff is anticipated
to reach the infiltration system, appropriate permanent measures
to prevent or collect sediment shall be installed prior to discharge
to the infiltration system.
(11) All infiltration facilities shall be set back at least 15 feet from all
structures with subgrade elements (e.g., basements, foundation
walls).
(12) All infiltration facilities that serve more than one lot and are
considered a common facility shall have a drainage easement. The
easement shall provide to the Township the right of access and
shall be recorded in the Department of Real Estate of Allegheny
County, Pennsylvania.
(13) If a detailed infiltration study is required, the following rules shall
be followed:
(a) Soil evaluations shall be performed to determine the feasibility
and extent to which infiltration systems can be used. The
evaluation shall be performed by a qualified, licensed
geologist, geotechnical/civil engineer or soil scientist and, at a
minimum, address soil types, soil permeability, depth to
§ 190-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-16
1:557
bedrock, limitations of soils, presence/absence of carbonate
geology susceptibility to subsidence and/or sinkhole formation
and subgrade stability. The testing and evaluation shall be
completed at the preliminary design stage.
(b) Infiltration requirements shall be based on the portions of the
site that are permeable prior to disturbance and the degree to
which development will reduce the permeability of the site.
Permeability of the site shall be determined based on the
detailed evaluations described herein. Use of stormwater
management facilities to retain stormwater for infiltration
shall be applied to all areas where the soils evaluation
indicates favorable conditions. Areas generally not favorable
for infiltration shall still be provided with an appropriate water
quality practice.
(c) Soil infiltration tests shall be performed to an equivalent depth
or elevation of the bottom of the proposed infiltration areas.
These tests shall follow the procedures of percolation test
holes as established by the Allegheny County Health
Department (ACHD) for on-lot septic systems. The testing shall
include a test pit and percolation test holes. The test hole shall
be excavated to a depth so that the presence or absence of
bedrock and/or seasonal high-water table can be determined. A
soil log describing the soils present in each test pit shall be
performed. All test holes used for evaluating the percolation
rate shall be presoaked in accordance with the procedures
established by the ACHD. The location and number of test pits
and percolation holes shall be determined based on the type(s)
of stormwater management facilities being designed.
Acceptability of infiltration rates shall be based on sound
engineering judgment and recommended design
considerations described in the design manuals listed in the
references or other source material acceptable to the
Municipal Engineer.
(14) The following design and construction standards shall be followed
when planning and constructing infiltration BMPs:
(a) The lowest elevation of the infiltration area shall be at least two
feet above the seasonal high-water table and bedrock.
(b) Where roof drains are designed to discharge to infiltration
facilities, they shall have appropriate measures to prevent
clogging by unwanted debris (for example, silt, leaves and
vegetation). Such measures shall include, but are not limited
to, leaf traps, gutter guards and cleanouts.
(c) All infiltration facilities shall have appropriate positive
overflow controls to prevent storage within one foot of the
finished surface or grade, unless a specific amount of surface
§ 190-16 SHALER CODE § 190-16
1:558
storage away from pedestrian and vehicular traffic is provided
and such areas infiltrate the stored volume within 48 hours
after the end of the twenty-four-hour design storm.
(d) All infiltration facilities shall be designed to infiltrate the
stored volume within 48 hours after the end of the twenty-fourhour
design storm.
(e) All surface inflows shall be treated to prevent the direct
discharge of sediment into the infiltration practice;
accumulated sediment reduces stormwater storage capacity
and ultimately clogs the infiltration mechanism. No sand, salt
or other particulate matter may be applied to a porous
(pervious) surface for winter ice conditions.
(f) During site construction, all infiltration practice components
shall be protected from compaction due to heavy equipment
operation or storage of fill or construction material. Infiltration
areas shall also be protected from sedimentation. Areas that
are accidentally compacted or graded shall be remediated to
restore soil composition and porosity. Adequate documentation
to this effect shall be submitted for review by the Municipal
Engineer. All areas designated for infiltration shall not receive
runoff until the contributory drainage area has achieved final
stabilization.
(g) The following procedures and materials shall be required
during the construction of all subsurface facilities:
[1] Excavation for the infiltration facility shall be performed
with equipment that will not compact the bottom of the
seepage bed/trench or like facility.
[2] The bottom of the bed and/or trench shall be scarified
prior to the placement of aggregate.
[3] Only clean aggregate with documented porosity, free of
fines, shall be allowed.
[4] The tops and sides of all seepage beds, trenches or like
facilities shall be covered with drainage fabric. Fabric shall
meet the specifications of PennDOT Publication 408,
Section 735, Construction Class 1.
[5] Perforated distribution pipes connected to centralized
catch basins and/or manholes with the provision for the
collection of debris shall be provided in all facilities. Where
perforated pipes are used to distribute stormwater to the
infiltration practice, stormwater shall be distributed
uniformly throughout the entire seepage bed/trench or like
facility.
§ 190-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-16
1:559
C. Open vegetated channels.
(1) Open vegetated channels are conveyance systems that are
engineered to also perform as water quality and infiltration
facilities. Such systems can be used for the conveyance, retention,
infiltration and filtration of stormwater runoff.
(2) Open vegetated channels primarily serve a water quality function
(WQv). They also have the potential to augment infiltration.
Examples of such systems include, but are not limited to, dry
swales, wet swales, grass channels and biofilters. Open vegetated
channels are primarily applicable for land uses such as roads,
highways, residential developments (dry swales only) and pervious
areas.
(3) Open vegetated channels shall be designed to meet the following
minimum standards:
(a) The channel shall be designed to safely convey the ten-yearfrequency
storm event with a freeboard of at least 12 inches.
"Freeboard" is the difference between the elevation of the
design flow in the channel and the top elevation of the channel.
(b) The peak velocity of the runoff from the ten-year storm shall be
nonerosive for the soil and ground cover provided in the
channel.
(c) The longitudinal slope shall be no greater than 4%.
(d) Channels shall be trapezoidal in cross section.
(e) Channels shall be designed with moderate side slopes of four
horizontal to one vertical. Flatter side slopes may be necessary
under certain circumstances.
(f) The maximum allowable ponding time in the channel shall be
less than 48 hours.
(g) Channels (for example, dry swales) may require an underdrain
in order to function and dewater.
(h) Channels shall be designed to temporarily store the WQv
within the system for a maximum period of 48 hours and a
minimum period of one hour.
(i) Landscape specifications shall address the grass species,
wetland plantings (if applicable), soil amendment and hydric
conditions present along the channel.
(j) Accumulated sediment within the channel bottom shall be
removed when 25% of the original WQv volume has been
exceeded. The channel shall be provided with a permanent
concrete cleanout marker that indicates the 25% loss level.
§ 190-16 SHALER CODE § 190-16
1:560
(k) Check dams along the channel length may be warranted.
(l) The bottom of dry swales shall be situated at least two feet
above the seasonal high-water table.
(4) Additional design information for open vegetated channels is
available in Design of Roadside Channels with Flexible Linings,
HEC 15, FHWA, September 2005.
D. Retention basins.
(1) Retention basins shall be designed to create a healthy ecological
community with sufficient circulation of water to prevent the
growth of unwanted vegetation and mosquitoes or other vectors. If
circulation cannot be provided via natural means, then artificial
aeration and circulation shall be provided. Care shall be taken to
landscape retention basins in accordance with § 190-17.
(2) The retention basin shall be of sufficient size to allow the
appropriate aquatic community needed to maintain healthy pond
ecology and avoid mosquitoes capable of carrying West Nile Virus
and other diseases. The Allegheny County Health Department,
Pennsylvania Fish and Boat Commission, the Natural Resources
Conservation Service, the Pennsylvania Extension Service, or other
qualified professional consultant shall be consulted during the
design of these facilities in order to ensure the health of aquatic
communities and minimize the risk of creating mosquito breeding
areas.
(3) An outlet structure shall be designed to allow complete drainage of
the pond for maintenance.
(4) The design of a retention basin shall include the determination of
the proposed site's ability to support a viable permanent pool. The
design shall take into account such factors as the available and
required rate and quality of dry weather inflow, the stormwater
inflow, seasonal and longer-term variations in groundwater table,
and impacts of potential pollutant loadings.
(5) Sediment storage volume equal to at least 20% of the volume of the
permanent pool shall be provided.
(6) A sediment forebay with a hardened bottom shall be provided at
each inlet into the retention basin. The forebay storage capacity
shall at minimum be 10% of the permanent pool storage. The
forebay shall be designed to allow for access by maintenance
equipment for periodic cleaning. A permanent concrete cleanout
marker shall be installed in the forebay to indicate the level where
25% capacity for the forebay storage has been used.
(7) Emergency spillways shall be sized and located to permit the safe
passage of stormwater flows from an unattenuated one-hundred-
§ 190-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-16
1:561
year post-development storm with one foot of freeboard. The
maximum velocities in vegetated spillways excavated in otherwise
undisturbed soil shall be analyzed based upon the velocity of peak
flow in the emergency spillway during an assumed clogged primary
outlet condition. Where maximum velocities exceed design
standards contained in the Engineering Field Manual for
Conservation Practices (USDA SCS, July 1984), suitable lining shall
be provided. All emergency spillways placed on fill materials shall
be lined. Lining for emergency spillways shall incorporate native
colors and materials where possible, including monoslab
revetments, grass pavers, riprap and native stone.
(8) Basin and pond embankments shall be designed by a professional
engineer registered in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. The
design shall include an investigation of the subsurface conditions at
the proposed embankment location to evaluate settlement
potential, groundwater impacts, and the need for seepage controls.
The submittal of a geotechnical report from a geotechnical
engineer for any embankment over 10 feet in effective height or
posing a significant hazard to downstream property or life is
required. The selection of fill materials shall be subject to approval
of the design engineer. Fill shall be free of frozen soil, rocks over six
inches, sod, brush, stumps, tree roots, wood or other perishable
materials. Embankment fills less than 10 feet in fill height shall be
compacted using compaction methods that would reasonably
guarantee that the fill density is at least 90% of the maximum
density as determined by standard proctor (ASTM-698). All
embankment fills more than 10 feet in fill height shall be
compacted to at least 90% of the maximum density as determined
by standard proctor (ASTM-698) and shall have their density
verified by field density testing. A PADEP dam permit is required
for embankments having a maximum depth of water, measured
from the upstream toe of the dam to the top of the dam at maximum
storage elevation, of greater than 15 feet; and/or for ponds having a
contributory drainage area of greater than 100 acres; and/or for
impoundments of greater than 50 acre-feet.
(9) The embankment's interior slope shall not be steeper than 3:1
(three horizontal to one vertical). The exterior slope of the
embankment may not exceed 2:1 (two horizontal to one vertical).
(10) The minimum embankment width shall be four feet for
embankments less than six feet in height, six feet if the
embankment is between 6.1 feet and 9.9 feet in height and eight
feet if the embankment is between 10 feet and 15 feet in height.
(11) Existing ponds or permanent pool basins may be used for
stormwater management, provided that it can be demonstrated
that the ponds are structurally sound and meet the design
requirements herein.
§ 190-16 SHALER CODE § 190-16
1:562
(12) Inlet structures and outlet structures shall be separated to the
greatest extent possible in order to maximize the flow path through
the retention basin.
(13) Retention basins shall be designed to provide a length-to-width
ratio of at least 3L:1W as measured in plan view (for example, a
ratio of 4L:1W is too narrow).
(14) The retention basin depth shall average three feet to six feet.
(15) Fencing of the facility is not required if the interior slope of the
pond is 4H:1V or flatter and the design also includes a five-footwide
bench around the pond perimeter at an elevation one foot
below the permanent water surface elevation.
(16) Any side slopes below the permanent water surface level shall not
exceed 3H:1V. Interior side slopes above the permanent water
surface level shall not exceed 3H:1V.
(17) Stabilization. Proper stabilization structures, including stilling
basins, energy dissipators and channel lining, shall be constructed
at the outlets of all retention basins and emergency spillways. The
stabilization structures shall control water to avoid erosion, reduce
velocities of released water, and direct water so that it does not
interfere with downstream activities.
(18) Energy dissipators and/or level spreaders shall be installed to
prevent erosion and/or initiate sheet flow at points where pipes or
drainageways discharge to or from basins. Level spreaders shall be
used only where the maximum slope between the discharge point
and the waterway does not exceed 5%. Energy dissipators shall
comply with criteria in Hydraulic Design of Energy Dissipators for
Culverts and Channels, HEC 14, FHWA, July 2006. Such facilities
shall be both functional and harmonious with the surrounding
environment, for example, native rock shall be used in constructing
dissipators where practical.
(19) Discharge points. The minimum distance between a proposed basin
discharge point (including the energy dissipator, etc.) and a
downstream property boundary shall in no case be less than 15
feet. Where there is discharge onto or through adjacent properties
prior to release to a stream, designers shall demonstrate how
downstream properties are to be protected. The Municipal
Engineer may require that the setback distance be increased based
upon factors such as topography, soil conditions, the size of
structures, the location of structures, and discharge rates. A
drainage easement may also be required.
(20) Outlet structures. Outlet structures shall meet the following
specifications:
§ 190-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-16
1:563
(a) To minimize clogging and to facilitate cleaning and inspecting,
outlet pipes shall have an internal diameter of at least 15
inches and a minimum grade of 1%.
(b) Bentonite plugs shall be provided on all outlet pipes within a
constructed berm.
(c) All principal outlet structures shall be built using reinforced
concrete with watertight construction joints.
(d) The use of architecturally treated concrete, stucco, painted
surface or stone facade treatment shall be considered for
enhancing the outlet structure. Such facilities shall be both
functional and harmonious in design with the surrounding
environment.
(e) Outlet pipes shall be constructed of reinforced concrete with
rubber gaskets, in conformance with AASHTO M170, M198
and M207, or smooth interior HDPE pipe in conformance with
AASHTO M252 or M294.
(f) Basin outlet structures shall have childproof, nonclogging
trash racks over all design openings exceeding 12 inches in
diameter, except those openings designed to carry perennial
stream flows. Periodic cleaning of debris from trash racks shall
be included in the operation and maintenance plan.
(g) Antivortex devices, consisting of a thin vertical plate normal to
the basin berm, shall be provided at the top of all circular
risers or standpipes.
E. Detention basins.
(1) The landscape standards of § 190-17 shall apply.
(2) The maximum inside side slopes shall not exceed three horizontal
to one vertical (3H:1V). The minimum required slope for the basin
bottom is 2%. A level bottom is acceptable, provided that the
designer demonstrates to the Township's satisfaction that the basin
bottom shall be landscaped with appropriate wetland vegetation
pursuant to § 190-17. In addition, detention basins of sufficient size
and slope may serve other functions as well, including recreational
uses which do not hinder or conflict with the function of the
detention basin.
(3) Inlet structures. The inlet pipe invert into a basin shall be six inches
above the basin floor or lining so that the pipe can adequately drain
after rainstorms. Inlets shall discharge into areas of the basin that
slope toward the outlet structure.
(4) Inlet structures and outlet structures shall be separated to the
greatest extent possible in order to maximize the flow path through
the retention basin.
§ 190-16 SHALER CODE § 190-16
1:564
(5) Low-flow channels. Low-flow channels constructed of concrete or
asphalt are not permitted. Where low-flow channels are necessary,
they shall be composed of a natural or bioengineered material.
Low-flow channels shall be designed to promote water quality and
slow the rate of flow through the basin. Low-flow channels may also
be designed to infiltrate where practical.
(6) Outlet structures. Outlet structures shall meet the following
specifications:
(a) To minimize clogging and to facilitate cleaning and inspection,
outlet pipes shall have an internal diameter of at least 15
inches and a minimum grade of 1%.
(b) Bentonite plugs shall be provided on all outlet pipes within a
constructed berm.
(c) All principal outlet structures shall be built using reinforced
concrete with watertight construction joints.
(d) The use of architecturally treated concrete, stucco, painted
surface or stone facade treatment shall be considered for
enhancing the outlet structure. Such facilities shall be both
functional and harmonious in design with the surrounding
environment.
(e) Outlet pipes shall be constructed of reinforced concrete with
rubber gaskets, in conformance with AASHTO M170, M198
and M207, or smooth-interior HDPE pipe in conformance with
AASHTO M252 or M294.
(f) Energy-dissipation facilities that convert concentrated flow to
uniform shallow sheet flow shall be used where appropriate.
(g) Basin outlet structures shall have childproof, nonclogging
trash racks over all design openings exceeding 12 inches in
diameter, except those openings designed to carry perennial
stream flows.
(h) Antivortex devices, consisting of a thin vertical plate normal to
the basin berm, shall be provided at the top of all circular
risers or standpipes.
(7) Emergency spillways shall be sized and located to permit the safe
passage of stormwater flows from an unattenuated one-hundredyear
post-development storm with one foot of freeboard. The
maximum velocities in vegetated spillways excavated in otherwise
undisturbed soil shall be analyzed based upon the velocity of peak
flow in the emergency spillway during an assumed clogged primary
outlet condition. Where maximum velocities exceed design
standards contained in the Engineering Field Manual for
Conservation Practices (USDA SCS, July 1984), suitable lining shall
§ 190-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-16
1:565
be provided. In general, emergency spillways shall not be located
in fill areas; all such facilities placed on fill materials shall be lined.
Lining for emergency spillways shall incorporate native colors and
materials where possible, including monoslab revetments, grass
pavers, riprap and native stone.
(8) Basin and pond embankments shall be designed by a professional
engineer registered in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. The
design shall include an investigation of the subsurface conditions at
the proposed embankment location to evaluate settlement
potential, groundwater impacts and the need for seepage controls.
The submittal of a geotechnical report from a geotechnical
engineer for any embankment over 10 feet in effective height or
posing a significant hazard to downstream property or life is
required. The selection of fill materials shall be subject to approval
of the design engineer. Fill shall be free of frozen soil, rocks over six
inches, sod, brush, stumps, tree roots, wood or other perishable
materials. Embankment fills less than 10 feet in fill height shall be
compacted using compaction methods that would reasonably
guarantee that the fill density is at least 90% of the maximum
density as determined by standard proctor (ASTM-698). All
embankment fills more than 10 feet in fill height shall be
compacted to at least 90% of the maximum density as determined
by standard proctor (ASTM-698) and shall have their density
verified by field density testing. A PADEP dam permit is required
for embankments having a maximum depth of water, measured
from the upstream toe of the dam to the top of the dam at maximum
storage elevation, of greater than 15 feet; and/or for ponds having
contributory drainage area of greater than 100 acres; and/or for
impoundments of greater than 50 acre-feet.
(9) The embankment's interior slope shall not be steeper than 3:1
(three horizontal to one vertical). The exterior slope of the
embankment shall not exceed 2:1 (two horizontal to one vertical).
(10) The minimum embankment width shall be four feet for
embankments less than six feet in height, six feet if the
embankment is between 6.1 feet and 9.9 feet in height, and eight
feet if the embankment is between 10 feet and 15 feet in height.
(11) Fencing of the facility is not required if the interior slope of the
pond is 4:1 or flatter.
(12) Freeboard. Freeboard is the difference between the elevation of
the design flow in the emergency spillway (usually the onehundred-
year peak elevation) and the top elevation of the settled
basin embankment (that is, top of berm). The minimum freeboard
shall be one foot.
(13) Energy dissipators and/or level spreaders shall be installed to
prevent erosion and/or initiate sheet flow at points where pipes or
§ 190-16 SHALER CODE § 190-16
1:566
drainageways discharge to or from basins. Level spreaders shall be
used only where the maximum slope between the discharge point
and the waterway does not exceed 5%. Energy dissipators shall
comply with criteria in Hydraulic Design of Energy Dissipators for
Culverts and Channels, HEC 14, FHWA, July 2006. Such facilities
shall be both functional and attractive; for example, native rock
shall be used in constructing dissipators where practical.
(14) Stabilization. Proper stabilization structures, including stilling
basins, energy dissipators and channel lining, shall be constructed
at the outlets of all basins and emergency spillways. The
stabilization structures shall control water to avoid erosion, reduce
velocities of released water, and direct water so that it does not
interfere with downstream activities.
(15) Discharge points. The minimum distance between a proposed basin
discharge point (including the energy dissipator, etc.) and a
downstream property boundary shall in no case be less than 15
feet. Where there is discharge onto or through adjacent properties
prior to release to a stream, designers shall demonstrate how
downstream properties are to be protected. The Municipal
Engineer may require that the setback distance be increased based
upon factors such as topography, soil conditions, the size of
structures, the location of structures and discharge rates. A
drainage easement may also be required.
(16) A sediment forebay with a hardened bottom shall be provided at
each inlet into the detention basin. The forebay storage capacity
shall at minimum be 10% of the permanent pool storage. The
forebay shall be designed to allow for access by maintenance
equipment for periodic cleaning.
F. Conveyance systems (open channels, drainageways and storm sewers).
(1) Applicants are encouraged to design conveyance systems that
encourage infiltration and improve water quality wherever
practicable.
(2) Wherever conveyance channels are necessary, drainage shall be
maintained by an open channel with landscaped banks designed to
carry the ten-year, twenty-four-hour stormwater runoff from
upstream contributory areas. The Municipal Engineer may
increase the design storm as conditions require. All open channels
shall be designed with one foot of freeboard above the design water
surface elevation of the design runoff condition.
(3) Flood relief channels shall be provided and designed to convey the
runoff from the one-hundred-year, twenty-four-hour storm such
that a positive discharge of this runoff to an adequate receiving
stream or conveyance system occurs without allowing this runoff to
encroach upon other properties.
§ 190-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-16
1:567
(4) Manholes and/or inlets shall not be spaced more than 300 feet
apart for pipe sizes up to 24 inches in diameter and not more than
450 feet apart for larger pipe sizes.
(5) Where drainage swales are used in lieu of or in addition to storm
sewers, they shall be designed to carry the required runoff without
erosion and in a manner not detrimental to the properties they
cross. Drainage swales shall provide a minimum grade of 2% but
shall not exceed a grade of 9%. Drainage swales used strictly for
conveyance are not the same as open vegetated channels. Design
standards for open vegetated channels are provided under of this
chapter.
(6) Street curbing for the purpose of stormwater conveyance is
discouraged. On streets that must contain curbing, storm sewers
shall be placed in front of the curbing. To the greatest extent
possible, storm sewers shall not be placed directly under curbing.
At curbed street intersections, storm inlets shall be placed in the
tangent section of the road.
(7) Use of grassed swales or open vegetated swales, in lieu of curbing,
to convey, infiltrate and/or treat stormwater runoff from roadways
is encouraged. Inlets shall be placed at the center of the shoulder
swale draining the street and shall be located no closer than four
feet from the edge of the cartway.
(8) When requested by the Township, the applicant shall obtain or
grant a minimum twenty-foot-wide drainage easement over all
storm sewers, drainage swales, channels, etc., that are a
component of the stormwater management system when located
within undedicated land. All permanent detention basins and/or
other stormwater management facilities providing stormwater
control for other than a single residential lot shall be located within
a defined drainage easement that allows proper legal access and
maintenance vehicle access.
(9) No property owner or applicant shall obstruct or alter the flow,
location or carrying capacity of a stream, channel or drainage
swale to the detriment of any other property owner, whether
upstream or downstream. All subdivision and/or land development
plans containing streams, channels, drainage swales, storm sewers
or other conveyance systems that cross property boundaries,
existing or proposed, or whose discharge crosses such boundaries
shall contain a note stating the above.
(10)Water quality inlets. Storm drainage systems that collect runoff
from parking areas and/or loading areas exceeding 10,000 square
feet of impervious coverage and discharge to stormwater
management systems, including surface or subsurface infiltration
systems, shall have a minimum of one water quality inlet per each
acre of drainage area. The purpose of water quality inlets is to
§ 190-16 SHALER CODE § 190-16
1:568
§ 190-17. Landscaping of stormwater management facilities.
Stormwater management facilities shall be landscaped in accordance with
the following standards:
remove oil, grease and heavy particulates or total suspended solids,
hydrocarbons and other floating substances from stormwater
runoff. Methods other than water quality inlets may be permitted
if the applicant demonstrates to the Township's satisfaction that
any such alternative will be as effective and as easily maintained.
Periodic cleaning of these systems shall be addressed in the
operation and maintenance plan submitted to the Township.
A. Landscaping shall be required in and around all constructed
stormwater management facilities with a minimum surface area of
1,000 square feet for the purposes of:
(1) Assisting in the management of stormwater;
(2) Stabilizing the soil within such facilities to minimize and control
erosion;
(3) Enhancing the visual appearance of such facilities; and
(4) Mitigating maintenance problems commonly associated with the
creation of such facilities.
B. A planting plan and planting schedule shall be submitted in accordance
with the following:
(1) Wet meadows, including floors of stormwater management
facilities.
(a) Wet meadows and floors of stormwater management facilities
shall be planted with noninvasive plants native to western
Pennsylvania, such as wildflowers and noninvasive grasses, the
intent being to create a mixed meadow of such plantings,
where appropriate. Selection of plantings shall be based on
whether the area in question is usually well drained or
permanently wet and whether the area will be used for
recreation purposes. No woody plants shall be planted within
the saturated zone (phreatic line) of a stormwater
management practice or on a berm constructed for impounded
water.
(b) Seeding by drills, corrugated rollers, cyclone or drop seeders
or hand seeding of such areas is preferred; however,
hydroseeding followed by hydromulching can be used on wet
ground and steep slopes.
(c) Fertilizers, as a nutrient supplement, shall not be used unless it
is documented that soil conditions warrant such use and
nutrient applied does not exceed plant uptake. Soil for planting
§ 190-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-17
1:569
of wildflowers shall contain not less than 3% or more than 10%
organic matter, as determined by an agricultural chemist, with
certification of the test before planting.
(d) Seeding shall take place either between April 1 and May 15 or
between September 1 and October 15. Planting areas shall be
soaked to maintain a consistent level of moisture for at least
four to six weeks after planting. For seeding recommendations,
reference the DEP's E&S Pollution Control Program Manual.
(e) Once established, a single annual mowing when plants are
dormant should be sufficient to maintain a wet meadow and/or
floor of a stormwater management practice.
(2) Wet edges that remain wet all or most of the year shall be planted
with wildflowers, grasses and shrubs. Plants to be located on rims
or banks which remain dry most of the year shall be planted with
species tolerant of dry soil conditions.
(3) Wooded areas.
(a) Where stormwater management facilities adjoin wooded areas,
trees and shrubs shall be selected and planted outside the
practice so as to blend with existing surroundings.
(b) Plantings in such areas shall be of sufficient density to
eliminate the need for mowing.
(c) It is recommended that clusters of trees and shrubs be planted
around stormwater management facilities but well away from
outfalls and any constructed berms, where applicable, to
provide for wildlife habitat, wind control and buffering and
screening.
(d) Vegetation shall be planted during appropriate times of the
year, predominantly between late March and mid-May or from
early October until evidence of ground freezing, depending
upon the species selected. Most deciduous trees and shrubs
can be planted in either spring or fall. Evergreens are best
planted in late summer or early fall.
(4) Slopes.
(a) Where slopes are gentle, a mixture of meadow grasses and
wildflowers (for wet meadows) shall be planted.
(b) On steep slopes, as defined by the Township's Code, dense
spreading shrubs (shrubs tolerant of dry soils) shall be planted.
Heavy mat mulch shall be used during the period of
establishment.
(c) No woody plant materials or trees shall be located on a
constructed or natural berm acting as the impoundment
§ 190-17 SHALER CODE § 190-17
1:570
§ 190-18. Stream buffer requirements.
Stream buffers shall be provided for new development sites as per the
following requirements:
structure of a stormwater management practice. Trees shall
be located downstream of an impoundment berm a sufficient
distance from the toe of the constructed slope to assure that
the toe of the slope is outside the dripline of the species
planted at maturity but in no case less than 15 feet.
(5) In cases where stormwater management facilities are to be located
in proximity to wetlands or waterways, the applicant's planting
plan and schedule shall consider the sensitive conditions existing
therein and be modified accordingly to reflect existing flora.
(6) Stormwater management facilities shall be screened in a manner
which complements the existing landscape and provides sufficient
access for maintenance.
A. In order to protect and improve water quality, a riparian buffer
easement shall be created and recorded as part of any subdivision or
land development that encompasses a riparian buffer. The intent of this
chapter in establishing a riparian buffer is to protect and improve
stream water quality. The riparian buffer is intended to slow overland
flow to the stream through the presence of native grasses, trees and
shrubs, allowing infiltration/groundwater recharge; causing deposition
of sediment, nutrients, pesticides, and other pollutants in the buffer
rather than in the stream; and reducing erosion by providing stream
bank stabilization. The trees provide shade for streams, keeping waters
cooler and reducing evaporation.
B. Except as required by 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102, the riparian buffer
easement shall be required for all streams (as defined in Article II) with
a contributing watershed area of greater than 10 acres. The riparian
buffer easement shall be measured to be a minimum of 35 feet from the
top of the stream bank (on each side).
C. Minimum management requirements for riparian buffers.
(1) No use or construction within the riparian buffer shall be permitted
that is inconsistent with the intent of the riparian buffer as
described in § 190-18A.
(2) Existing native vegetation shall be protected and maintained within
the riparian buffer easement.
(3) Whenever practicable, invasive vegetation shall be actively
removed and the riparian buffer easement shall be planted with
native trees, shrubs and other vegetation to create a diverse native
plant community appropriate to the intended ecological context of
the site.
§ 190-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-18
1:571
D. The riparian buffer easement shall be enforceable by the Township and
shall be recorded in the appropriate County Recorder of Deeds office,
so that it shall run with the land and shall limit the use of the property
located therein. The easement shall allow for the continued private
ownership and shall count toward the minimum lot area required by
zoning, unless otherwise specified in the Township Zoning
Ordinance.119
E. Any permitted use within the riparian buffer easement shall be
conducted in a manner that will maintain the extent of the existing onehundred-
year floodplain, improve or maintain the stream stability, and
preserve and protect the ecological function of the floodplain.
F. Stormwater drainage pipes shall be permitted within the riparian buffer
easement, but they shall cross the easement in the shortest practical
distance. Other structural stormwater management facilities are not
permitted within the riparian buffer easement.
G. The following conditions shall apply when public and/or private
recreation trails are permitted by the Township within riparian buffers:
(1) It is preferred that trails be designed to be permeable and for
nonmotorized use only; however, impermeable trails are permitted,
provided that they have adequate drainage.
(2) Trails shall be designed to have the least impact on native plant
species and other sensitive environmental features.
H. Septic drainfields and sewage disposal systems shall not be permitted
within the riparian buffer easement and shall comply with setback
requirements established under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 73.
I. Underground utilities shall be permitted within the riparian buffer
easement; however, work shall be performed to minimize disturbance
area and removal of trees. Restoration within the riparian buffer
easement shall be with native species of trees, grasses, and other
plantings. One tree shall be planted for each tree removed, and the
restoration shall be designed by a registered professional with the
requisite experience. Aboveground utilities shall only be permitted to
cross the easement perpendicular to the easement or in the shortest
practical distance. Existing utilities may remain and be maintained as
required.
119. Editor's Note: See Ch. 225, Zoning.
§ 190-18 SHALER CODE § 190-18
1:572
ARTICLE V
Operation and Maintenance Responsibilities
§ 190-19. General responsibilities.
A. The owner of stormwater management facilities shall be responsible for
the proper operation and maintenance of those facilities during and
after construction. An operation and maintenance plan consistent with
the requirements of § 190-21 shall be prepared for review and approval
by the Municipal Engineer and shall be executed and signed by the
Municipal Engineer and applicant.
B. The owner of the stormwater management facilities for a tract shall be
responsible for the proper installation and function of those facilities in
accordance with the approved stormwater management plan. All
temporary soil erosion and sedimentation control measures shall be
removed or converted to their permanent configuration in accordance
with an approved erosion control plan. This requirement in no way
precludes the authority of the Allegheny County Conservation District
to determine when sufficient stabilization has occurred on a site in
order to convert to the permanent stormwater management facilities.
C. Dedication and acceptance of stormwater management facilities.
(1) Upon completion of construction of stormwater management
facilities shown on an approved subdivision or land development
plan and within 90 days after approval of such construction, the
applicant shall submit a written offer of such stormwater
management facilities for dedication to the Township. Said offer
shall include a deed of dedication covering said facilities together
with satisfactory proof establishing an applicant's clear title to said
property. Such documents are to be filed with the Municipal
Secretary for review by the Municipal Solicitor. Deeds of dedication
for stormwater management facilities may be accepted by
resolution of the Township at a regular meeting thereof.
(2) The Township may require that stormwater management facilities
remain undedicated, with operation and maintenance the
responsibility of individual lot owners or a homeowners' association
or similar entity, or an organization capable of carrying out
maintenance responsibilities.
(3) Regardless of ownership, the applicant shall submit a written offer
deeding an access and/or drainage easement to the Township
pursuant to § 190-20. Such easement shall cover the stormwater
management facilities and any drainage to and from such facilities
and shall clearly permit municipal entry for inspection and/or
maintenance purposes.
(4) Regardless of ownership, the applicant shall submit an actual asbuilt
plan to the Township for the stormwater management
§ 190-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-19
1:573
§ 190-20. Ownership and maintenance.
All stormwater management facilities identified within an approved
stormwater management plan shall be owned and maintained by one or a
combination of the following entities:
facilities required pursuant to the approved stormwater
management plan. The as-built plan shall show all final design
specifications for all permanent stormwater management facilities,
including, but not limited to, pipe material and diameter, inlet,
outlet and overflow elevations, two-foot contours for all detention/
retention basins and drainage swales, and a comparison of asbuilt
capacities compared to the capacities of the approved design
facilities, and shall be prepared and certified by a licensed
professional engineer. The as-built plan shall be based on an actual
field survey performed by a licensed professional land surveyor.
The surveyor shall certify as to the accuracy of the plan. The asbuilt
plan shall be submitted to the Township for review by the
Municipal Engineer. Any performance and/or financial securities
established for the project shall include requirements for submittal
of as-built plans.
(5) The as-built plan(s) shall be submitted to the Township in a digital
format or formats approved by the Township.
A. Private ownership.
(1) Where individual on-lot stormwater management facilities are
proposed, the subdivision and/or land development plan shall
contain a note in a form satisfactory to the Municipal Solicitor
designating the entity responsible for operation and maintenance
of the on-lot facilities consistent with an approved operation and
maintenance plan and, in the event that the responsible person or
entity fails to do so, granting to the Township the right but not the
duty to enter upon the premises to repair or restore said facilities,
to charge and assess the costs thereof to the owner, including a
reasonable allowance for overhead, and to enforce said charges
and assessments by lien upon the property. In addition, the deed for
each lot shall contain a perpetual covenant binding the grantee and
all successors in interest designating the responsibility for
operation and maintenance of the on-lot facilities in the following
form:
Under and subject, nevertheless, to the following conditions and
restrictions: Prior to any earth disturbance for which stormwater
management facilities are required by the Township, grantee shall
construct the permanent stormwater management facilities as
shown on the stormwater management plan (the "plan") prepared
by <NAME>, P.E., dated <DATE> and last revised <DATE> and
approved by the Township; thereafter, the grantee, his heirs,
executors, administrators, successors and assigns ("owner"), at his
§ 190-19 SHALER CODE § 190-20
1:574
sole cost and expense, shall operate, maintain and repair said
stormwater management facilities on the lot in accordance with
said plan, so that the facilities shall at all times continue to operate
and function in the same manner and capacity as they were
designed. In the event of the failure of the owner to comply with
these conditions and restrictions, the Township may have said
stormwater management facilities repaired or restored as
required, and the costs thereof plus a reasonable allowance for
overhead shall be assessed to the owner; said assessment shall
be a charge and a continuing lien upon the property herein. The
Township, before it may exercise this right, shall notify the owner
by certified mail of its intention to take the aforesaid action. The
notice shall set forth in what manner the owner has neglected
the operation and maintenance of or repair to the stormwater
management facilities, and if the owner fails, within a period of 90
calendar days, to correct or repair the items listed in the notice
from the Township, then and only then, may the Township exercise
this right.
(2) In addition to the above, developers of parcels with more than one
dwelling unit shall record in the office of Recorder of Deeds for
Allegheny County a declaration of covenants and restrictions in a
form satisfactory to the Municipal Solicitor, describing the
responsibility for operation and maintenance of the on-lot facilities
consistent with an approved operation and maintenance plan prior
to the sale of any individual lots. The terms of this covenant and
restriction shall run with the land and be binding upon the initial
grantees of each lot within the subdivision and his, her or their
heirs, administrators, successors or assigns.
B. Homeowners' or condominium association ownership. Where a
homeowners' association is created to own and manage common
facilities, the subdivision and/or land development plan shall contain a
note in a form satisfactory to the Municipal Solicitor, designating the
entity responsible for construction and/or maintenance of the
stormwater management facilities consistent with an approved
operation and maintenance plan and, in the event that the responsible
entity fails to do so, granting to the Township the right but not the duty
to enter upon the premises to repair or restore said facilities; to charge
and assess the costs thereof, plus a reasonable allowance for overhead,
to each owner of property within the development; and to enforce said
charges and assessments by lien upon each property within the
development. In addition, the developer shall record in the office of the
Recorder of Deeds for Allegheny County a declaration of covenants in a
form satisfactory to the Municipal Solicitor, setting forth the rights and
responsibilities of the homeowners' association for operation and
maintenance of the stormwater management facilities, prior to the sale
of individual lots. The terms of this covenant and restriction shall run
with the land and be binding upon the initial grantees of each lot within
§ 190-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-20
1:575
§ 190-21. Operation and maintenance plan.
An operation and maintenance plan shall be prepared by an engineer
licensed to practice in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, that identifies
the ownership, operation and maintenance responsibilities and as-built
conditions for all stormwater management facilities. At a minimum, the
operation and maintenance plan shall include the following:
the subdivision, his, her or their heirs, administrators, successors and
assigns.
C. Municipal ownership. Where the Township has accepted an offer of
dedication of the permanent stormwater management facilities, the
Township shall be responsible for operation and maintenance.
Municipal ownership notwithstanding, the applicant is required to
prepare a stormwater management plan and an operation and
maintenance plan, as defined herein. Upon approval of the stormwater
management facilities by the Township, the applicant shall provide a
lump sum long-term maintenance payment to the Township, to be
reserved and used at all times by the Township only for costs of
operation and maintenance of the dedicated facilities, as follows:
(1) Long-term maintenance payment. The long-term maintenance
payment shall be in an amount equal to the present value of
operation and maintenance costs for the facilities for a ten-year
period. The long-term maintenance payment shall be based on a
ten-year cost estimate prepared by the applicant's engineer and
reviewed and approved by the Municipal Engineer. The amount of
the payment shall include all costs of operation and maintenance,
which shall include, but not be limited to, typical operation and
maintenance costs as well as costs such as landscaping and
planting, tax payments required and construction of any kind
associated with the use, benefit and enjoyment of the facilities by
the owners. In particular, a description of routine facility operation
and day-to-day management requirements and a description of
projected maintenance actions and schedules necessary to ensure
proper operation of stormwater management facilities shall be
submitted for review and approval to the Municipal Engineer.
(2) Documentation. The terms of the long-term maintenance payment
shall be documented as part of the stormwater management plan
and the operation and maintenance plan.
A. Any obligations concerning perpetuation and/or maintenance of natural
drainage or infiltration facilities and other facilities identified within the
stormwater management plan. Ownership of and responsibility for
operation and maintenance of stormwater management facilities,
including names and contact information, shall be required.
B. A description of the permanent stormwater management facilities on
the site, explaining how each facility is intended to function and operate
§ 190-20 SHALER CODE § 190-21
1:576
§ 190-22. Operation and maintenance agreement.
over time. All drainage and access easements shall be depicted, and any
site restrictions to be recorded against the property shall be identified
on the recorded plan. All such easements and restrictions shall be
perfected to run with the land and be binding upon the landowner
and any successors in interest and shall be recorded in the Allegheny
County Department of Real Estate.
C. A description of the actions, budget and schedule for operating and
maintaining the stormwater management facilities. This description
shall be written in a clear manner, consistent with the knowledge and
understanding of the intended user.
D. A general description of operation and maintenance activities and
responsibilities for facilities held in common or on lot, including, but not
limited to, lawn care, vegetation maintenance, cleanout of accumulated
debris and sediment (including from grates, trash racks, inlets, etc.),
liability insurance, maintenance and repair of stormwater management
facilities, landscaping and planting, payment of taxes and construction
of any kind associated with the use, benefit and enjoyment of the
facilities by the owners. In particular, a description of routine facility
operation and day-to-day management requirements (as needed) and a
description of routine maintenance actions and schedules necessary to
ensure proper operation of stormwater management facilities shall be
submitted.
E. Assurances that no action will be taken by any lot owner to disrupt or in
any way impair the effectiveness of any stormwater management
system, setting forth in deed restrictions the ability of the Township to
take corrective measures if it is determined at any time that stipulated
permanent stormwater management facilities have been eliminated,
altered, or improperly maintained, including the ability of the Township
to cause the work to be done and lien all costs plus a reasonable
overhead allowance against the property shall the required corrective
measures not be taken by the lot owner, following written notification,
within a period of time set by Municipal Engineer.
F. Parties responsible for the long-term operation and maintenance of
stormwater management facilities shall make records of the installation
and of all maintenance and repairs and shall retain the records for at
least 10 years. These records shall be submitted to the Township as
established by the operation and maintenance plan or if otherwise
required by the Township.
A. The owner of any land upon which permanent stormwater management
facilities and/or BMPs will be placed, constructed or implemented, as
described in an approved stormwater management plan and the
operations and maintenance plan, shall record the following documents
in the office of the Recorder of Deeds for Allegheny County, within 15
§ 190-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-22
1:577
§ 190-23. Special stormwater facility maintenance fund.
days of approval of the operations and maintenance plan by the
Township:
(1) The operation and maintenance plan, or a summary thereof;
(2) The operation and maintenance agreement; and
(3) All access and/or drainage easements.
B. The operation and maintenance agreement shall be substantially the
same as the sample agreement in Appendix C of this chapter.120
C. Other items or conditions may be included in the operation and
maintenance agreement where determined necessary to guarantee the
satisfactory operation and maintenance of all permanent stormwater
facilities and BMPs. The agreement shall be subject to the review and
approval of the Township.
D. The Township may suspend or revoke any approvals granted for the
project site upon discovery of the failure of the owner to comply with
Article V of this chapter.
A. Persons installing stormwater storage facilities will be required to pay a
specified amount to the municipal stormwater facility maintenance
fund, if one exists, to help defray costs of periodic inspections and
annual maintenance expenses. The amount of the deposit shall be
determined as follows:
(1) If the storage facilities are to be privately owned and maintained,
the deposit shall cover the cost of periodic inspections performed
by the Township for a period of 10 years, as estimated by the
Municipal Engineer. After that period of time, inspections will be
performed at the expense of the Township.
(2) If the storage facilities are to be owned and maintained by the
Township, the deposit shall cover the estimated annual costs for
maintenance and inspections for 10 years. The Municipal Engineer
will establish the estimated annual maintenance costs utilizing
information submitted by the applicant.
(3) The amount of the deposit to maintenance fund, covering annual
inspection and maintenance costs, shall be converted to present
worth of the annual series values. The Municipal Engineer or
Manager shall determine the present worth equivalents, which
shall be subject to the final approval of the Township Board of
Commissioners.
(4) If a storage facility is proposed which also serves as a recreation
facility, such as a lake or ball field, the Township may reduce or
120. Editor's Note: Appendix C is on file in the Township offices.
§ 190-22 SHALER CODE § 190-23
1:578
waive the amount of the maintenance fund deposit based on the
value of the land for public recreational purposes.
B. If any storage facility (whether publicly or privately owned) is
subsequently eliminated due to the installation of storm sewers or
another storage facility (e.g., a distributed storage facility), the unused
portion of the maintenance fund may be applied to the cost of
abandoning the facility and connecting to the storm sewer system or
other facility. Any amount of the deposit remaining after the costs of
abandonment are paid will be returned to the depositor.
§ 190-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-23
1:579

ARTICLE VI
Plan Submission, Review and Review Fees
§ 190-24. Plan submission.
§ 190-25. Review.
A. The Township shall require receipt of a complete plan, as specified in
this chapter.
B. Five copies of the stormwater management plan shall be submitted and
distributed as follows:
(1) One copy to the Township accompanied by the requisite municipal
review fee as established by the Township.
(2) Two copies to the County Conservation District.
(3) One copy to the Municipal Engineer.
(4) One copy to the County Planning Commission/Department.
A. The Municipal Engineer shall review the stormwater management plan
for consistency with this chapter. Any stormwater management plan
found incomplete shall not be accepted for review and shall be returned
to the applicant.
B. The Municipal Engineer shall review the stormwater management plan
for any subdivision or land development against the municipal
subdivision and land development chapter provisions not superseded by
this chapter.121
C. When required by regulation, the County Conservation District shall
review and approve the erosion and sedimentation control plan for
consistency with PADEP's Chapter 102 regulations.
D. For activities regulated by this chapter, the Municipal Engineer shall
notify the applicant and the Township whether the stormwater
management plan is consistent with this chapter.
(1) Should the stormwater management plan be determined to be
consistent with this chapter, the Municipal Engineer shall forward
an approval letter to the Municipal Secretary, who will then
forward a copy to the applicant.
(2) Should the stormwater management plan be determined to be
inconsistent with this chapter, the Municipal Engineer shall
forward a disapproval letter to the Municipal Secretary, who will
then forward a copy to the applicant. The disapproval letter shall
cite the reason(s) and specific chapter sections for the disapproval.
Disapproval may be due to inadequate information to make a
121. Editor's Note: See Ch. 195, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 190-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-25
1:581
reasonable judgment as to compliance with the stormwater
management plan. Any disapproved stormwater management plans
may be revised by the applicant and resubmitted consistent with
this chapter.
E. For regulated activities specified in Article I of this chapter, which
require a building permit, the Municipal Engineer shall notify the
Municipal Building Permit Officer, in writing, within a time frame
consistent with the Municipal Building Code122 and/or Municipal
Subdivision Ordinance,123 whether the stormwater management plan is
consistent with the stormwater management plan, and forward a copy
of the approval/disapproval letter to the applicant. Any disapproved
stormwater management plan may be revised by the applicant and
resubmitted consistent with this chapter.
F. For regulated activities under this chapter that require an NPDES
permit application, the applicant shall forward a copy of the Municipal
Engineer's letter stating that the stormwater management plan is
consistent with the stormwater management plan to the County
Conservation District. PADEP and the County Conservation District may
consider the Municipal Engineer's review comments in determining
whether to issue a permit.
G. The Township shall not grant preliminary or final approval to any
subdivision or land development for regulated activities specified in
Article I of this chapter if the stormwater management plan has been
found to be inconsistent with this chapter, as determined by the
Municipal Engineer. All required permits from PADEP must be obtained
prior to approval of any subdivision or land development.
H. No building permits shall be issued for any regulated activity specified
in Article I of this chapter if the stormwater management plan has been
found to be inconsistent with this chapter, as determined by the
Municipal Engineer, or without considering the comments of the
Municipal Engineer. All required permits from PADEP must be obtained
prior to issuance of a building permit.
I. The applicant shall be responsible for completing record drawings of all
stormwater management facilities included in the approved stormwater
management plan. The record drawings and an explanation of any
discrepancies with the design plans shall be submitted to the Municipal
Engineer for final approval. In no case shall the Township approve the
record drawings until the Township receives a copy of an approved
highway occupancy permit from the PennDOT District Office, NPDES
permit, and any other applicable permits or approvals from PADEP or
the County Conservation District. The above permits and approvals
shall be based on the record drawings. The record drawings shall
include copies of all applicable permits and approvals.
122. Editor's Note: See Ch. 90, Building Construction.
123. Editor's Note: See Ch. 195, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 190-25 SHALER CODE § 190-25
1:582
§ 190-26. Modification of plans.
A modification to a stormwater management plan under review by the
Township for a development site that involves a change in stormwater
management facilities or techniques, or that involves the relocation or
redesign of stormwater management facilities, or that is necessary because
soil or other conditions are not as stated on the stormwater management
plan, as determined by the Municipal Engineer, shall require a resubmission
of a modified stormwater management plan consistent with this chapter and
shall be subject to review as specified in Article VI of this chapter.
§ 190-27. Resubmission of disapproved stormwater plans.
A disapproved stormwater management plan may be resubmitted, with
the revisions addressing the Municipal Engineer's concerns documented
in writing, and addressed to the Municipal Secretary in accordance with
Article VI of this chapter, and distributed accordingly, and shall be subject
to review as specified in Article VI of this chapter. Any applicable municipal
review and inspection fee shall accompany a resubmission of a disapproved
stormwater management plan.
§ 190-28. Municipal stormwater plan review and inspection fees.
J. The Township's approval of a stormwater management plan shall be
valid for a period not to exceed five years commencing on the date that
the Township approves the stormwater management plan. The
Township may specify a term of validity shorter than five years in the
approval for any specific SWM site plan. If stormwater management
facilities included in the approved stormwater management plan have
not been constructed, or if constructed and record drawings of these
facilities have not been approved within this time period, then the
Township may consider the stormwater management plan disapproved
and may revoke any and all permits. Stormwater management plans
that are considered disapproved by the Township shall be resubmitted
in accordance with § 190-27 of this chapter.
A. Fees may be established from time to time by the Township in
accordance with applicable laws to defray plan review and construction
inspection costs incurred by the Township. All fees shall be paid by the
applicant at the time of stormwater management plan submission.
B. Any fees established pursuant to this chapter may include, but not
necessarily be limited to, any of the following:
(1) Administrative costs.
(2) The review of the stormwater management plan by the Township,
county (if applicable), Allegheny County Conservation District (if
applicable) and the Municipal Engineer.
(3) The site inspections.
§ 190-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-28
1:583
(4) The inspection of stormwater management facilities and
stormwater management improvements during construction.
(5) The final inspection upon completion of the stormwater
management facilities.
(6) Any additional work required to enforce any permit provisions
regulated by this chapter, correct violations and assure proper
completion of stipulated remedial actions.
§ 190-28 SHALER CODE § 190-28
1:584
ARTICLE VII
Inspections
§ 190-29. Schedule of inspections.
§ 190-30. Access to facilities.
A. The Municipal Engineer or his municipal assignee shall inspect all
phases of the installation of the permanent stormwater management
facilities and BMPs.
B. During any stage of the work, if the Municipal Engineer determines that
the permanent stormwater management facilities and BMPs are not
being installed in accordance with this chapter, the Township shall
revoke any existing permits until a revised drainage plan is submitted
and approved, as specified in this chapter.
C. Other inspections. SWM BMPs shall be inspected by the landowner/
developer (including the Township for dedicated facilities), according to
the following list of frequencies:
(1) Annually for the first five years;
(2) Once every three years thereafter; and
(3) During or immediately after the cessation of a ten-year or greater
storm.
D. Inspections regarding compliance with the SWM site plan are a
responsibility of the Township.
E. Inspections should be conducted during or immediately following
precipitation events. A written inspection report shall be created to
document each inspection. The inspection report shall contain the date
and time of the inspection, the individual(s) who completed the
inspection, the location of the BMP, facility or structure inspected,
observations on performance, and recommendations for improving
performance, if applicable. Inspection reports shall be submitted to the
Township within 30 days following completion of the inspection.
A. Upon presentation of proper credentials, Township employees or
agents working on behalf of the Township may enter at reasonable
times upon any property within the Township to inspect the condition of
the stormwater structures and facilities in regard to any aspect
regulated by this chapter.
B. SWM BMP owners and operators shall allow persons working on behalf
of the Township ready access to all parts of the premises for the
purpose of determining compliance with this chapter.
C. Persons working on behalf of the Township shall have the right to
temporarily locate on any BMP in the Township such devices as are
§ 190-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-30
1:585
necessary to conducting monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's
stormwater discharge.
D. Unreasonable delays in allowing a representative of the Township
access is a violation of this chapter.
§ 190-30 SHALER CODE § 190-30
1:586
ARTICLE VIII
Enforcement and Penalties
§ 190-31. Right of entry.
Upon presentation of proper credentials, Township employees or agents
working on behalf of the Township may enter at reasonable times upon any
property within the Township to inspect the condition of the stormwater
structures and facilities in regard to any aspect regulated by this chapter.
§ 190-32. Notification of violation.
In the event that a person fails to comply with the requirements of this
chapter, or fails to conform to the requirements of any permit issued
hereunder, the Township shall provide written notification of the violation.
Such notification shall set forth the nature of the violation(s) and establish
a time limit for correction of these violation(s). Failure to comply within
the time specified shall subject such person to the penalty provision of this
chapter. All such penalties shall be deemed cumulative and shall not prevent
the Township from pursuing any and all remedies by law. It shall be the
responsibility of the owner of the real property on which any regulated
activity is proposed to occur, is occurring, or has occurred to comply with
the terms and conditions of this chapter.
§ 190-33. Compliance required.
§ 190-34. Authorization for enforcement.
The municipal governing body is hereby authorized and directed to enforce
all of the provisions of this chapter. All inspections regarding compliance
with the project plan shall be the responsibility of the Municipal Engineer
or other qualified persons designated by the Township.
§ 190-35. Hearing required prior to revocation or suspension of
permits.
Prior to revocation or suspension of a permit, the governing body will
schedule a hearing to discuss the noncompliance if there is no immediate
danger to life, public health or property.
§ 190-36. Suspension and revocation of permits.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to undertake any
regulated activity on any property except as provided for in an
approved SWM site plan and pursuant to the requirements of this
chapter.
B. It shall be unlawful to alter or remove any control structure required by
the SWM site plan or to allow the property to remain in a condition
which does not conform to the approved SWM site plan.
§ 190-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-36
1:587
§ 190-37. Occupancy permit.
An occupancy permit shall not be issued unless the certification of
compliance pursuant to § 190-25 has been secured. The occupancy permit
shall be required for each lot owner and/or developer for all subdivisions
and land development in the Township.
§ 190-38. Violations to be public nuisances.
§ 190-39. Violations and penalties.
A. Any approval or permit for a regulated activity issued may be
suspended or revoked, in whole or in part, by the Township for:
(1) Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of the
approval or the permit.
(2) A violation of any provision of this chapter or any other applicable
law, ordinance, rule or regulation relating to the regulated activity.
(3) The creation of any condition or the commission of any act during
the regulated activity which constitutes or creates a hazard or
nuisance, pollution or which endangers the life or property of
others.
B. A suspended approval may be reinstated by the Township when:
(1) The Township has inspected and approved the corrections to the
violations that caused the suspension.
(2) The Township is satisfied that the violation has been corrected.
C. An approval that has been revoked by the Township cannot be
reinstated. The applicant may apply for a new approval under the
provisions of this chapter.
A. The violation of any provision of this chapter is hereby deemed a public
nuisance.
B. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
A. Anyone violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
summary offense and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine of not
more than $1,000 for each violation, recoverable with costs, or
imprisonment of not more than five days, or both. Each day that the
violation continues shall be a separate offense, and penalties shall be
cumulative.
B. In addition, the Township, through its Solicitor, may institute injunctive,
mandamus or any other appropriate action or proceeding at law or in
equity for the enforcement of this chapter. Any court of competent
jurisdiction shall have the right to issue restraining orders, temporary
§ 190-36 SHALER CODE § 190-39
1:588
§ 190-40. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Township or its designee
relevant to the provisions of this chapter may appeal to the Allegheny
County Court of Common Pleas within 30 days of the Township's decision.
§ 190-41. Repealer.
Any ordinance or ordinance provision of the Township inconsistent with any
of the provisions of this chapter is hereby repealed to the extent of the
inconsistency only; provided, however, that this repeal shall in no manner
be construed as a waiver, release or relinquishment of the right to initiate,
pursue or prosecute, as the case may be, any proceeding at law or in equity
pertaining to any act done which would have constituted a violation of such
prior ordinance or ordinance provision. All of said ordinance or ordinance
provisions shall remain in full force and effect and are not repealed hereby
as they pertain to such acts and to the processing of such plans filed prior
to the effective date of this chapter, which are protected from the effect of
intervening ordinances by Section 508(4) of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code.124
or permanent injunctions, mandamus or other appropriate forms of
remedy or relief.
124. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10508(4).
§ 190-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-41
1:589
Chapter 192
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Rights-of-way — See Ch. 176.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 195.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 212.
§ 190-41 SHALER CODE § 190-41
1:590
ARTICLE I
Street Openings and Excavations
[Adopted 3-9-1937 by Ord. No. 326]
§ 192-1. Application for permit.
A permit for the opening and excavating of streets, avenues, alleys and
public highways in front of premises in said Township, for the purpose of
making connections for sewer, gas, water or other lines, shall be granted
only upon application of the contractor, plumber, owner or any other person
making such connection approved by the owner of the property for whom
such connection is to be made.
§ 192-2. Deposit; bond; costs. [Amended 11-9-1954 by Ord. No. 636;
10-21-1958 by Ord. No. 768; 8-10-1965 by Ord. No. 1080; 4-9-1985
by Ord. No. 1572]
A. Said application shall be made to the Township Secretary, who shall
grant the same, provided that he is satisfied that it is for the best
interest of the property owner, and provided also that a cash deposit is
made with him by either the contractor, plumber, owner or other person
in the sum of $500 for any and all openings or excavations to be made
on Township streets, avenues, alleys or public highways; however, when
an individual or company has on deposit with the Township a
maintenance bond for the street involved in application for permit, said
individual or company will be exempt from depositing any cash for
openings or excavations on said street.
B. In addition to the above, in the event that an individual or company
intends to excavate or make street openings to develop property for
which he has received subdivision approval from the Township, that
individual or company shall be permitted to place with the Township a
cash bond in the amount of $500, which shall be held by the Township
in lieu of the required street opening deposit of $500 with the
stipulation and understanding that, if any street opening made by that
individual or company requires additional work or repairs and the
individual or company fails to make said repairs immediately upon
being notified by a proper official of the Township, the Township shall
make said repairs and deduct the cost thereof from the cash bond so on
deposit, and no further street openings will be granted to that
individual or company until the cash bond is brought back to the
original figure of $500. The individual or company having said cash
bond of $500 on deposit may have the same released at his or its
request at any time after a period of six months has elapsed from the
date the last street opening permit was granted to said individual or
company.
§ 192-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-3
1:591
§ 192-3. Temporary repair.
The person, persons, firm or corporation making such connection in
opening or excavating the streets, avenues, alleys or public highways as
aforesaid shall be required as soon as may be able to make temporary repair
to the streets, avenues, alleys or public highways, so that there shall be as
little interference with traffic thereon as may be necessary.
§ 192-4. Completion of repairs. [Amended 1-8-1957 by Ord. No.
704]
The owner of the property or the contractor, plumber or other person
performing the work shall, within 30 days after the completion of the work,
restore the streets, avenues, alleys or public highways to their former
condition, unless an extension of time shall be given him by said Township
by reason of weather conditions or other conditions beyond his control.
All trenches across or under paved road areas must be backfilled with
granulated slag; and for trenches for waterlines, one foot of loose dirt must
be used to cover the water pipes and the remainder of the trench filled
with granulated slag. The backfilling of the trench shall follow as rapidly as
possible in the placing of subsurface structures and shall be completed in
such a manner as will conform to the earth shoulder.
§ 192-5. Failure to repair; collection of costs.
In case of failure to restore said streets, avenues, alleys or public highways
to their former condition within the time hereinbefore provided, the
Township shall have the right and privilege to perform said work and deduct
the cost of said work from the amount previously deposited by the owner,
contractor, plumber or other person, and if the sum so deposited is not
sufficient to cover the cost to perform said work, said Township is hereby
authorized to take such steps as are necessary to collect the balance due
from either the owner, contractor, plumber or other person, or all of them,
by appropriate action.
§ 192-6. Refund of deposit.
In the event that the restorative costs do not consume the deposit, the
balance remaining shall be refunded to the depositor; and likewise, the
depositor is entitled to a refund of his deposit when the Township has
not incurred any costs by reason of said opening. Said refund shall be
returned only after the expiration of six months from date of application,
upon resolution of the Board of Commissioners.
§ 192-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-15-1988 by Ord. No.
1631; 5-14-1996 by Ord. No. 1739]
Any person, persons, firm or corporation violating any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof before any Magisterial District Judge,
be fined a sum of $1,000 and, upon any default of payment of said fine, may
§ 192-3 SHALER CODE § 192-7
1:592
be committed to imprisonment in the Allegheny County Jail for a period not
exceeding 90 days.
§ 192-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-7
1:593

ARTICLE II
Snow and Ice
[Adopted 4-11-1978 by Ord. No. 1439]
§ 192-8. Prohibited acts.
It shall be unlawful for any individual or corporation, as owner, agent,
lessor, lessee or employee of land or buildings in the Township of Shaler,
to shovel or otherwise deposit snow or ice from the premises owned or
occupied by said individual or corporation into the streets or highways of
the Township of Shaler.
§ 192-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-8-1978 by Ord. No.
1452; 11-15-1988 by Ord. No. 1631]
For each and every violation of the provisions of this article, any person
or corporation, either as owner, agent, lessor, lessee or employee, violating
any of the provisions of this article, shall, upon conviction for a summary
offense by the issuing authority for the magisterial district which includes
the Township of Shaler, be sentenced to pay a fine of $600 and costs of
prosecution and, in default of payment thereof, may be committed by the
issuing authority to prison in conformity with the Pennsylvania Rules of
Criminal Procedure.
§ 192-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-9
1:595
Chapter 195
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 90.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 130.
Grading, excavating and filling — See Ch. 140.
Sewers — See Ch. 181.
Street openings and excavations — See Ch.
192, Art. I.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 190.
Zoning — See Ch. 225.
§ 192-9 SHALER CODE § 192-9
1:596
ARTICLE I
Title and General Provisions
§ 195-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Shaler Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance."
§ 195-2. Purpose.
This chapter is established for the purposes of:
A. Assuring sites suitable for building purposes and human habitation.
B. Providing for the harmonious development of the Township.
C. Coordinating the proposed development with existing development
within the Township.
D. Encouraging adequate open spaces for proper traffic flows, recreation,
light and air and for proper distribution of population, thereby creating
conditions favorable to the health, safety, morals and general welfare of
the citizens.
E. Protecting the character and social and economic stability of the
Township and to encourage the orderly and beneficial development of
the Township.
F. Protecting and conserving the value of land throughout the Township,
the value of buildings and improvements upon the land and to minimize
the conflicts among the uses of land and buildings.
G. Guiding public and private policy and action in order to provide
adequate and efficient transportation, water supply, sewage, schools,
parks, playgrounds, recreation and other public requirements and
facilities.
H. Providing the most beneficial relationship between the uses of land and
buildings and the circulation of traffic within the Township, having
particular regard to the avoidance of congestion in the streets and
highways and the pedestrian traffic movements appropriate to the
various uses of land and buildings, and providing for the proper location
and width of streets and building lines.
I. Establishing reasonable standards of design and procedures for
subdivision and resubdivision in order to further the orderly layout and
use and/or reuse of land, and ensuring proper legal descriptions and
monumenting of subdivided land.
J. Promoting and fostering the community development goals and
objectives, including quality infill, redevelopment and/or adaptive
reuse.
§ 195-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-2
1:597
§ 195-3. Land development control.
§ 195-4. Other regulations incorporated herein.
See the Shaler Township Zoning Ordinance (Chapter 225), the Stormwater
Management Ordinance (Chapter 190) and other applicable ordinances and
regulations of the Township as required.
§ 195-5. Conflicts between regulations and modifications.
K. Ensuring that public facilities are available and will have a sufficient
capacity to serve the proposed subdivision.
L. Preventing the pollution of air, streams and ponds; assuring the
adequacy of drainage facilities; safeguarding the water table; and
encouraging the wise use and management of natural resources in
order to preserve the community and value of the land.
M. Preserving the natural beauty and topography of the Township and
ensuring appropriate development with regard to these natural
features.
N. Providing for open spaces through efficient design and layout of the
land.
O. Ensuring that documents prepared as part of land ownership transfer
fully and accurately describe the parcel of land being subdivided and
new parcels thus created.
A. Land development, as herein defined, must comply with the regulations
contained herein. Such compliance shall include, but not be limited to:
the filing of preliminary and final plans, the dedication and
improvement of rights-of-way, streets and roads, developers'
agreement(s), covenants and restrictions as applicable and the
payment of fees and charges as established by resolution of the
Township Board of Commissioners.
B. Land development plans shall indicate the location of each structure
and clearly define each unit and shall indicate public easements,
common areas and improvements to public rights-of-way. Developments
are subject to the zoning regulations as they apply to use and density
requirements, setbacks, parking and other features and shall be
indicated on the land development plans.
A. Whenever there is a difference between the minimum standards
specified herein and those included in other Township ordinances and
regulations, the more stringent requirements shall apply.
B. See also § 195-67, Modifications and waivers.
§ 195-2 SHALER CODE § 195-6
1:598
§ 195-6. Effect of chapter.
Hereafter, except in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, no
lot in a subdivision may be sold; no permit to erect any building upon
land in a subdivision may be issued; no cuts, grading or filling permitted;
no street, walkway, curbs, gutters, streetlights, fire hydrants, shade trees,
sanitary sewer, storm sewer, water line, utilities or other improvements as
may be required herein shall be laid out, constructed, opened or dedicated
for public use or travel or for the common use of occupants of buildings
abutting thereon.
§ 195-7. Effect of noncompliance.
Hereafter, except as provided in this chapter, any plat of any subdivision,
street or development of land not approved by the Township Board of
Commissioners in accordance with the provisions and procedure, as set
forth herein, shall be null and void.
§ 195-8. Effect on prior applications or approvals.
A. From the time an application for approval, whether preliminary or final,
is duly filed as provided in this chapter and while such application is
pending approval or disapproval, no change or amendment in zoning, or
change in the subdivision or other governing ordinances or plans, shall
affect the decision on such application adversely to the applicant, and
the applicant shall be entitled to a decision in accordance with the
provisions of the governing ordinances or plans as they stood at the
time the application was duly filed. In addition, when a preliminary
application has been duly approved, the applicant shall be entitled to
final approval in accordance with the terms of the approved preliminary
application as hereinafter provided. However, when an application is
properly and finally denied, then any subsequent application shall be
subject to the intervening change in governing regulations.
B. When an application for approval of a plat, whether preliminary or final,
has been approved or approved subject to conditions acceptable to the
applicant, no subsequent change or amendment in the zoning,
subdivision or other governing ordinance or plan shall be applied to
affect adversely the right of the applicant to commence and to complete
any aspect of the approved development in accordance with the terms
of such approval within five years from such approval. The five-year
period shall be counted from the date of the preliminary approval. See
also PA MPC Section 504, as amended.125
125. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10504.
§ 195-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-8
1:599

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 195-9. Strict construction.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the
purpose of these regulations, have the meaning indicated:
§ 195-10. Abbreviations.
As used in this chapter, the following abbreviations shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADA Americans with Disabilities Act
ASTM American Society for Testing and Materials
EPA Environmental Protection Agency
FEMA Federal Emergency Management Agency
FHA Federal Housing Administration
HOP Highway Occupancy Permit
HVAC Heating, Ventilating, and Air Conditioning
NPDES National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
A. Words used in the present tense include the future, words in the
singular number include the plural and words in the plural number
include the singular number.
B. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
C. The word "may" is permissive.
D. The word "used" shall include arranged, designed, constructed, altered,
converted, rented, leased, or intended to be used.
E. The word "occupied" includes arranged, designed, built, altered,
converted, rented or leased, or intended to be occupied.
F. The word "land" shall include water surface.
G. The word "Commissioner" shall mean the elected members of the
Township Board of Commissioners of Shaler Township, Pennsylvania.
H. The phrase "Board Member" shall mean the members of the Zoning
Hearing Board of Shaler Township, Pennsylvania.
I. The word "Manager" shall mean the Township Manager of Shaler
Township, Pennsylvania.
J. Any reference to the Township Manager, Planning Commission,
Township Engineer or other administrative official of Shaler Township,
Pennsylvania, shall include their designees.
§ 195-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-10
1:601
PADEP Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection
PennDOT Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
PUC Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission
SALDO Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance
§ 195-11. Meaning of words.
Other terms or words used herein shall be interpreted or defined as follows:
APPLICANT — A landowner or developer, as herein defined, who has filed
an application for development, including his heirs, successors and assigns.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — Every application, whether
preliminary or final, required to be filed and approved prior to start of
construction or development, including, but not limited to, an application
for a building permit and an application for the approval of a development
plan.
BLOCK — An area bounded by streets, rights-of-way, streams or other
similar natural features.
BUILDING — Any fully enclosed structure having a roof intended for the
shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals, equipment or belongings
and not including heating, ventilating, and air conditioning (HVAC),
mechanical equipment, electrical equipment or trash.
CARTWAY (ROADWAY) — The improved or paved portion or portions of
a street available for vehicular or other traffic; the portion or portions
between curbs where curbs are used.
CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE — An area of unobstructed vision at the
intersection of two streets or the intersection of a driveway with a street,
intended to allow the operators of vehicles approaching simultaneously to
see each other in time to prevent a collision.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — A parcel or parcels of land or an area of water,
or a combination of land and water, within a development site, designed
as and intended for the use or enjoyment by the public or residents of
a development, not including streets, off-street parking areas, and areas
set aside for public facilities. Stormwater management facilities such as
drainageways, swales and stormwater basins shall not be considered
eligible to meet common open space requirements.
COUNTY — The County of Allegheny, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
COUNTY PLANNING AGENCY — Allegheny County Economic Development
(ACED) as assigned by the Allegheny County Council.
CROSSWALK — A publicly or privately owned right-of-way for pedestrian
use extending from a street into a block or across a block to another street.
CUT — An excavation; the difference in vertical elevation between a point
on the surface of original ground and a point on the final grade; the material
removed in excavation.
§ 195-10 SHALER CODE § 195-11
1:602
DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION (PADEP) — The
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, its bureaus,
divisions, departments and/or agencies, as may from time to time be
established, or such department or departments as may in the future
succeed it.
DETENTION POND — See Chapter 190, Stormwater Management, Article
II.
DEVELOPER — Any landowner, agent of such landowner, or tenant with the
permission of such landowner, who proposes, makes, or causes to be made
a subdivision of land or land development.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN — The provisions for development of land, including
a planned residential development, a plat of subdivision, all covenants
relating to use, location and bulk of buildings and other structures, intensity
of use or density of development, streets, driveways, sidewalks and parking
facilities, common open space, and public facilities. The phrase "provisions
of development plan," when used in this chapter, shall mean the written and
graphic materials referred to in this definition.
DRAINAGE — The removal of surface water or groundwater from land by
drains, grading or other means, and includes control of runoff to minimize
erosion and sedimentation during and after construction or development.
DRAINAGE FACILITY — See Chapter 190, Stormwater Management, Article
II.
DRAINAGE RIGHT-OF-WAY — See Chapter 190, Stormwater Management,
Article II.
DRIVEWAY — A vehicular connection from a lot to the right-of-way. A
driveway terminates at the right-of-way line and/or the access drive.
DWELLING UNIT — More than one habitable room containing permanent
heating, sanitary, sleeping, cooking and eating facilities used or intended to
be used as living quarters for a single household or family.
EASEMENT — A grant of one or more property rights for a portion of land
by the landowner to and/or for the use by the public, a corporation, or
another person or entity.
ELECTRONIC NOTICE — Notice given by a municipality through the
Internet of the time and place of a public hearing and the particular nature
of the matter to be considered at the hearing.
ENGINEER — An individual licensed and registered to engage in the
practice of engineering in Pennsylvania. A professional engineer may not
practice land surveying unless licensed as set forth in P.L. 534, No. 230;
however, a professional engineer may perform engineering land surveys.
EROSION — The removal of surface materials by the action of natural
elements.
§ 195-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-11
1:603
EXCAVATION — Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other
similar material is dug into, cut, quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced,
relocated or bulldozed, and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.
FILL — Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other material
is placed, pushed, dumped, transported, or moved to a new location above
the natural surface of the ground or on top of the stripped surface, and
shall include the conditions resulting therefrom. Fill also can refer to the
difference in elevation between a point on the original ground and a
designated point of higher elevation on the final grade.
FLOODPLAIN/FLOODWAY — See Chapter 130 (Flood Damage Prevention)
of the Code of Shaler Township.
IMPROVEMENTS TO LAND — A construction or installation, including, but
not limited to, of any of the following: streets, gutters, culverts, sidewalks,
storm sewers, fiber optic cable, water drainage facilities, utilities (gas,
electric, telephone services), water system, fire hydrants, sanitary sewers,
septic tanks, street signs, streetlights, and including cuts and/or fills.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any one of the following activities:
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land, including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option
or contract is subject to any condition), a lessee if he is authorized under
the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner, or other person having a
proprietary interest in the land.
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as a
unit.
LOT AREA — The area contained within the lot lines of a lot, excluding
space within any rights-of-way of public streets and ways.
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots, regardless of the number of
occupants or tenure; or
(1)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of, streets,
common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other
features.
(2)
A.
B. Subdivision of land.
Development in accordance with Section 503(1.1) of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.126
C.
126. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10503(1.1).
§ 195-11 SHALER CODE § 195-11
1:604
LOT OF RECORD — A lot which has been properly recorded in the Office of
the Department of Real Estate of Allegheny County, Pennsylvania.
LOT, CORNER — A lot at the junction of and adjoining two or more
intersecting streets or at the point of abrupt change of a single street,
where the interior angle is less than 135° or the radius of the street line is
less than 10 feet.
LOT, INTERIOR — A lot other than a corner lot with only one frontage on a
street.
LOT, THROUGH — A lot other than a corner lot with frontage on more than
one street.
LOT, WIDTH — The horizontal distance between both side lot lines
measured at the required minimum front setback.
MARKER — A metal pipe or pin of at least 1/2 inch diameter (preferred 3/4
inch or 7/8 inch) and at least 24 inches in length (preferred 30 inches to 36
inches), which shall be used for survey purposes.
MEDIATION — A voluntary negotiating process in which parties in a dispute
mutually select a neutral mediator to assist them in jointly exploring and
settling their differences, culminating in a written agreement which the
parties themselves create and consider acceptable.
MOBILE HOME — See Chapter 225, Zoning, Article II.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A lot or contiguous lots of land which have been
so designated and improved that they contain two or more mobile home lots
for the placement thereon of mobile homes.
MONUMENT — A stone or concrete monument with a flat top at least four
inches in diameter or square, containing a copper or brass dowel (plug), and
at least 24 inches in length (preferred 30 inches to 36 inches). The bottom,
sides or radius shall be at least two inches greater than the top, to minimize
movements caused by front which shall be used for survey purposes.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE — Any security which may be in lieu of
a requirement that certain improvements be made before the Township
Board of Commissioners approves a final subdivision or land development
plan, including performance bonds, escrow agreements, and other similar
collateral or surety agreements.
PERSON — An individual(s), partnership(s), co-partnership(s),
association(s), corporation(s), limited liability company(ies), limited liability
partnership(s), and any and all other entities.
PLANNING COMMISSION or TOWNSHIP PLANNING COMMISSION —
The Shaler Township Planning Commission, appointed by the Township
Board of Commissioners in accordance with the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, Act 247, as amended.127
127. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 195-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-11
1:605
PLAT OF RECORD — The copy of the final plat which contains the required
original endorsements and which is recorded with the County Department
of Real Estate.
PLAT, FINAL — A complete and exact map or plan of a subdivision or land
development (and including all required supplementary data), prepared for
official recording as required by statute, defining property rights as well as
proposed streets and other improvements.
PLAT, PRELIMINARY — A tentative map or plan of a subdivision of land
development (and including all required supplementary data), in lesser
detail than a final plat, showing approximate proposed street and lot layout
as a basis for consideration prior to preparation of a final plat.
PRIVATE STREET (see "street") — A right-of-way not adopted or otherwise
determined to be a public street by Shaler Township, or not having
otherwise been adopted as a county, state or Township street.
PUBLIC GROUNDS — Public grounds includes:
PUBLIC HEARING — A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice by
the Township Board of Commissioners or Planning Commission, intended to
inform and obtain public comment, prior to taking action in accordance with
the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247, as amended.128
PUBLIC MEETING — A forum held pursuant to notice under the Act of July
3, 1986 (P.L. 388, No. 84), known as the "Sunshine Act."129
PUBLIC NOTICE — A notice published once each week for two successive
weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the Township. Such notice
shall state the time and place of the hearing and the particular nature of
the matter to be considered at the hearing. The first publication shall not be
more than 30 days, and the second publication shall not be less than seven
days, from the date of the hearing.
RESOURCE PROTECTION WORKSHEET — A table designed to help an
applicant determine the location and amount of development permitted
within any given lot in order to protect the Township's natural resources.
RESUBDIVISION — See "subdivision."
RIGHT-OF-WAY — An area of land that is legally described for the public or
private provision of access.
Parks, playgrounds, trails, paths and other recreational areas and other
public areas.
A.
Sites for schools, sewage treatment, refuse disposal and other publicly
owned or operated facilities.
B.
C. Publicly owned or operated scenic and historic sites.
128. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
129. Editor's Note: See now 65 Pa.C.S.A. § 701 et seq.
§ 195-11 SHALER CODE § 195-11
1:606
RUNOFF — The surface water discharge or rate of discharge of a given area
or watershed, after a fall of rain or snow, that does not enter the soil but
runs off the surface of the land.
SANITARY SEWAGE DISPOSAL, ON-SITE — Any structure designed to
biochemically treat sanitary sewage within the boundaries of an individual
lot, or tract of lots.
SANITARY SEWAGE DISPOSAL, PRIVATE — A sanitary sewage collection
system managed and operated under private auspices, in which sewage is
carried from individual lots by a system of pipes, to a central treatment and
disposal plant, generally serving a neighborhood area.
SANITARY SEWAGE DISPOSAL, PUBLIC — A sanitary sewage collection
system, managed and operated by the Township, in which sewage is carried
from individual lots by a system of pipes to a central treatment and disposal
plant.
SEDIMENTATION — The process by which mineral or organic matter is
accumulated or deposited by moving wind, water or gravity. Once this
matter is deposited (or remains suspended in water), it is considered
sediment.
SEPTIC TANK — A covered watertight settling tank in which raw sewage
is biochemically changed into solid, liquid and gaseous states to facilitate
further treatment and final disposal.
SHOULDER — The portion of a roadway (cartway) between the curb or
gutter and the travelway intended for emergency and parking use.
SLOPE — The face of an embankment or cut section; any ground whose
surface makes an angle with the plane of the horizon. Slope is expressed
in a percentage based upon vertical difference in feet per 100 feet of
horizontal distance.
SOIL PERCOLATION TEST — A field test conducted to determine the
absorption capacity of soil to a specified depth in a given location for the
purpose of determining suitability of soil for on-site sewage disposal.
SOIL STABILIZATION — The chemical or structural treatment of a mass
of soil to increase or maintain its stability or otherwise to improve its
engineering properties.
STREET — Includes street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway, freeway,
parkway, lane, alley, viaduct and any other ways used or intended to be used
by vehicular traffic or pedestrians, whether public or private. Streets are
further classified according to the functions they perform:
Arterial: signalized streets that serve primarily through traffic and
provide access to abutting properties as a secondary function, having
signal spacings of two miles or less and turn movements at
intersections that usually do not exceed 20% of total traffic.
A.
§ 195-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-11
1:607
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object that has an ascertainable stationary
location on or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the land.
SUBDIVIDER — The term "subdivider" shall be synonymous in meaning
with "developer" as defined herein and shall be used interchangeably with
same.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land
by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other division of land,
including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether immediate
or future, of lease, petition by the court for distribution to heirs or devisees,
transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided, however,
that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into parcels
of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of access
or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBSTANTIALLY COMPLETED — Where, in the judgment of the Municipal
Engineer, at least 90% (based on the cost of the required improvements
for which financial security was posted pursuant to Section 509 of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code130) of those improvements
required as a condition for final approval have been completed in
accordance with the approved plan, so that the project will be able to be
used, occupied or operated for its intended use.
SURVEYOR — A surveyor registered by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
SWALE — A low-lying stretch of land which gathers, or carries, surface
water runoff.
TOPSOIL — Surface soils and subsurface soils which presumably are fertile
soils and soil material, ordinarily rich in organic matter or humus debris.
Topsoil is usually found in the uppermost soil layer called the "A horizon."
TOWNSHIP — Shaler Township, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania.
TOWNSHIP BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS — The governing body of Shaler
Township, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania.
TOWNSHIP STREET — A street adopted as a public street by the Township,
or having become a Township street as legally determined.
Collector: a roadway which typically connects local streets to arterial
streets, whereas the street may provide land access and traffic
circulation within residential, commercial, and industrial areas.
B.
Local roads: a public street designed to provide access to abutting lots
and to discourage through traffic.
C.
Alley: a public thoroughfare which may afford a secondary means for
lot access, but not intended for general traffic circulation.
D.
Cul-de-sac: a dead-end street with a vehicular turnaround at the dead
end.
E.
130. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10509.
§ 195-11 SHALER CODE § 195-11
1:608
WATER DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM, ON-SITE — A system for supplying and
distributing water to a single dwelling or other building from a source
located on the same lot.
WATERCOURSE — A permanent stream; intermittent stream; river; brook;
creek; or a channel or ditch for water, whether natural or man-made.
WETLAND — Any area defined as a wetland by the Federal Manual for
Identifying and Delineating Jurisdictional Wetlands.
§ 195-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-11
1:609

ARTICLE III
Classification of Approvals and Applications
§ 195-12. General.
A. The regulations in this article are intended to assure that adequate
information is submitted to permit the Township to undertake a
thorough review of each proposal as related to the development,
transportation, environment and other aspects of an application.
B. Any landowner or developer of land within the Township desiring
approval of a subdivision or land development application shall comply
with the following procedures.
C. Any application for a subdivision or a boundary survey for a plan of
development, or any revisions of approved plans that have not been
recorded, shall be considered as new applications and shall be required
to comply with all requirements of this chapter, unless the applicant
requests and receives a modification of any requirements from the
Township Board of Commissioners pursuant to this chapter.
D. Any application for resubdivision or revision that is limited to a survey
correction may be approved without review by the governing body,
provided no changes have been made to the Zoning Ordinance or
SALDO. The application should be accompanied by a statement from a
professional engineer that the plan has not been altered from the
original.
E. All applications shall reflect the contents for submission reflected on
Table 1: Subdivision and/or Land Development Submission
Requirements.131 Completion and timing of staff and county reviews
shall occur in accordance with applicable law. The Zoning Officer may
call on staff for review of submissions at any time during the review
process.
F. All applications shall be in accordance with the Allegheny County
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance §§ 780-101, 780-103,
780-305 and 780-306, as applicable to or containing relevant
information to the subdivision and/or land development. Plans shall also
be prepared in accordance with the applicable appendices of the
Allegheny County Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
G. All applications shall include any additional information that is required
by the Planning Commission, Township Board of Commissioners,
Zoning Officer, or Township Engineer to comply with the intent of this
chapter.
H. Application submission(s) and approval deadlines shall be in
accordance with the requirements of Allegheny County and
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code § 508.132
131. Editor's Note: Said table is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 195-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-12
1:611
§ 195-13. Approvals overview.
§ 195-14. Simple subdivision approval.
I. See also applicable approval process diagrams available on file at the
Township Administrative Office.
A. Three types of approvals regulate lot revisions, lot consolidations,
subdivisions and land development. See Table 1: Subdivision and/or
Land Development Submission Requirements,133 for the applicability of
each approval type. The three approvals include:
(1) Simple subdivision.
(2) Minor subdivision and/or land development.
(3) Major subdivision and/or land development.
A. Applicants are required to apply for and receive a simple subdivision
approval from the Township in accordance with the following.
(1) Recommendations and approvals.
(a) Application requirements as shown on the Subdivision and/or
Land Development Requirements table134 shall be submitted
for all simple subdivisions.
(b) The Township staff shall review and forward an application to
the Planning Commission regarding simple subdivision.
Township staff comments resulting from said review shall
accompany the application forwarded.
(c) The Planning Commission shall recommend application
approval, approval subject to conditions, or denial to the
Township Board of Commissioners regarding simple
subdivision.
(d) The Township Board of Commissioners shall be responsible for
approving or denying simple subdivision in accordance with
Section 508 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code.135
(2) Conferences. A preapplication conference with the Township is
highly recommended prior to the submission of a final plan
application.
(3) Applicants are required to provide an escrow fee for plan review
and legal opinion of the Township Solicitor.
132. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10508.
133. Editor's Note: Said table is included as an attachment to this chapter.
134. Editor's Note: Said table is included as an attachment to this chapter.
135. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10508.
§ 195-12 SHALER CODE § 195-15
1:612
§ 195-15. Minor subdivision and/or land development approval.
§ 195-16. Major subdivision and/or land development approval.
A. Applicants are required to apply for and receive a minor land
development approval from the Township in accordance with the
following criteria:
(1) Recommendations and approvals.
(a) Application requirements as shown on the Subdivision and/or
Land Development Requirements table136 shall be submitted
for all minor land developments.
(b) The Township staff shall review and forward an application to
the Planning Commission regarding minor land development.
Township staff comments resulting from said review shall
accompany the application forwarded.
(c) The Planning Commission shall recommend application
approval, approval subject to conditions, or denial to the
Township Board of Commissioners regarding minor
subdivision and/or land development.
(d) The Township Board of Commissioners shall be responsible for
approving or denying minor land developments.
(2) Conferences. A preapplication conference is highly recommended
with the Township prior to the submission of a final application.
(3) Applicants are required to provide an escrow fee for plan review
and legal opinion of the Township Solicitor.
A. Applicants are required to apply for and receive both preliminary and
final approval for a major land development approval from the
Township in accordance with the following criteria:
(1) Recommendations and approvals.
(a) Application requirements as shown on Table 1: Subdivision
and/or Land Development Submission Requirements,137 shall
be submitted for all major land developments.
(b) The Township staff shall review and forward the application to
the Planning Commission regarding major land development.
Township staff comments resulting from said review shall
accompany the application forwarded.
(c) The Planning Commission shall recommend application
approval, approval subject to conditions, or denial to the
136. Editor's Note: Said table is included as an attachment to this chapter.
137. Editor's Note: Said table is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 195-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-16
1:613
§ 195-17. Preapplication conference.
§ 195-18. Sketch plan.
§ 195-19. Preliminary plan application requirements.
Township Board of Commissioners regarding major subdivision
and/or land development.
(d) The Township Board of Commissioners shall be responsible for
approving or denying major land developments, whether
preliminary or final.
(2) Conferences. A preapplication conference is highly recommended
with the Township prior to the submission of a plan application.
(3) Applicants are required to provide an escrow fee for plan review
and legal opinion of the Township Solicitor.
A. A voluntary preapplication conference with the Township is highly
recommended prior to the submission of a preliminary plan application.
The conference requires no formal application or fee.
B. Any materials submitted for a preapplication conference shall not be
considered as a part of an application for preliminary or final review.
These opportunities are afforded to the applicant to obtain information
and guidance before entering into binding commitments or incurring
substantial expenses for plan preparation.
A. As part of the preapplication conference, a subdivision and/or land
development sketch plan may be submitted by an applicant as a basis
for informal discussion with the Township.
B. If an applicant chooses to submit a sketch plan, sufficient information
should be provided on the sketch plan to clearly indicate the character
and extent of the proposed subdivision or land development and its
relationship to existing natural features and public facilities within the
area in which the land is situated. Such submission should include a
concept establishing the location of the development, proposed
circulation, open space, and any other features pertinent to the
development. The base information illustrated on the sketch plan is
recommended to be at scale.
A. Preliminary plan applications shall be prepared in conformance with
the provisions of this article and any other applicable requirements of
Township law. The preliminary plan application shall not be considered
to be complete and properly filed unless and until all items required
have been submitted and confirmed by the Zoning Officer. The
Township shall check the plans, documents and fees to determine if
they are in proper form and contain all the information. If defective, the
application will be returned to the applicant with a statement that the
application is incomplete within 10 working days; otherwise, the
§ 195-16 SHALER CODE § 195-19
1:614
§ 195-20. Preliminary plan application form and fee.
§ 195-21. Letter of transmittal.
A letter of transmittal identifying the proposed activity, the purpose of
the development, lot/block reference(s), date, and any other pertinent
information shall accompany the preliminary plan application.
§ 195-22. Preliminary site plan.
application shall be deemed filed as of the submission date. Acceptance
shall not constitute a waiver of any deficiencies.
A. A preliminary plan application shall demonstrate conformance with the
design standard requirements of this chapter. All preliminary plan
applications shall include the Township application form plus any
additional information, copies and fees as required by the Township.
B. A minimum of 10 copies of the preliminary plan application with a
minimum of three sets shall be 24 inches by 36 inches. One electronic
file in PDF file format and one electronic file in a file format acceptable
to the Township shall be submitted of all plans, maps, and drawings. All
items shall be submitted 25 days prior to a scheduled Planning
Commission meeting for Township staff review and recommendation.
C. Filing/review fee. (See schedule available at Township office.) The fee
shall be submitted in the form of a check or money order payable to
Shaler Township.
(1) Review fees shall include the reasonable and necessary charges by
the Township professional consultants or engineer for review and
report to the Township and shall be set by resolution. Such review
fees shall be reasonable and in accordance with the ordinary and
customary charges by the Township Engineer, but in no event shall
be the fees exceed the rate or cost charged by the engineer or
consultant to the Township when fees are not reimbursed or
otherwise imposed on applicants.
(2) In the event the applicant disputes the amount of any such review
fees, Section 503(1) of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code138 shall apply.
A. The preliminary site plan shall have all information required for the
survey as described in § 195-30A. The following shall also be provided
at the time of submission:
(1) Intended name of plan or development.
(2) Date of plan, graphic scale and site location map of plan.
138. Editor's Note: 53 P.S. § 10503(1).
§ 195-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-22
1:615
(3) Name, address and phone number of current land owner(s) and
applicant(s).
(4) Legend. A legend shall be made part of the final site plan. The
legend shall show all pertinent zoning requirements such as, but
not limited to, setback requirements, zoning district, parking
requirements, existing use, any variances required, applied for or
granted, etc. This legend shall be incorporated into the title sheet.
(5) Name and address of the registered professional who prepared the
site plan with registration number and seal affixed.
(6) North arrow, properly affixed, and basis of demarcation.
(7) Graphic scale.
(8) Legend.
(9) Existing zoning boundaries on the lot, if any.
(10) Accurate depiction of all known survey points with description as to
type, location and material.
(11) Existing lot boundary lines, right-of-way lines or easements for
streets and utilities, and proposed lot lines with accurate
dimensions, bearings or radii and arcs of all corners.
(12) Post office approved name and legally established right-of-way
width of each existing or proposed street or right-of-way.
(13) Proposed lot lines shown with a number to identify each proposed
lot on the site and the approximate area (in square feet) of each lot.
(14) Location of existing buildings by surveyed distance shown from
structure to front, side or rear lot lines.
(15) Proposed building front setback lines of all existing or proposed
lots.
(16) The layout of the proposed lots, with approximate dimensions,
including setback and/or building lines.
(17) The proposed location of all sanitary sewer and stormwater
management structures.
(18) A parking plan indicating location of parking area(s), arrangement
of spaces, access lanes and number of cars to be accommodated;
the configuration of proposed building(s) and all other significant
planned facilities.
(19) If required or provided, location size and general layout of public
areas, open space and recreation areas.
(20) A separate written statement on the preliminary site plan
indicating any requested modifications to the provisions of this
§ 195-22 SHALER CODE § 195-22
1:616
§ 195-23. Preliminary grading plan.
chapter or variances, exceptions or interpretation from the
Township Zoning Ordinance.139
(21) A description of the soil types located on the lot, delineating all
landslide-prone areas as well as any mined areas.
(22) Plans shall show existing and proposed building locations and
waivers from the regulations herein established and cite the
reasons for same.
(23) In addition to the location of proposed buildings, the following
utility lines shall be illustrated: sanitary sewer, storm sewer, water,
gas, petroleum and high-pressure gas lines indicating line size. As
applicable, the following shall also be indicated: manholes, fire
hydrants, utilities and other visible elements in the system on or
adjacent to the lot proposed to be developed.
(24)Wetlands, streams, floodplains and FEMA designations on the lot.
(25) Environmentally sensitive areas on the lot.
(26) Gas wells on the lot.
(27) Easements proposed or existing.
(28) Separate written proof of sewer availability.
(29) Names of owners of record of adjoining lands.
(30) Total acreage of the overall tract and, if applicable, each proposed
lot in square feet and acreage to 1/1000 acre.
(31) Parcel block and lot numbers.
A. A preliminary grading plan shall be submitted and shall include the
following:
(1) Written and graphic scale in a form acceptable to the Township and
engineering standards. The preliminary grading plan shall be at a
scale of one inch to 50 feet or larger.
(2) North arrow.
(3) The existing contours of the lot(s).
(4) Proposed contours of the lot(s) after completion of the excavation,
cuts, grading and filling.
(5) The preliminary grading plan's contour interval shall be as follows:
139. Editor's Note: See Ch. 225, Zoning.
§ 195-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-23
1:617
§ 195-24. Preliminary parking plan.
The applicant shall submit a preliminary parking plan demonstrating how
the off-street parking requirements will be met. The preliminary parking
plan shall utilize the preliminary site plan as a background and shall
illustrate all existing and proposed parking for the development. Parking
space counts shall also be provided for each parking area. The location and
design of off-street parking areas showing size and location of bays, aisles,
and barriers and the proposed direction of movement shall be provided, as
well as access points into and out of the parking areas. The preliminary
parking plan shall conform to the drawing standards as outlined for the
preliminary site plan. If applicable, a shared parking analysis as identified
in this chapter shall be attached to the submission.
§ 195-25. Preliminary loading plan.
The applicant shall submit a preliminary loading plan demonstrating how
loading space requirements will be met, including accessibility. The
preliminary loading plan shall utilize the preliminary site plan as a
background and shall illustrate proposed loading areas for the
development. Parking space counts shall also be provided for each parking
area. The preliminary loading plan shall conform to the drawing standards
as outlined for the preliminary site plan.
§ 195-26. Preliminary stormwater management plan and report.
(a) Not more than two-foot intervals where the slope will be
greater than 10% and less than 50%; not more than ten-foot
intervals where the slope will be greater than 50%.
(b) Not more than one-foot intervals where the slope will be equal
to or less than 10%.
(6) Existing and proposed catch basins, manholes, headwalls and other
drainage structures with top and invert elevations on the
applicable stormwater management plan.
(7) Existing and proposed buildings, structures, roads, sidewalks,
curbs, parking areas and any other physical improvements.
(8) Grading within or near a stream bank must be noted.
(9) Grading within or near a floodplain area must be noted and, if
applicable, the impact the grading will have on the floodplain.
(10) A surface drainage map showing the impact upon runoff prior to,
during and post grading activities.
(11) A vegetation plan showing types of existing vegetation existing on
site and areas of proposed removal.
§ 195-23 SHALER CODE § 195-26
1:618
§ 195-27. Resource protection plan and worksheet.
The following table shall be copied and completed to determine the initial
net buildable area of the lot:
Table A: Resource Protection Worksheet
Sensitive Existing
Conditions
Gross Lot/
Site Area
(acres)
Permitted
Disturbance
Ratio
Net
Buildable
Area
(acres)
Line 1 All floodplains,
wetlands, and
hydric soils
__________ x 0.0 = 0.00
Line 2 All lakes and
waterbodies,
and natural
drainageways/
streams
__________ x 0.0 = 0.00
Line 3 All springs and
vernal pools
(including 100
ft. buffer)
__________ x 0.0 = 0.00
Line 4 Colluvial Soils
and Red Beds
on slopes
< 25% __________ x 0.4 = 0.00
> 25% __________ x 0.1 = 0.00
Line 5 Other Areas on
slopes 0-25%
not calculated
as part of Lines
1 through 4
above
__________ x 1.0 = 0.00
A. Land development plans shall be based on a stormwater management
study performed in accordance with the Stormwater Management
Ordinance (Chapter 190) of the Code of Shaler Township relating to
stormwater management. A copy of said study shall be submitted.
B. Where applicable, if the Allegheny County Conservation District or the
PADEP has reviewed a stormwater management plan in accordance
with 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102 regulations that differs from the
requirements set forth in the Stormwater Management Ordinance
(Chapter 190), the completed and approved documents authorizing the
design and discharge together with a written request for modification
from the ordinance shall be submitted.
§ 195-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-27
1:619
Table A: Resource Protection Worksheet
Sensitive Existing
Conditions
Gross Lot/
Site Area
(acres)
Permitted
Disturbance
Ratio
Net
Buildable
Area
(acres)
Line 6 Other Areas on
slopes > 25%
but < 40% not
calculated as
part of Lines 1
through 4 above
__________ x 0.4 = 0.00
Line 7 Other Area on
slopes > 40%
not calculated
as part of Lines
1 through 4
above
__________ x 0.1 = 0.00
Line 8 Sum of Lines
1+2+3+4+5+6+7
0.00 0.00
(Total Gross
Lot/Site Area)
(Total Net Buildable Area)
§ 195-28. Sewage facilities planning module.
§ 195-29. Proof of submission.
A. Where applicable, if an exemption from the Sewage Facilities Planning
Module has been requested or granted in accordance with the rules and
regulations of the PADEP, the completed or approved forms shall be
submitted with the application.
B. Where applicable, a Sewage Facilities Planning Module shall be the
responsibility of the applicant and shall be prepared in accordance with
the rules and regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection.
A. A listing of the necessary approvals and permits that will be required
for the proposed development from the Township, county,
commonwealth or federal agencies shall be submitted.
B. Approval of the preliminary plan application by the Township Board of
Commissioners may be conditioned upon receipt of approvals from
county, state or federal agencies. Therefore, proof of submission during
the preliminary plan application process is required to avoid any issues
throughout the final plan application process.
C. Proof of submission of review requests/responses and permit
applications may include, but is not limited to:
§ 195-27 SHALER CODE § 195-29
1:620
§ 195-30. Survey (sealed) and preliminary plat.
(1) Pennsylvania Department of Transportation highway occupancy
permits.
(2) Pennsylvania Department of Transportation traffic signal permits.
(3) Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection Sewage
Facilities Planning Module (or exemption if applicable).
(4) Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permits.
(5) Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection water
obstruction and encroachment permits.
(6) Pennsylvania Department of Economic Development and/or
Federal Emergency Management Agency floodplain permits.
(7) Allegheny County Conservation District proof of submission.
(8) Hampton-Shaler Water Authority proof of submission.
(9) Include proof that the Pennsylvania Department of Community and
Economic Development, the Federal Insurance Administrator, or
other applicable local/state/federal agency, has been notified
whenever any such activity is proposed that impacts an identified
flood-prone area.
(10) Proof of submission of a Shaler Township zoning request unless
otherwise identified by the Township.
A. The applicant shall submit an engineering land survey of the lot
certified by a professional land surveyor. The survey shall be at a scale
of not more than one inch equals 100 feet. The plan shall be drawn in
accordance with standard land surveying practices, and using standard
map symbols to clearly indicate the following:
(1) Name of the proposed project.
(2) Location map showing the subdivision/land development location
within the boundaries of the Township (including major
transportation routes, title, north arrow and graphic scale).
(3) Existing lot lines, adjacent lot owners' names, lot and block
numbers and recorded subdivision name with recording
information.
(4) Name, address of current land owner(s), applicant and firm that
prepared the survey.
(5) The entire existing lot boundary with bearings and distances as
surveyed.
§ 195-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-30
1:621
§ 195-31. Erosion and sedimentation plan.
A copy of the erosion and sedimentation plan as filed with the Allegheny
County Conservation District, including a copy of the transmittal letter and
evidence of Allegheny County Conservation District adequacy letter, shall
be provided. An NPDES authorization letter shall be provided.
§ 195-32. Typical cross-sections of each street proposed.
§ 195-33. Photometrics plan.
The photometrics plan shall describe the maximum illumination values and
average illumination value required. The location and effect of outdoor
lighting on streets and residential lots in the line of sight of proposed
lighting shall be provided by the applicant. A computer-generated lighting
model with point-by-point illumination of all proposed lighting and areas
(6) The total acreage of the entire existing land.
(7) Zoning information legend (to include, but not be limited to:
district, minimum lot size, density, and requirements) showing both
required and proposed conditions.
(8) Streets abutting the lot, indicating names, right-of-way widths and
cartway widths and ownership (federal, state, county, municipal or
private).
(9) Existing and proposed easements, indicating location, width,
purpose and lessee.
(10) Location of existing buildings, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, water,
gas, petroleum and high-pressure gas lines indicating line size,
manholes, fire hydrants, utilities and other visible elements in the
system on or adjacent to the lot proposed to be developed.
(11) Existing contours at a minimum vertical interval of two feet.
(12) A description of the lot locating proposed, existing and preexisting
gas and oil wells, location maps, dates of operation, and lease
holder(s) shall be provided.
(13) Where practical, datum to which contour elevations refer shall
refer to known, established elevations.
(14) Monument locations.
A. Typical street cross-sections for each proposed street and typical crosssections
for any existing street that will be improved shall be provided.
Cross-sections shall be drawn to scale, 1/4 inch to one foot and shall be
sealed by a registered engineer or land surveyor.
B. All street cross-sections shall include all information in accordance with
the Township standards.
§ 195-30 SHALER CODE § 195-33
1:622
expected to be illuminated, if applicable, is required. The lighting model
shall include buildings, structures, parking areas and lot lines and shall be
provided at the same scale as the final site plan.
§ 195-34. Building elevations and other architectural drawings.
§ 195-35. Landscape plan.
§ 195-36. Construction details.
§ 195-37. Phasing plan and schedules.
A. Building elevations and other architectural drawings shall be provided
for all developments other than single-family residential.
B. Building elevations and other architectural drawings containing the
following information shall be provided. Elevations and drawings shall
be illustrated to scale (no less than 1/4 inch to one foot) showing:
(1) Drawings or elevations depicting the front, rear and side facades of
all proposed buildings, including the buildings' architectural
features, exterior building materials, colors and/or finishes.
(2) The drawings or elevations shall indicate the height of the building
in feet and number of stories and the building's relationship to the
finished grade immediately surrounding the building.
(3) Spot elevations designating the existing and proposed grading.
A. A landscape plan shall be provided for all developments other than
single-family residential.
B. A landscape plan shall be provided in accordance with the Township
Zoning Ordinance140 and shall contain the following:
(1) Preliminary site plan as a background.
(2) Approximate locations and spacing of all proposed plant material
with typical dimensions at maturity by species. Existing vegetation
to remain shall also be illustrated.
(3) Botanical and common names of all plant species, their sizes and
quantities as noted in a plant schedule and as individual call-outs
on the graphic.
A. Construction details shall be provided for all construction in
accordance with Township standards. Details shall include, but not be
limited to, utilities, pavement, walls, and landscaping.
A. If the applicant intends to develop land in phases, a phasing plan shall
be required showing total lot phasing. If a subdivision and/or land
140. Editor's Note: See Ch. 225, Zoning.
§ 195-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-37
1:623
§ 195-38. Common areas plan and facilities management.
All development proposals involving land or facilities that will be commonly
owned among more than one titleholder shall include a diagram illustrating
the location(s) and extent of said land at the time of plan application. The
ownership and method of assuring perpetual maintenance to be applied to
those areas which are to be used for recreational or other common purposes
shall be defined and recorded in a manner that the Township Solicitor finds
acceptable. The plan shall be provided at the same scale as the preliminary
and final site plans, as applicable.
§ 195-39. Level of service of water and sewage supply.
If water is to be provided by means other than private wells owned and
maintained by the individual owners of lots within the subdivision and/
or land development, applicants shall present evidence to the Planning
Commission that the subdivision and/or land development is to be supplied
by the Hampton-Shaler Water Authority. This evidence shall take the form
of a copy of a certificate of public convenience from the Pennsylvania Public
Utility Commission or an application for such certificate, a cooperative
agreement or a commitment or agreement to serve the area in question,
whichever is appropriate, submitted to the Township.
§ 195-40. Traffic impact study.
development is planned as a phased development, the plan shall specify
how many phases, phasing boundaries and the proposed time frame
necessary to complete each phase.
B. Where the applicant proposes the development of a subdivision or land
development in separate phases over a period of years, the Township
will allow that an applicant submits an installation schedule of
improvements as outlined in the Municipalities Planning Code,
§ 508.4(v).141
C. All applications for final approval of future phases must conform to the
preliminary plan application as previously approved by the Township.
Any phase that contains substantive changes to the previously
approved in the preliminary plan will represent a major modification to
the application and will require complete resubmission of the
preliminary plan application in accordance with this chapter.
D. Each phase, except for the last phase, shall contain a minimum of 25%
of the total number of dwelling units as depicted on the preliminary site
plan unless the Township approves a lesser percentage for one or more
of the phases.
A. The Township shall require a traffic impact study for land development
or change in land use generating trips in addition to the adjacent
141. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10508(4)(v).
§ 195-37 SHALER CODE § 195-40
1:624
roadways' existing peak hour volumes in cases where known traffic
deficiencies as listed by the Township exist in the area of the proposed
development or as the result of a proposed change in use. Development
generating less than 75 trips per peak hour shall be required to submit
a Traffic Impact Study Type A. Development generating 75 per peak
hour or more trips shall require the submission of a Traffic Impact
Study Type B.
B. Traffic Impact Study Type A.
(1) The applicant shall prepare a worksheet that computes the
weekday peak morning hour (between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m.) and
weekday peak afternoon hour (between 4:00 p.m. and 6:00 p.m.)
average vehicle trips for residential subdivisions according to the
latest edition of the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) Trip
Generation Manual. The applicant shall submit the completed
worksheet to the Township. The applicant shall reference the
Average Rate in the Trip Generation Per Acre table for the
applicable Land Use 210 Codes of the ITE Trip Generation Manual.
(2) In addition to the computation worksheet, the applicant shall
supply copies of the land use pages ITE results to the Township.
C. Traffic Impact Study Type B.
(1) Traffic impact study scope. Prior to beginning a traffic impact
study, the applicant shall submit a proposed scope of services to the
Township for review and approval. The traffic impact study shall
include the following if appropriate as determined by the Township:
(a) A brief description of the proposed project in terms of land use
and magnitude.
(b) An inventory and analysis of existing roadway and traffic
conditions in the site environs, including:
[1] Roadway network and traffic control.
[2] Existing traffic volumes in terms of peak hours and
average daily traffic (ADT).
[3] Planned roadway improvements by others.
[4] Intersection levels of service.
[5] Other measures of roadway adequacy; i.e., lane widths,
traffic signal warrants, vehicle studies, etc.
(c) Proposed site-generated traffic volumes in terms of:
[1] Peak hours and ADT (by development phase if required).
[2] Arrival/departure distribution, including method of
determination.
§ 195-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-40
1:625
[3] Site traffic volumes on study roadways.
(d) An analysis of future traffic conditions, including:
[1] Future opening year combined traffic volumes (site traffic
plus future background roadway traffic). Opening year is
the projected year of opening for the proposed
development or change in use.
[2] Future design year, or years with phasing, combined
traffic volumes (site traffic plus future roadway traffic).
Design year is projected to 10 years beyond the expected
opening year of the development or change in use.
[3] Background traffic growth rates shall be obtained from the
Southwestern Pennsylvania Commission.
[4] Intersection levels of service.
[5] A pavement analysis or roadways which are projected to
experience significant increase in ADT volumes off site.
[6] Other measures of roadway adequacy; i.e., lane widths,
traffic signal warrants, vehicle delay studies, etc.
[7] When access is onto a state road, the analysis of future
conditions shall be consistent with PennDOT
requirements.
(e) A description of future levels of service and their compliance
with standards for traffic capacity of streets, intersections and
driveways. New streets shall be designed for adequate traffic
capacity defined as follows. All reference to levels of service
(LOS) shall be defined by the Highway Capacity Manual,
Special Report 209, published by Transportation Research
Board. These standards may be waived by the Township if
sufficient evidence is provided that criteria cannot be met with
reasonable mitigation.
[1] Traffic capacity LOS shall be based upon future design
year analysis.
[2] New or modified (a new approach created) nonsignaled
intersections or driveways which intersect streets shall be
designed for LOS C or better for each traffic movement
unless otherwise specified by the Township.
[3] New or modified (a new approach created) signalized
intersections shall be designed for LOS C or better for
each traffic movement, unless otherwise specified by the
Township.
§ 195-40 SHALER CODE § 195-40
1:626
§ 195-41. State highway access.
The applicant shall obtain a copy of the submitted application and approved
permit for a highway occupancy permit (H.O.P.) for plans that require
access to a highway (Pennsylvania route or United States route) under the
jurisdiction of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation. The H.O.P.
plan shall contain a notice that a highway occupancy permit is required
pursuant to Section 420 of the Act of June 1, 1945 (P.L. 1424, No. 428),
known as the "State Highway Law,"142 before driveway access to a state
highway is permitted.
§ 195-42. Geotechnical report and slope analysis.
[4] Existing intersections impacted by development traffic
shall maintain a minimum LOS D for each traffic
movement, or, if future base (without development traffic)
LOS is E then mitigation shall be made to maintain LOS E
with development traffic. If future base LOS is F, then
degradation in delays shall be mitigated.
(f) A description and analysis of the proposed access plan and site
plan, including:
[1] Access plan including analysis of required sight distances
using PennDOT criteria and description of access roadway,
location, geometric conditions and traffic control.
[2] On-site circulation plan showing parking locations and
dimension, loading access circulation roadway and traffic
control.
(g) The traffic circulation mitigating action plan shall include:
[1] Project features relative to site access and on-site
circulation which could be modified to maximize positive
impact or minimize negative impact.
[2] An off-site improvement plan depicting required roadway
and signal installation and signing improvements to meet
the minimum level of service requirements.
A. A professional geotechnical engineer licensed in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania shall complete a quantitative slope stability analysis of
proposed cut slopes and fill embankments. At minimum, test boring and
relevant laboratory soil or rock test results, site groundwater and
surface water findings, anticipated surcharge and/or hydrostatic loads/
conditions and any other factors affecting the proposed slopes should
be included in the analysis. The slope stability analysis must be based
on a method accepted by the geotechnical engineering community, and
that has been published in an accepted engineering textbook, journal,
142. Editor's Note: See 36 P.S. § 670-420.
§ 195-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-42
1:627
§ 195-43. Impervious surface requirements and worksheet.
or proceedings. The analysis should ultimately provide a factor of safety
(FS) against movement/failure of the proposed slope. A slope will
generally be considered stable in the long-term when the FS is greater
than or equal to 1.5, unless special circumstances, as approved by the
Township, should be allowed. Various slope/embankment construction
scenarios can be analyzed by the engineer, but no proposed slopes/
embankments indicating an FS less than that approved will be deemed
acceptable.
B. The slope analysis shall also depict the location of slopes with grades
between 15% and 25% and those that exceed 25% in gradient. Each
category shall be depicted with a different color or grey shading or
pattern. A statement that the proposed subdivision or land development
will not cause any environmental hazard or subsidence shall also be
included on the slope analysis.
C. An applicant shall review and note his or her site location in relation to
landslide-prone areas as designated by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania's available mapping.
A. Purpose and intent.
(1) To decrease stormwater runoff volumes and increase the
stormwater infiltration and groundwater recharge.
(2) To reduce peak stormwater discharge rates significantly by
diverting stormwater into the ground and away from the pipe-andpond/
cistern stormwater management system.
(3) To improve site appearance by encouraging the installation of
vegetation or other permeable surfaces where there would
otherwise be only hard pavement or impermeable surfaces.
(4) To increase a lot's effective developable area by downsizing the
need for a piped stormwater management system.
(5) To provide an applicant flexibility in complying with Township,
Allegheny County and Commonwealth of Pennsylvania regulations
related to stormwater management.
B. Applicability.
(1) The impervious surface coverage requirements shall apply to all
land development plans.
(2) All horizontal surfaces on a lot shall be accounted for. Horizontal
surfaces shall include but may not be limited to roofs, patios, decks,
terraces, stoops, sidewalks, swimming pools, ponds, driveways,
parking areas and sport courts.
C. Methodology.
§ 195-42 SHALER CODE § 195-43
1:628
(1) A table itemizing the total square footage of each surface material
(see Table C: Impervious Surface Coverage) and the total square
footage of the lot (total lot area) shall be depicted on the site plan.
The worksheet shall be submitted to the Zoning Officer as part of a
preliminary land development application.
(2) In a situation where a horizontal surface, such as a deck, is
suspended or supported above another horizontal surface, in the
calculation the applicant shall account for the surface with the
greatest surface area.
(3) An applicant shall compute the square footage of a roof's surface
area based on the building footprint.
(4) The rate of imperviousness for each surface material denoted on
the site plan shall be based on Table B: Rate of Imperviousness. An
applicant can provide an alternative imperviousness rate based on
a professional engineer's statement and computation. The
Township reserves the right to evaluate the proposed alternative
imperviousness rate and to accept or reject the proposal.
(5) No allowances or deductions shall be made for tree canopy except
as associated to a woodland; see Table B.
(6) Details shall be provided so compliance may be determined.
(7) The total surface area for all surface material assignments shall be
equal to the total lot area.
Table B: Rate of Imperviousness
Surface Materials
Rate of
Imperviousness1
(% impervious)
1 Asphalt, Rubber or Metal Roofing
Roof; Conventional Concrete
Pavement; Conventional Asphalt
Pavement; Open Water Body; Gravel
Roof
95
2 Stone, Concrete or Brick Pavers with
Grouted Joints on Concrete Base;
Compacted Angular Aggregate
Pavement; Wood or Composite Wood
Deck
75
3 Green Roof <=4" depth; Stone,
Concrete or Brick Pavers with
Ungrouted Joints on Sand and/or
Aggregate Base; Permeable Concrete
Pavement; Permeable Asphalt
Pavement
50
§ 195-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-43
1:629
Table B: Rate of Imperviousness
Surface Materials
Rate of
Imperviousness1
(% impervious)
4 Uncompacted Non-angular Aggregate
Pavement; Green Roof > 4-8" depth;
Open-celled Concrete Grid with Lawn
or Non-Angular Aggregate Fill
30
5 Open-celled Plastic Grid with Lawn or
Non-Angular Aggregate Fill; Lawn;
Green Roof > 8" depth; Field
20
6 Woodland 15
NOTES:
1 Based on slopes between 0 and 3%. Increase the impervious
rating of each surface material by 5% for surfaces located on
slopes > 3% to 10%. Increase the impervious rating of surface
material by 15% for surfaces on slopes > 10%.
Table C: Impervious Surface Coverage
Column A Column B Column C Column D
Surface Material
Total
Square Feet
of Surface
Rate of
Imperviousness
Adjusted
Square Feet of
Surface
Material
(Column B x C)
Line 1 Asphalt, Rubber or
Metal Roofing Roof;
Conventional Concrete
Pavement;
Conventional Asphalt
Pavement; Open Water
Body; Gravel Roof
__________x 0.95 = __________
Line 2 Stone, Concrete or
Brick Pavers with
Grouted Joints on
Concrete Base;
Compacted Angular
Aggregate Pavement;
Wood or Composite
Wood Deck
__________x 0.75 __________
§ 195-43 SHALER CODE § 195-43
1:630
§ 195-44. Environmental assessment.
The location of relevant natural features as stated under the National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit requirements,
Table C: Impervious Surface Coverage
Column A Column B Column C Column D
Surface Material
Total
Square Feet
of Surface
Rate of
Imperviousness
Adjusted
Square Feet of
Surface
Material
(Column B x C)
Line 3 Green Roof <=4"
depth; Stone, Concrete
or Brick Pavers with
Ungrouted Joints on
Sand and/or Aggregate
Base; Permeable
Concrete Pavement;
Permeable Asphalt
Pavement
__________x 0.50 = __________
Line 4 Uncompacted Nonangular
Aggregate
Pavement; Green Roof
> 4-8" depth; Opencelled
Concrete Grid
with Lawn or Non-
Angular Aggregate Fill
__________x 0.30 = __________
Line 5 Open-celled Plastic
Grid with Lawn or
Non-Angular
Aggregate Fill; Lawn;
Green Roof > 8" depth;
Field
__________x 0.20 = __________
Line 6 Woodland __________x 0.15 = __________
Line 7 Sum of Lines
1+2+3+4+5+6
__________ __________
Total Lot
Area
Adjusted
Impervious
Surface
Total
Maximum Permitted Impervious Surface
Coverage
= __________
Percent of Impervious Surface Coverage (Adjusted
Surface Area/Total Lot Area)
= __________
§ 195-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-44
1:631
including, but not limited to, streams, other natural watercourses, wetlands,
general land cover, significant tree masses and other significant natural
features shall be illustrated on an environmental analysis base map at the
same scale as the preliminary site plan.
§ 195-45. Wetland impact.
The applicant shall include on the plans a statement that no development
will occur within wetland areas. If development is proposed within
wetlands, the applicant shall obtain appropriate permits from federal and
state regulating agencies. Also, the Township may require an environmental
study to determine impacts to the wetlands in addition to recommending
improvements to mitigate the impacts.
§ 195-46. Phase 1 Environmental Assessment.
A. Purpose: A Phase 1 Environmental Assessment report shall be
submitted that evaluates whether a lot is likely to have suffered
environmental degradation. It involves nonintrusive investigative
techniques to establish whether the lot is likely to be contaminated and,
if so, to initiate the next level of environmental assessment.
B. Content: An environmental assessment, in general conformance with
the guidelines established under ASTM Standards on Environmental
Assessments, shall contain the following:
(1) Records review.
(a) Review of records from standard sources as accepted by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection that are
reasonably ascertainable to identify known environmental
conditions for the site as well as the immediate surrounding
area.
(b) Review federal, state and local databases, including CERCLIS,
NPL, RCRA notifiers, open dumps, ERNS, FINDS and USTs to
determine if the subject lot is identified therein regarding
spills, discharges and hazardous waste sites.
(c) Review site historical records to assess previous uses of the
site as they may relate to current environmental conditions.
(d) Review chain-of-title documents and practical reviewable
materials such as aerial photographs, Sanborn fire insurance
maps, zoning and land use records or historical maps to assess
the previous uses of lots.
(2) Site reconnaissance: The site reconnaissance shall assess, to the
extent to which they can be visually or physically observed, the
following:
(a) Current land use.
§ 195-44 SHALER CODE § 195-46
1:632
(b) Previous uses.
(c) Current uses of adjacent properties.
(d) Previous uses of adjacent properties.
(e) Hazardous and petroleum substances storage and use.
(f) Evidence of above- or below-ground storage tanks.
(g) Drums or unidentified storage containers.
(h) Electrical equipment with known or suspected PCBs.
(i) Pools of free liquid, stains or corrosion or odors.
(j) A general description of the presence of floor drains, sumps/
pits, septic systems and wells.
(k) Stressed vegetation or dead vegetation.
(l) Signs of oil and gas well development.
(3) Interviews of persons familiar with the site: Topics of interviews
with those familiar with the site shall include, but not be limited to,
the following:
(a) Past uses of the site.
(b) Site modifications.
(c) Regulatory compliance (to identify obvious potential indicators
of the existence of environmental conditions).
(d) Information regarding the presence and locations of:
[1] Burial sites.
[2] Oil and/or gas wells or leases of the same.
(4) Report preparation.
(a) Evaluate data, findings and recommendations resulting from
Subsection B(1), (2) and (3) of this section.
(b) Prepare and submit a written report summarizing and
detailing the above results.
C. Findings: If the environmental site assessment report indicates that the
lot is likely to be degraded, then the applicant must conduct a site
investigation in accordance with the ASTM guidelines for a site
investigation to identify areas of the lot impacted by environmental
degradation and a remedial investigation/feasibility study to identify
the full extent of soil and groundwater contamination and to identify
and evaluate the feasibility of remediation alternatives. The site
investigation and remedial investigation/feasibility study evaluations
§ 195-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-46
1:633
§ 195-47. Phase 2 Environmental Assessment (if required by Phase
1 assessment).
A Phase 2 Environmental Assessment, including all plans, narrative, and
supporting information as required by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection or its approved equivalent shall be provided. The
following situations, but not limited to such situations, may specifically
require a Phase 2 Environmental Assessment based upon determination
from the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection:
§ 195-48. Final plan application requirements.
§ 195-49. Final plan applications.
shall be in conformance with the guidelines of the governing state or
federal regulatory agency.
D. Waiver: The Township Board of Commissioners may waive the
requirements of this section upon the applicant's written request and
recommendations from the Planning Commission. Grounds for a waiver
include, but are not limited to:
(1) A proposal presenting a suitable alternative that conforms to the
intent of this chapter.
(2) Existing physical characteristics of the lot that prevent
conformance with requirements.
A. For an application for change of use.
B. When the regulatory agency suspects toxic conditions on the site.
A. Final plan applications shall be prepared in conformance with the
provisions of this article and any other applicable requirements of
Township law. The final plan application shall not be considered to be
complete and properly filed unless and until all items required have
been submitted and confirmed by the Zoning Officer. The Township
shall check the plans, documents and fees to determine if they are in
proper form and contain all the information. If defective, the application
will be returned to the applicant with a statement that the application is
incomplete within 10 working days; otherwise, the application shall be
deemed filed as of the submission date. Acceptance shall not constitute
a waiver of any deficiencies.
A. After a preliminary plan application has been approved by the
Township, the applicant may proceed by submitting a final plan
application within such time periods as set forth by law. Final plans
shall be prepared in accordance with the additional requirements of
this chapter and shall provide sufficient design information to
demonstrate compliance with the requirements of Article V of this
chapter.
§ 195-46 SHALER CODE § 195-49
1:634
§ 195-50. Final plan application form and fee.
B. For those applicants not required to obtain preliminary plan application
approval, the final plan application shall include all information
required on the Subdivision and/or Land Development Submission
Requirements Table.143
C. A final plan application shall not be considered to be complete and
properly filed unless and until all items required by this chapter,
including the application fee and the application form provided by the
Township, have been received at least 25 days prior to the Planning
Commission meeting.
A. Final plan applications shall be prepared in conformance with the
provisions of this chapter and any other additional applicable Township
requirements of law.
B. All final plan applications shall include the following, plus any
additional information and copies as required by the Township:
(1) One application form as specified and obtained from the Township.
(2) A minimum of 10 copies of the final site plan with a minimum of
three sets shall be 24 inches by 36 inches. One electronic file shall
be submitted in PDF file format of all plans, maps, and drawings.
(3) Filing/review fees. (See schedule available at the Township office.)
The fee shall be submitted in the form of a check or money order
payable to Shaler Township.
(a) Review fees shall include the reasonable and necessary
charges by the Township professional consultants or engineer
for review and report to the Township and shall be set by
resolution. Such review fees shall be reasonable and in
accordance with the ordinary and customary charges by the
Township Engineer, but in no event shall the fees exceed the
rate or cost charged by the engineer or consultant to the
Township when fees are not reimbursed or otherwise imposed
on applicants.
(b) In the event the applicant disputes the amount of any such
review fees, Section 503(1) of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code144 shall apply.
(4) Inspection and engineering fees. Inspection and engineering fees
according to the resolution of Township Board of Commissioners,
as updated time to time, in the form approved by the Township,
shall be provided.
143. Editor's Note: Said table is included as an attachment to this chapter.
144. Editor's Note: 53 P.S. § 10503(1).
§ 195-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-51
1:635
§ 195-51. Letter of transmittal.
A letter of transmittal identifying the proposed activity, the purpose of the
development, lot numbers, date, and any other pertinent information shall
accompany the application.
§ 195-52. Updated/revised preliminary plan information.
§ 195-53. Final site plan.
A. The items in §§ 195-30 through 195-47 in the preliminary plan
application requirements shall be resubmitted as part of the final plan
application requirements with information revised per Township
comments and updated per the latest available design.
A. The final site plan shall be provided in an accurate and final form
appropriate for recording. Final site plans shall be submitted on sheets
measuring 24 inches by 36 inches, or other size requested by the
Allegheny County Department of Real Estate. Where necessary to avoid
sheets larger than the maximum size prescribed above, final site plans
shall be drawn on multiple sheets and accompanied by a key diagram
showing relative location of the sections.
B. The final site plan shall be in such a format and/or such material as is
required for recording by Allegheny County. All preliminary site plan
requirements as listed in § 195-22 shall be included in the final site
plan. The final site plan shall also meet the following requirements and/
or contain the following:
(1) Copy of the approved preliminary plan.
(2) Final plat, in accurate and final form for recording. The final plat
shall include the following:
(a) Title block, placed in the lower right hand corner and
containing the following information:
[1] The name and location of the subdivision or land
development, the plan date and the date of any revisions.
[2] The name and plan book volume and page numbers of the
previously recorded plan, if any.
[3] Name, address and phone number of the owner of record
and the developer.
[4] Name, address and phone number of the firm that
prepared the plans, and the name, seal and registration
number of the surveyor who prepared the plan.
[5] Sheet number, North arrow and graphic scale.
§ 195-51 SHALER CODE § 195-53
1:636
(b) Tract boundaries, right-of-way lines of streets, easements and
other right-of-way lines with accurate distances to hundredths
of a foot and bearings to 1/4 of a minute. Tract boundaries shall
be determined by field survey only and shall be balanced and
closed. Surveys shall be prepared in accordance with the
standards contained in the Allegheny County Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance.
(c) Complete curve data for all curves included in the final plat,
including radius, arc length, chord bearing and chord distance.
(d) Location, type and size of all monuments and lot line markers;
state whether found, set or to be set.
(e) Approved street names and street right-of-way widths.
(f) Lot numbers, lot dimensions, lot areas in square feet and
building setback lines.
(g) Tabulation of area data in acres and square feet, including lots,
parcels, units, areas dedicated for rights-of-way, etc., and total
plan area.
(h) Lot and block or Tax Map parcel numbers.
(i) Easements and rights-of-way for all public and private
improvements, including widths, purposes and limitations, if
any.
(j) Accurate dimensions, acreage and purpose of any property to
be reserved as public or common open space.
(k) Indication of platting of adjacent property and the names of the
adjacent property owners.
(l) Site location map, prepared in accordance with the Allegheny
County Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
(m) All required municipal certifications, which shall include the
Municipal Engineer.
(n) Certification of plat preparation and accuracy by a registered
surveyor.
(o) Certification of the dedication of streets and other property.
(p) All other certifications, dedications and acknowledgments, as
required by Allegheny County.
(q) Plats which require access to a road under the jurisdiction of
the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation shall contain a
notice that, before driveway access is permitted, a highway
occupancy permit is required in accordance with the Act of
June 1, 1945, known as the "State Highway Law."145
§ 195-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-53
1:637
(r) Notation on the plan of any modifications or waivers granted to
the provisions of this chapter.
(3) Land development plans. In addition to the above final
requirements, land development plans shall include the following
information:
(a) Final site plan, including building locations, parking areas,
roads and access drives, landscaping and buffer yards in
accordance with this chapter.
(b) Final grading plan. The final grading plan shall include all final
contours, grades, floor elevations, permanent conservation
measures, limit of disturbance line, typical keyway and/or
benching details, and earthwork quantities in cubic yards.
(c) Final stormwater management plan, including all final
calculations.
(d) Final soil erosion and sedimentation pollution control plan, as
submitted to the Allegheny County Conservation District
(ACCD), and evidence that the ACCD has issued a finding of
adequacy.
(e) Dimensioned site layout plan.
(f) Final photometric plan.
(4) Construction plans for public and private improvements, prepared
by a registered professional on sheets measuring 24 inches by 36
inches. The construction plans shall show the following:
(a) Conformity with the design standards specified in this chapter.
(b) Plan and center line profile drawings of each street in the plan
and extending at least 200 feet beyond the plan. Street profiles
shall include complete vertical curve information.
(c) At least a typical cross-section of each street in a new
development, extending at least 50 feet from the street center
line to each side, or extending 25 feet from the right-of-way
line to each side, whichever is greater.
(d) The location of all existing and proposed sanitary sewers,
storm sewers, manholes, catch basins and endwalls within the
site, and all necessary extensions thereof beyond the site.
(e) By plan, all pipe sizes, distances and directions of flow. Show
sanitary sewer wye locations, including a station for each wye
as measured from the downstream manhole.
145. Editor's Note: See 36 P.S. § 670-101 et seq.
§ 195-53 SHALER CODE § 195-53
1:638
(f) By profile, all pipe sizes, materials, distances and grades; and
top and invert elevations of all manholes, catch basins and
endwalls. Show existing and proposed ground.
(g) All construction details for stormwater detention facilities,
including any intake control structures, discharge control
structures, underground storage tanks, sumps and stormwater
detention basins.
(h) The locations of all other existing and proposed utilities,
including gas, water, fire hydrants, electric, telephone and
cable TV.
(i) All easements and rights-of-way for public improvements.
(5) Permits and approvals. The applicant shall submit certified copies
of all permits and approvals required by applicable federal and
state laws and county codes and regulations, including, without
limitation, the following:
(a) Allegheny County Conservation District adequacies and
permits.
(b) Federal Aviation Administration and PennDOT Bureau of
Aviation approvals where required.
(c) Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection sewage
facilities permits, general permit, wetland encroachment
permits, stream encroachment/obstruction permits, etc.
(d) County of Allegheny and Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
permits for any proposed roads or driveways.
(e) Water supply certification.
(f) Letters of intent to provide service from utilities companies.
(g) A copy of comments received, if any, from the Allegheny
County Health Department on the stormwater management
plan.
(6) Final zoning chart.
(7) When required by the Township, additional information related to
infill, redevelopment and/or replacement in accordance with the
Township requirements.
(8) If required under the Township Zoning Ordinance,146 locations of
street trees, groundcover/landscaping and sidewalks.
(9) Where applicable, plans of bridges and other improvements, and
shall contain sufficient information to provide complete working
146. Editor's Note: See Ch. 225, Zoning.
§ 195-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-53
1:639
§ 195-54. Final grading plan.
§ 195-55. Utility plans, profiles and data.
A written statement shall be provided indicating that within 90 days of final
plan approval of the submission of a final application, all plans, profiles, and
data for all utilities, including but not limited to electric, water, phone, gas,
and cable lines, shall be provided. Utility locations, where proposed, shall
be imposed to a copy of the final site plan.
§ 195-56. Agreement for dedication of streets.
§ 195-57. Shared parking agreement.
A shared parking agreement shall be provided in a format satisfactory to
the Township Solicitor and shall specify the names of the entity with whom
plans for the proposed construction, including calculations and
required Pennsylvania engineer's seal.
(10) Where individual on-site water supply systems are proposed,
certification of the acceptability of the water supply system by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection must be
submitted wherever their approval is required.
(11) Other certificates of approval as may be required by the Township
Engineer, Planning Commission and the Township Board of
Commissioners.
A. A final grading plan, illustrating final grades of all lots and a surface
drainage plan by arrows showing the direction of runoff on each lot,
shall be submitted and shall also include all items required under the
preliminary grading plan section of this article.147 The final grading
plan shall also clearly delineate the following:
(1) Proposed center line grade of streets with percent of grade of
tangents, including grades at intersections.
A. When the Township accepts dedication of all or some of the streets
within the proposed subdivision/land development following
completion, the Township Board of Commissioners shall require the
posting of financial security to secure the structural integrity of the
streets in accordance with the design and specifications as depicted on
the final site plan. The term for financial security for the maintenance of
the streets shall be 18 months, and the amount shall not exceed 15% of
the actual cost of installation.
B. If there are conditions related to the dedication of streets or related
issues, those conditions and issues shall be noted in the developer's
agreement.
147. Editor's Note: See § 195-23.
§ 195-53 SHALER CODE § 195-57
1:640
the agreement has been made, quantity of spaces, location, lease terms and
uses to be served by the off-site parking spaces, as well as any other mutual
agreements. The final shared parking agreement shall be made a part of the
final landowner and/or developer's agreement.
§ 195-58. Final landowner and/or developer's agreement.
§ 195-59. Deed restrictions, easements and protective covenants.
§ 195-60. Proof of other agencies' approval.
A. As a condition of granting final plan application approval, the Township
shall require that the landowner and/or developer execute a
development agreement with the Township in a form acceptable to the
Township Solicitor, containing provisions that are reasonably required
to ensure compliance with any conditions of approval and any
ordinance or regulation of the Township and to guarantee the proper
installation of on-site improvements related to the subdivision and/or
land development, and provisions necessary to indemnify the Township
in connection with such subdivision and/or land development.
B. If the applicant fails to execute the development agreement within 90
days of the date of final plan approval, the Township may revoke final
plan approval. In the event that the final plan application approval is
revoked, the applicant shall resubmit a final plan application for
approval.
A. Deed restrictions, easements and protective covenants, if any, shall be
provided in a form for recording. Provisions within any declaration of
covenants and restrictions shall include:
(1) Definitions.
(2) General plan of development.
(3) Use restrictions and management responsibilities.
(4) Resolution of document conflicts.
A. Approval of the final plan application by the Township Board of
Commissioners shall be conditioned upon if Allegheny County, state or
federal agencies disapprove the development. It shall be the applicant's
responsibility to obtain all necessary approvals from Allegheny County,
state and federal agencies and submit these approvals to the Township,
including a notification from PADEP regarding a sewer facilities plan
revision approval or waiver (as applicable).
B. Proof of approval of requests/responses and permit applications shall
be including, but not limited to:
(1) Pennsylvania Department of Transportation highway occupancy
permits.
§ 195-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-60
1:641
§ 195-61. As-built drawings in conformance with Allegheny County
and Township standards.
Upon completion of the public and/or private improvements in a plan, asbuilt
plans and profiles of the subdivision and/or land development public
and/or private improvements, as constructed, shall be filed with the
Township Zoning Officer by the applicant within 10 days of the mailing of
the notice of completion. The as-built plans and profiles shall indicate all
public improvements, as constructed, and shall show the top and invert
elevations for all manholes, inlets and sewer structures; the distance
between all manholes, inlets and sewer structures; wye ("y") locations on all
sanitary sewers; and significant changes to the street profiles as approved.
An electronic form of the plan compatible with the Allegheny County and
the Township's digital format and a print of each as-built drawing for public
and/or private improvement shall be submitted. As-built plans and profiles
shall be marked "as-built" and shall contain the final grade of all sanitary
and storm sewers and appurtenances.
§ 195-62. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Township concerning an
application of approval of a subdivision of land development may appeal the
decision in accordance with the procedures specified in Article X-A of the
MPC.148
(2) Pennsylvania Department of Transportation traffic signal permits.
(3) Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection Sewage
Facilities Planning Module (or exemption if applicable).
(4) Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permits.
(5) Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection water
obstruction and encroachment permits.
(6) Pennsylvania Department of Economic Development and/or
Federal Emergency Management Agency floodplain permits.
(7) Hampton-Shaler Water Authority approval.
(8) In addition, where any alteration or relocation of a stream or
watercourse is proposed, documentation shall be submitted
indicating that all affected adjacent municipalities have been
notified of the proposed alteration or relocation. The Pennsylvania
Department of Community and Economic Development and the
Federal Insurance Administrator, or other applicable agency, shall
also be notified whenever any such activity is proposed.
(9) Shaler Township zoning approval unless otherwise identified by the
Township.
§ 195-60 SHALER CODE § 195-63
1:642
§ 195-63. Approval resolution.
When requested by the applicant, in order to facilitate financing, the
Township Board of Commissioners shall furnish the landowner and/or
developer with a signed copy of a resolution indicating approval of the
final plat contingent upon the landowner and/or developer obtaining a
satisfactory completion bond. The final plat shall not be signed or recorded
until the completion bond and development agreement are executed. The
resolution shall expire and be deemed to be revoked if the completion bond
and development agreement are not executed within 90 calendar days,
unless the Planning Commission grants a written extension. Such extension
shall not be unreasonably withheld and shall be placed in writing at the
request of the landowner and/or developer.
§ 195-64. Completion of improvements; improvement guaranty.
§ 195-65. Final release from improvement guaranty.
A. No plan shall be given final approval by the Township Board of
Commissioners unless the public improvements required by this
chapter have been installed in accordance with the standards set forth
in Article V.
B. In lieu of the completion of any improvement(s) required prior to, and
as a condition for, final approval, the applicant shall provide for the
deposit, in a form acceptable with the Township, of financial security in
an amount sufficient to the Township to cover the costs of such
improvement(s) or common amenities.
C. The amount of the financial security required shall be based upon an
estimate of the cost of completion of the required improvement(s),
submitted by the applicant and prepared by a registered professional
engineer and certified by such engineer to be a fair and reasonable
estimate of such cost. The Township Engineer shall review the proposed
estimate and make a recommendation to the Township Board of
Commissioners as to acceptance and may provide an estimate if
deemed unacceptable.
(1) If the applicant and the Township cannot agree upon an estimate,
then the estimate shall be recalculated and recertified by another
registered professional engineer chosen mutually by the applicant
and the Township. The estimate by the third engineer shall be
deemed as the final estimate.
(2) If a third engineer is selected, the fees for services shall be evenly
divided between the applicant and the Township.
A. When the applicant has completed all of the necessary and appropriate
improvements, he/she shall notify the Township, in writing, by certified
148. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 11001-A et seq.
§ 195-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-65
1:643
§ 195-66. Partial release from improvement guaranty.
or registered mail, of the completion of said improvements, and shall
also send a copy to the Township Engineer. The Township shall, within
10 days after receipt of such notice, direct the Township Engineer to
inspect all of the installed improvements.
B. Within 30 days of authorization by the Township Board of
Commissioners, the Township Engineer shall file a report, in writing, of
the result of the inspection. A copy shall also be forwarded to the
applicant by certified or registered mail. The report shall detail the
improvements and shall indicate approval or rejection, in whole or in
part, of the improvement(s). A rejection, in whole or in part, of the
improvement(s) shall contain a statement of reasons for such
recommendation.
C. The Township shall notify the applicant within 15 days of receipt of the
Engineer's recommendation, in writing, by certified or registered mail,
of the action by the Township Board of Commissioners.
D. If any portion of the said improvement(s) shall not be approved, or shall
be rejected by the Township, the applicant shall proceed to complete
the same and, upon completion, the same procedure of notification as
identified above shall be followed.
E. The applicant shall reimburse the Township for the reasonable and
necessary fees based upon a schedule established by ordinance or
resolution. Such fees shall be those customarily paid for engineering or
consulting work performed in the Township.
F. Billing, reimbursements and disputes. See Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code Section 510, as amended.149
A. As the work of installing the required improvements proceeds, the
applicant may request the Township to release or authorize the release,
from time to time, of such portions of the financial security necessary
for payment to the contractor or contractors performing the work.
B. Any such requests must be in writing and describe the portion of the
work claimed to be completed and the amount of security requested to
be released.
C. The Township shall have 45 days from receipt of such request to have
the Township Engineer certify in writing to the Township that such
portion of the work upon the improvements has been completed in
accordance with the approved plat. Upon such certification, the
Township shall authorize release by the bonding company or lending
institution of an amount as estimated by the Township Engineer fairly
representing the value of the improvements completed, or if the
Township fails to act within said forty-five-day period, the release of
149. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10510.
§ 195-65 SHALER CODE § 195-66
1:644
§ 195-67. Modifications and waivers.
funds shall be deemed approved. Notwithstanding anything to the
contrary, the Township may, prior to final release at the time of
completion and certification by its appointed engineer, require
retention of 10% of the estimated cost of improvements.
D. If any portion of the said improvement(s) shall not be approved, or shall
be rejected by the Township, the applicant shall proceed to complete
the same and, upon completion, the same procedure of notification as
identified above shall be followed.
E. The applicant shall reimburse the Township for the reasonable and
necessary fees based upon a schedule established by ordinance or
resolution. Such fees shall be those customarily paid for engineering or
consulting work performed in the Township.
F. Billing, reimbursements and disputes. See Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code Section 510, as amended.150
A. Where the applicant shows to the satisfaction of the Township that the
literal compliance with any mandatory provision of these regulations
causes undue hardship to the applicant because of peculiar conditions
pertaining to the particular property, the Township may grant a
modification or waiver to one or more provisions of this chapter. Such
modification or waiver, however, shall not have the effect of nullifying
the intent and/or purpose of this chapter.
B. In granting any modification, the Township may impose such conditions
as will substantially secure the objectives of the standards and
requirements of this chapter.
C. All requests for modifications or waivers of any standard and/or
requirement contained in this chapter shall be made in accordance with
the following procedure:
(1) The request shall be made in writing and shall accompany the
preliminary plan application. The request shall include:
(a) A full description of the unreasonableness or hardship on
which the request is based, and any peculiar circumstances.
(b) A full description of the alternative standard proposed to
provide equal or better results.
(c) The section(s) of this chapter that are requested to be modified
and the minimum modification necessary to relieve the
hardship.
(2) The request for modification shall be reviewed by the Planning
Commission during preliminary plan review to determine
150. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10510.
§ 195-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-67
1:645
§ 195-68. Recording of final plat.
compliance with the requirements in Subsection C(1), above, and
shall be recommended for action to the Township Board of
Commissioners.
(3) The Township Board of Commissioners, after receipt of the
Planning Commission recommendation, shall complete its own
review and shall grant or reject the required modification.
(4) If the modification is granted, a note shall appear on the final plan
for recordation.
(5) The Township Board of Commissioners shall keep a written record
of all action on all requests for modifications.
A. Upon approval of a final plat by the Township, the applicant shall,
within 90 days of such final approval or 90 days after the date of
delivery of an approved plat signed by the governing body, following
completion of conditions imposed for such approval, whichever is later,
record such plat in the Allegheny County Department of Real Estate.
The Allegheny County Department of Real Estate shall not accept any
plat for recording unless such plat officially notes the approval of the
Township Board of Commissioners and the review of the Allegheny
County Planning Agency or its designee. The recording of the plat shall
not constitute grounds for assessment increases until such time as lots
are sold or improvements are installed on the land included within the
subject plat. Approval certification shall be in accordance with county
and/or Township language as outlined and/or referenced in this article
and Article XI, Required Signature and Stamp Blocks.
B. In the event that the plan has not been recorded within the required 90
calendar days, the President of the Township Board of Commissioners
and the Chairman of the Planning Commission are authorized to
reinstate the Township approval for recording upon receiving a report
from the Township Engineer that there are not changes in the
subdivision or land development plan previously granted approval and
that all requirements of this article regarding posting of a complete
plan is submitted for reinstatement of approval within 90 calendar days
following the expiration of the original 90 calendar days from the date
of final approval.
C. Upon recording of the final plat in the office of the Allegheny County
Department of Real Estate, the applicant shall deliver to the Township
two paper prints of the final plat as recorded. In addition to the two
paper prints, the applicant must submit one copy of the final plat in an
electronic format compatible with the Township's geographic
information system (GIS).
§ 195-67 SHALER CODE § 195-68
1:646
D. At the time of final plat submission, the applicant shall be required to
pay a recorded plan deposit in an amount determined from time to time
by resolution of the Township Board of Commissioners.
E. Said deposit shall be returned to the applicant when the Township
receives the two signed and recorded paper prints of the final plat and
the one electronic copy, or when the applicant has officially withdrawn
the application.
§ 195-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-68
1:647

ARTICLE IV
Installation, Inspection and Acceptance of Improvements
§ 195-69. General.
§ 195-70. Required improvements.
The following improvements, as shown on the recorded plan, shall be
provided by the applicant in accordance with the details and/or
specifications cited in Article V and the Appendix of this chapter. The
applicant shall give a certified copy of the recorded plan to the Township.
§ 195-71. Inspections.
A. No improvements shall be installed, or work begun, unless the
following has been accomplished:
(1) All necessary plans, profiles and specifications for the
improvements have been submitted to, and approved by, the
Township.
(2) The completion bond/financial security and/or proof of insurance
has been provided.
(3) A fully executed developer's agreement has been submitted.
(4) All required permits have been obtained.
(5) PA One Call is made.
B. The applicant shall notify the Township at least 48 hours prior to
beginning any installation of public improvements in an approved plan.
A. Cartway paving.
B. Curbs.
C. Sidewalks and crosswalks.
D. Monuments.
E. Street signs.
F. Sanitary sewage disposal.
G. Water supply and fire hydrants.
H. Stormwater management facilities.
I. Erosion and sedimentation control measures.
J. Street trees.
K. Streetlights.
§ 195-69 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-71
1:649
§ 195-72. Acceptance of improvements.
A. Once the installation of improvements has been approved, while work is
in progress, the applicant shall notify the Township at least 48 hours
prior to the time that the following required progress inspections are
warranted:
(1) Inspection of subgrade of streets prior to laying of base.
(2) Inspection of base prior to final paving of streets.
(3) Inspection of installed water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm
sewers and drainage facilities before they are covered.
B. The inspector shall prepare a written report of all inspections, with a
copy being submitted to the Township for its files.
C. The inspection of sanitary sewer installations shall be in accordance
with the procedures of the applicable sanitary authority with a copy of
any notices or reports being submitted to the Township.
D. When it is evident that any street in a partially completed plan of lots
may be extensively used by construction vehicles hauling building
materials and equipment, and where such street, if completed, may be
damaged during the course of construction of houses on lots abutting
the right-of-way within which the street is centered, the Township shall
require the applicant to complete 80% of the dwelling units prior to the
final paving of the street or otherwise be responsible for damage
through the posting of an additional bond, including, but not limited to,
streets and other required improvements.
A. Every street, sewer, drainage facility or other required improvement
shown on the recorded plan shall remain as a private improvement, and
the Township shall have no responsibility with respect to maintenance,
repair or replacement until such time as the improvement has been
offered for dedication to the Township, inspected, approved and
accepted by resolution or ordinance.
B. No public improvement(s) required by this chapter shall be accepted by
ordinance or resolution of the Township Board of Commissioners
unless, prior thereto, the following shall be submitted to the Township:
(1) A dedication of the installed improvements in a form acceptable to
the Township.
(2) Two sets of as-built plans.
(3) A certificate or notification by the Township Engineer, or other
person designated by the Township, that the improvements have
been constructed in accordance with the standards established by
this chapter.
§ 195-71 SHALER CODE § 195-72
1:650
(4) The results of core boring tests for composition and thickness of
paving, prepared by a qualified testing firm. The location and size
of the borings shall be in accordance with PennDOT Form 408, or
as determined by the Township Engineer.
§ 195-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-72
1:651

ARTICLE V
Design Standards
§ 195-73. General.
§ 195-74. Land requirements.
Land shall be subdivided only for the purposes for which the subdivision has
been approved or proposed.
A. Unless otherwise superseded by state and/or federal laws and/or
regulations, the following land subdivision principles, standards and
requirements shall be applied by the Township Board of Commissioners
in evaluating the plans for proposed subdivisions and shall be the
minimum requirements.
B. This article sets forth design standards and requirements for all
subdivision and land development proposals. The following standards
and requirements shall be applied by the Township in evaluating the
plans for proposed subdivisions and land developments and shall be the
minimum requirements. Any application fee for development shall
conform to the standards set forth in this chapter, unless a modification
is granted under the provisions of this chapter.
(1) All plans shall be prepared in compliance with any applicable
municipal ordinance, including the Zoning Ordinance151 in effect,
and in compliance with any requirement imposed by any local,
state, or federal entity exercising valid regulatory authority.
(2) When other local regulations, or state or federal statutes impose
more restrictive standards and requirements than those contained
herein, the more restrictive standards shall be observed.
(3) Unless otherwise specified by the Township, the requirements of
the Allegheny County Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance, Appendix 1: Drafting Standards for Plans for
Recording, shall be applicable.
(4) Refer to Township roadway and storm sewer improvements details.
A. A preservation of natural features: The applicant shall make every
effort to preserve shade trees and other salient natural features, keep
cut-fill operations to a minimum, and ensure conformity with
topography so as to create the least erosion potential and adequately
handle the volume and velocity of surface water runoff. Whenever
possible, the applicant shall preserve trees, scenic points, historic spots
and other community assets and landmarks. All subdivisions over five
acres in size shall include a comprehensive environmental analysis
prepared by a qualified environmental engineer. Such environmental
analysis shall include:
151. Editor's Note: See Ch. 225, Zoning.
§ 195-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-74
1:653
(1) A description of the project.
(2) A map indicating:
(a) Limits of the following slope areas:
[1] Zero percent to 15%.
[2] Sixteen percent to 25%.
[3] Over 25%.
(b) All natural watercourses and wetlands.
(c) Undermined areas with less than 100 feet overburden.
(d) Landslide-prone area.
(e) Soil type.
(3) An assessment of the impact of the proposed development on those
items identified in Subsection A(2) above.
(4) A list of steps proposed to mitigate environmental damage to the
site during construction in accordance with latest revision of the
EPA Clean Water Act.152
(5) Evidence that the analysis was completed by a qualified
environmental engineer.
B. Subsidence. Land subject to subsidence or underground fires shall
either be made safe for the purpose for which it is to be used, or such
land shall be set aside for uses which shall not endanger life or property
or further aggravate or increase the existing menace.
C. Flood-prone areas. Portions of land which are poorly drained, subject to
periodic flooding, or are in a designated FEMA floodplain or floodway
shall be developed in accordance with Chapter 130 of the Township
Code and also any applicable Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection regulations.
D. Grading, excavating and filling. No change shall be made in the contour
of the land, no grading, excavating, removal or destruction of the
topsoil, trees or other vegetative cover of the land shall be commenced
unless approved in the preliminary and final plat, and, where
applicable, reviewed and approved by the Allegheny County
Conservation District. Such approval shall be based on the preliminary
grading plan for minimizing erosion and sedimentation, controls for
excessive slope areas, grading regulations, and storm drainage
regulations in this chapter, and as may be required by applicable
regulatory agencies having jurisdiction thereof.
152. Editor's Note: See 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
§ 195-74 SHALER CODE § 195-74
1:654
§ 195-75. Easements and utilities.
Easements with a minimum width of 20 feet shall be provided in all
subdivisions and land developments for poles, wires, conduits, storm drains,
sanitary sewers, gas, water and heat mains and/or other utility lines
intended to service the abutting lots, tracts or parcels. Additional widths
may be required if more than one utility is located in the same easement.
Easements shall be centered on or adjacent to rear or side lot lines. No
structures or trees shall be placed within such easements. The applicant
shall comply with the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission (PUC) order
of July 8, 1973, which requires electric and telephone service in residential
developments to be placed underground. Where a subdivision is traversed
by a watercourse, there shall be provided a drainage easement or right-ofway,
conforming substantially with the line of such watercourse and with
such width as will be adequate to preserve natural drainage and provide
sufficient width for maintenance. Applicants shall avail themselves of the
facilities provided by the various authorities or public utility companies in
determining the proper locations for utility line easements.
E. Land subject to hazards of life, health and safety shall not be subdivided
until such hazards have been reviewed or corrected.
F. All portions of a tract being subdivided or developed shall be taken up
in lots, streets, public lands, or other proposed uses so that remnants
and landlocked areas shall be avoided.
A. Water supply.
(1) All properties in subdivisions shall connect with an approved public
water supply system, if available. The subdivider shall construct a
system of water mains which are to be connected to the public
water system serving the Township wherever same is available.
Subdivisions of three lots or less which are located 1,000 feet
beyond the existing system may be exempted from this
requirement by the Township Board of Commissioners. If the water
distribution system cannot be tied in with an approved public
system, an individual well or spring must be installed and operated
in full compliance with the latest Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection specifications covering such facilities. All
land developments of other types must be equipped with a public
water supply system, approved as adequate by the Township Board
of Commissioners.
(2) The plans for the installation of the mains of a water distribution
system shall be prepared with the cooperation of the applicable
public water authority and reviewed and approved by its engineer.
A statement of approval from the Township shall be submitted to
the Township Board of Commissioners.
(3) Upon completion of a water distribution and supply system, one
copy of the plans for the system shall be filed with the Township
§ 195-74 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-75
1:655
§ 195-76. Blocks, lots, and parcels.
Board of Commissioners. The plan shall also be reviewed and
approved by the Department of Environmental Protection.
(4) Fire hydrants. It will be the responsibility of the applicant to
provide all subdivisions and land developments with fire hydrants.
Hydrants shall be installed with the installation of the water lines
or as soon as they become available. The location of the hydrants
shall be approximately every 1,000 feet and shall be subject to
approval by the Township on the final plat.
B. Sanitary sewage disposal.
(1) Each property shall connect with an approved public sewer system.
Where the sewer is not yet provided, the applicant shall install the
sewer line, including lateral connections as may be necessary to
provided adequate service to each lot when connection with the
sewer system is made. The sewer lines shall be suitably capped at
the limits of the subdivision or development, and the laterals shall
be capped at the street right-of-way line.
(2) All plats submitted for approval must show sanitary drains
separated from all other drains. No stormwater shall be permitted
in sanitary drains.
(3) All plats, designs, and data of any new sewage system or for
extension for tapping into any existing system shall be submitted to
the Township for approval and be subject to all its requirements.
(4) The subdivider shall contract the necessary and required sanitary
sewer lines which shall, when possible, be connected to the public
sewer system serving the Township or a portion thereof.
(5) If, in the opinion of the Allegheny County Health Officer, the
Township Engineer and/or the Township Board of Commissioners,
factors exist which would create a public health and sanitation
problem if a certain area is developed, the Zoning Hearing Board
shall not, in those cases, approve the subdivision and platting of
such area until such factors are corrected by an adequate sanitary
sewer system.
C. Propane. All propane installation shall be subject to prior approval of
the Township Engineer or other person designated by the Township and
the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry.
A. Blocks.
(1) Layout. The length, width and shape of blocks shall be determined
with due regard to:
(a) Provision of adequate sites for buildings of the type proposed,
any other zoning requirements, and topography.
§ 195-75 SHALER CODE § 195-76
1:656
(b) Street intersection requirements as outlined by the Township.
(c) Provision of adequate service areas for deliveries, pickups, and
the like, including, but not limited to, those related to
nonresidential development.
(2) Length in residential districts.
(a) Blocks shall have a maximum length of 1,000 feet.
(b) Any other zoning requirements shall be considered.
(c) In the design of blocks (fronting on minor streets) longer than
1,000 feet, special consideration shall be given to the
requirements of satisfactory fire protection. Where
practicable, blocks along arterial and collector streets shall not
be less than 1,000 feet long.
(3) Length in commercial and industrial districts. Blocks in commercial
and industrial areas may vary from the elements of design detailed
above, if required by the nature of the use. Any subdivision of land
or land development in the commercial or industrial districts shall
take into consideration the feasibility of creating roads on the lot
that minimize intersections with arterial, collector or local roads. In
all cases, however, adequate provisions shall be made for off-street
parking and loading areas as well as for traffic circulation and
parking for employees and customers.
(4) Depth. Residential blocks shall be of sufficient depth to
accommodate two tiers of lots, except:
(a) Where through lots are required along a major traffic street.
(b) Where prevented by the size, topographical conditions or other
inherent conditions of property, in which case the Planning
Commission may approve a single tier of lots.
(5) Lot or parcel numbers. Lot numbers or lettered parcels shall be
assigned and approved prior to filing the final subdivision and/or
land development plat.
(6) Building setback lines on lots and parcels. Building lines of lots or
parcels from street rights-of-way (public or private) shall not be
less than those required by the appropriate zoning classification
under Township Zoning Code,153 as amended, for the zoning
district in which they are located.
153. Editor's Note: See Ch. 225, Zoning.
§ 195-76 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-77
1:657
§ 195-77. Streets.
All provisions in this article shall be equally applicable and binding for both
dedicated and privately maintained streets, where said streets serve more
than one dwelling.
A. General standards:
(1) All streets intended for public use shall be paved to full cartway
width. In all cases, paving materials and workmanship shall
conform to any and all applicable Township standards, including all
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Standards adopted by
the Township. The proposed street system shall extend existing or
recorded streets at the same width, but in no case at less than the
required minimum width, and be so located as to allow proper
development of surrounding properties.
(2) Where a subdivision or land development abuts an existing street
of improper width or alignment, the Township Board of
Commissioners may require the dedication of land sufficient to
widen the street or correct the alignment.
(3) Streets in and bordering a subdivision or land development shall be
coordinated, and be of such widths and grades and in such
locations as deemed necessary to accommodate prospective traffic
and facilitate fire protection.
(4) Proposed streets shall be planned suitable to the contour of the
land, to provide buildable lots, to have a suitable alignment and
grade, and to be able to drain properly in accordance with the
standards established by this chapter or other ordinances.
(5) Partially completed streets shall not be approved in a development
plan, but all streets shall be constructed as soon as feasible under
the construction schedule in accordance with the designations
under the approved final plat.
(6) Street name signs shall be installed by the applicant at each street
intersection in accordance to type of materials, design and
standards established by the Township.
(7) A streetlighting system shall be installed in all developments
involving multifamily dwellings and at all intersections with
existing Township streets/roads. Streetlights may also be required
where a hazard exists as determined by the Township Board of
Commissioners.
B. Street widths shall be as follows:
§ 195-77 SHALER CODE § 195-77
1:658
Street Type Minimum Required
Width
Feet
Collector Right-of-way
Cartway
50
24
Local Right-of-way
Cartway
50
20
Permanent cul-de-sac Right-of-way (radius)
Cartway (radius)
50
40
Split street (having a
median with a separate
lane of traffic for each
direction)
Right-of-way
Cartways (each)
70
16
(1) Additional right-of-way and cartway widths may be required by the
Township Board of Commissioners for various reasons, including,
but not limited to:
(a) The type of land development.
(b) Public safety and convenience.
(c) Allowance for anticipated traffic volume.
(d) The size of vehicles frequenting the development.
(e) Parking lanes.
(f) The loading of school buses or other public transportation.
C. Street grades. There shall be a minimum center line grade of 2%.
Grades shall be designed for maximum visibility. Center line grades
shall not exceed the following:
(1) Arterial street: 5%.
(2) Collector street: 8%.
(3) Local street: 12%.
(4) Alley: 12%.
(5) All street intersections: 4%.
D. Horizontal curves: Proper sight distance must be provided with respect
to horizontal alignment. Measured along the center line five feet above
§ 195-77 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-77
1:659
grade, horizontal curves shall be provided to permit the following
minimum sight distances:
(1) Arterial street: 200 feet.
(2) Collector street: 200 feet.
(3) Local street: 100 feet.
(4) Alley: 100 feet.
E. Vertical curves. Proper sight distance must be provided with respect to
vertical alignment. Such curves shall be measured along the center line
five feet above minimum sight distances.
F. Intersections.
(1) Streets shall intersect as nearly as possible at right angles. No
more than two streets shall intersect at the same point.
Intersections with collector streets shall be located not closer than
1,000 feet apart, measured from the center line of the major street.
(2) Intersections with connector streets shall be at intervals not less
than 800 feet.
(3) Intersections with minor streets shall be at intervals not less than
500 feet.
(4) Staggered intersections shall be provided on collector streets at a
minimum distance of 500 feet; and on connector or minor streets at
not less than 200 feet as measured from center line to center line
along the street common to both intersections.
(5) Intersections shall be rounded by a tangential arc with a minimum
radius of:
(a) Twenty-five feet for intersections involving only minor streets.
(b) Thirty feet for all intersections involving a connector or
collector street.
G. Sight distance at intersections and obstructions. Embankments, fences,
hedges, shrubbery, walls, planting (except for trees and grass) or other
obstructions, including signs, shall not be located within the right-ofway
and shall not obscure any intersection. A clear sight triangle shall
be maintained at intersections, so that measured along the center line,
there shall be a clear sight triangle of 75 feet, minimum, from the point
of intersection. No obstruction to view will be permitted in this area
above the height of 2 1/2 feet and below 10 feet.
H. Culs-de-sac and temporary dead-end streets.
§ 195-77 SHALER CODE § 195-77
1:660
§ 195-78. Road construction: design standards.
(1) Cul-de-sac streets, permanently designed as such, shall not exceed
1,000 feet in length. The center line grade on a cul-de-sac street
shall not exceed 8%.
(2) Dead-end streets shall be prohibited except for future access to an
adjoining property or because of authorized stage development.
Such streets shall be provided with a temporary, all-weather
turnaround, within the subdivision or development, and the use of
such turnaround shall be guaranteed to the public until such time
as the street is extended. The outer paving radius shall be 40 feet.
Temporary dead-end streets shall not exceed 1,000 feet in length.
I. Street names.
(1) Proposed streets which are obviously in alignment with others
already existing and named shall bear the names of the existing
streets.
(2) In no case shall the name of a proposed street duplicate or be
phonetically similar to an existing street name in either the
Township or the postal district in which located. The applicant shall
submit the proposed street names to the Township at the time the
preliminary discussions are held and prior to filing a preliminary
plat.
A. Stakeout. In order to assure the Township staff and the Township
Engineer that the road is being paved in the center of the right-of-way
and in accordance with all grades that may have heretofore been
approved, the contractor, applicant and/or road builder must present an
affidavit, signed by a minimum-licensed Pennsylvania title surveyor,
that he has established the recorded and/or legal right-of-way on the
ground by a survey on the ground and has set construction stakes to the
desired construction offset distance at points along the road not
exceeding fifty-foot intervals and has established reference elevation on
said stakes to effect the construction of the road in accordance with all
plans that have been previously approved.
B. Grading.
(1) All streets shall be graded to the full width of the right-of-way and
the adjacent side slopes graded to blend with the natural lay of the
land, or in accordance with the cross section presented, to the
satisfaction of the Township Engineer. The slope of the ground of
the entire right-of-way line must be graded toward the paving to
the satisfaction of the Township Engineer or other designated
Township officials. An alternate grading plan may be submitted to
the Planning Commission and approved by the Township Engineer.
When filling operations are required, all topsoil must be removed
and the surface roughed up or scarified in order to assure a good
§ 195-77 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-78
1:661
bond between the filled ground and virgin ground. (If the lateral
slope upon which the fill is to be made is deemed too steep for
scarifying to make bond, then the virgin ground must first be
benched and the fill placed upon the benches). Drainage for any
springs, wet areas, existing streams or wet weather gullies
encountered while preparing for filling operations must be
approved by Shaler Township before filling can be commenced.
Fills must be built up with six-inch layers of suitable rock-free,
nonfrozen material, each layer being well compacted with an
approved sheepsfoot ten-ton roller or equivalent approved by
Shaler Township, and well crowned and drained to prevent soaking
and spongy areas. Where fill materials are necessary to establish
uniform grades, compacting shall be required to 95% density and
shall be so certified by a qualified soils technician. No paving shall
be placed in any fill area until at least two months have elapsed
since the filling operation was completed. A slope of two horizontal
to one vertical foot beyond the right-of-way line in cut or fill shall be
required as the maximum slope, except for extraordinary situations
approved by Shaler Township.
(2) Street cross sections for all streets shall be in accordance with the
standards established by Shaler Township or elsewhere herein. All
details of the cross section, crowns, curb, pavement, subgrade and
roadside ditches shall conform to the designated cross section.
(State approval shall also be obtained where necessary.)
(3) The subgrade shall be well rolled with an approved three-wheel,
ten-ton-minimum roller, crowned in conformance with the finished
surface crown, and must be perfectly smooth and free of spongy
areas as well as drained with approved subgrade drains and/or
bleeders, the bleeders draining into approved dry wells
(constructed at a minimum distance of three feet from the edge of
paving), lateral drains, storm sewers or drop inlets. In all cases the
flow lines of the aforementioned dry wells, lateral drains, storm
sewers and drop inlets must be at least 18 inches to three feet
below the lowest part of the subgrade. All drainage must be
constructed and in operation before any fine grading, berm
construction or filling commences. The width of the subgrade shall
include the area to be paved, plus the area of any curbs, berms or
sidewalks.
C. Berms. Where required, built-up rolled berms shall be constructed
along each edge paving using suitable and approved material (which
shall not include red dog or ashes) with a minimum width of three feet
and sloping toward the paving at a minimum slope of two inches per
foot, using the top of the curb for the start of the upward slope. The
berm shall be constructed before the curb or base is constructed and
simultaneously with the fine grading of the subgrade.
D. Subbase.
§ 195-78 SHALER CODE § 195-78
1:662
(1) Where required, the applicant shall place a six-inch compacted
subbase consisting of stone material which shall meet the PennDOT
Publication 408 specifications, placed and spread evenly and
extensively rolled in place with a three-wheel, ten-ton roller while
maintaining the crown.
(2) Where conditions warrant, subsurface drainage systems shall be
installed. Generally, this will mean that subsurface drainage must
be installed in the high side of any cut unless approved otherwise.
(3) Where conditions warrant, a geotextile shall be installed for the
separation of subgrade and subbase aggregate. Geotextiles shall
meet the PennDOT Publication 408 specifications for "Furnishing
and Installing Geotextiles."
E. Base course. The applicant shall construct a base course in accordance
with either of the following alternatives, the Township reserving the
right to specify either alternative and/or to modify either alternative:
(1) A stone base, properly drained, at least eight inches thick, placed in
two layers each approximately four inches thick, the material to be
in accordance with the Specifications of the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation, Form 408. (This base must be used
under any concrete paving.)
(2) An ID-2 asphaltic concrete base course (black base), properly
placed and compacted to a minimum thickness of 5 1/2 inches, the
material and installation to be in accordance with the specifications
of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, Form 408.
(3) The applicant shall install said base before any excavation or
construction of dwelling units or building units is undertaken.
F. Binder course. Where the use of the stone base has been selected and
approved, the applicant shall place ID-2 asphaltic concrete binder
course material and properly compact to a minimum thickness of two
inches.
G. Curbing.
(1) All concrete curbs installed within the Township shall be 24 inches
deep and 4,000 psi concrete in nature.
(2) The base course portion under the wedge-type curb must be
installed at the time of the base course installation and must extend
a minimum of six inches beyond the back of the curb.
(3) The curb shall be constructed before the wearing surface is placed
using either ID-2 asphaltic concrete base material or ID-2 asphaltic
concrete binder material, depending on the overall design of the
road, and shall be machine-spread and machine-rolled, all
materials to be prepared in a plant approved by the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation specification, Form 408.
§ 195-78 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-78
1:663
§ 195-79. Calendar construction limitations.
(4) The curb must be properly barricaded and protected from any
traffic or vehicles of any kind until it has been thoroughly set up
and all voids on the grass plot side have been completely backfilled,
the backfill being placed with proper and approved tamping
equipment in maximum four-inch layers. No traffic or vehicles of
any kind will be permitted to pass over this curb except through
driveway approaches.
H. Design standards.
(1) Wearing course.
(a) After placing the ID-2 asphaltic concrete base course (5 1/2
inches) or the ID-2 asphaltic concrete binder course (two
inches), the applicant shall place ID-2 wearing surface course
material over the entire base or binder course (including
curbs) and properly compact to a minimum thickness of 1 1/2
inches.
(b) After home and other construction is 90% complete, the
applicant shall place ID-2 wearing surface course material over
the entire wearing surface (including curbs) and properly
compact to a minimum thickness of one inch.
(c) All materials shall be placed and compacted using approved
spreaders and rollers in compliance with Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation Form 408.
I. Concrete streets and concrete curb construction.
(1) If concrete street and/or concrete curb construction is desired or
required because of heaving or industrial use of a street or road, all
plans, materials, specifications, construction and inspection of this
type of street or road must be approved by the Township Board of
Commissioners and the Township Engineer.
(2) The specifications and construction must comply to Portland
Cement Association recommended standards, latest edition, titled
"Design of Concrete Pavement for City Streets." The width of the
streets shall be as set forth elsewhere in this Subdivision and Land
Development chapter. A special street width for divided highways
in an enlarged overall street right-of-way width shall be permitted,
but each of said parallel cartways shall have a minimum width of 15
feet or 16 feet, including twenty-four-inch concrete curbs. (The
special street width must be approved as a special use only when
unusual topography, natural conditions or traffic exist and warrant
such exceptions. This use may be approved or required through
special action by the Township Board of Commissioners.)
§ 195-78 SHALER CODE § 195-79
1:664
A. Road construction such as filling, berming, subgrade, fine-grade
construction, base construction or surface construction cannot be
commenced before April 1 and must be completed before October 31 of
the same year, unless special permission is granted by the Township
Board of Commissioners otherwise. (It is assumed that the weather
conditions between these dates will be ideal for road construction;
however, if adverse weather conditions occur between these dates, the
contractor or builder must abide by the judgment of the Township
Board of Commissioners, its agents, or assigns, in regard to permissible
construction weather conditions.)
B. Testing and repair.
(1) Prior to acceptance by the Township, all roads shall be core bored
at locations to be determined by the Township Engineer, by a
reputable firm certified to do such work. All cores shall be tested
for compliance with all applicable paving regulations and shall
include, as a minimum, standard test for thickness, material
gradation and compaction, and the Township shall be furnished
with three copies of a written report setting forth the test results.
All costs associated therewith are to be paid by the applicant.
(2) All paving must be in complete compliance with Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation Form 408, and the Township may
subject the finished road to any additional testing set forth therein.
(3) All roads shall have a smooth, uniform, finished surface. The
applicant shall replace or resurface any areas which do not meet
the testing requirements or do not have a smooth, uniform
appearance due to patches, spalling, poorly butted joints, etc.,
regardless of the results of any tests. Any replacement or
resurfacing shall be made in a neat, workmanlike manner
extending the entire width of the road, at right angles to the center
line, the extent of the replacement or resurfacing to be determined
by the Township Engineer.
C. Acceptance of streets.
(1) Prior to acceptance of any streets and after all road construction
has been completed, the applicant and/or contractor, under the
direct guidance of a licensed Pennsylvania surveyor, must install
concrete monuments with a minimum size of four inches in
diameter, four inches square and three feet long, the center being
marked with 1/2 inch minimum brass wire or bar plug, at all
intersections and points of curvature in order to amply mark the
right-of-way before the construction of the road can be considered
as complete and fully prepared for the Township to accept the
maintenance responsibilities.
(2) The applicant shall be required to furnish the Township with a
maintenance bond prior to the acceptance of any streets by the
Township. Such bonding, with a corporate surety company
§ 195-79 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-79
1:665
§ 195-80. Sidewalks and crosswalks.
approved by the Township Board of Commissioners, shall be in the
amount of 15% of the construction value and shall be for a period of
18 months commencing with the date of acceptance of said streets
by the Township and shall specifically protect the Township from
defects of inferior materials and workmanship or damage caused
by the applicant and those employed by or under contract to him.
(3) The applicant or contractor must conform to weight limits
restriction ordinances.
D. Monuments.
(1) All streets shall be monumented, and monument locations shall be
shown on the recorded plat. All angle points in the boundary of any
subdivision shall be monumented. All lot corners and angle points
shall be located by iron pins. All monuments and iron pins shall be
placed by a minimum-licensed Pennsylvania title surveyor so that
the scored (by an indented cross in the top of the monument) point
shall coincide exactly with the point of intersection of the lines
being monumented.
(2) Monuments and iron pins shall be set so their top is level with the
finished grade of the surrounding area.
A. Sidewalks.
(1) All developments shall provide sidewalks unless otherwise
recommended by Township Planning Commission and/or Township
Board of Commissioners.
(2) Sidewalks shall be at least four feet in width and shall be paved
with an all-weather surface. The use of brick, terrazzo, paving
blocks or similar creative treatment, or pervious pavement
materials, is encouraged. All other design aspects shall comply
with the Township's construction standards. Natural walking trails
(i.e., unpaved) may be approved by Planning Commission where
such can be shown to be appropriate to the development.
B. Crosswalks.
(1) Crosswalks are required between streets whenever necessary to
facilitate pedestrian circulation and to give access to community
facilities, such as parks, playgrounds or schools.
(2) Such crosswalks have a right-of-way width of not less than 10 feet
and have a paved walk five feet in width.
C. Sidewalks and crosswalks shall have a minimum gradient of 1% and
maximum gradient of 10%. ADA handicapped access, ramp gradients,
railing requirements and treatment of pavement surfacing shall comply
§ 195-79 SHALER CODE § 195-80
1:666
§ 195-81. Vegetation.
§ 195-82. Development on private streets discouraged.
§ 195-83. Open space, lot siting, planting and beautification.
with applicable requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of Labor
and Industry.
A. Conservation. Development shall be planned so as to minimize the
removal of existing trees, shrubs and ground cover and to minimize the
amount of land covered by impervious surfaces. All plans shall be
submitted to the Allegheny County Conservation District.
B. Noise control. Street trees along local and collector streets in
residential areas may be required as a buffer every 25 feet or in
accordance with the established tree pattern of the street(s) on which
the lot exists.
C. Screening. All screening requirements shall comply with Chapter 225,
Article IX, Subdivision G: Landscape and Bufferyards, of the Township
Zoning Ordinance.
D. Windbreaks. The use of planting rows to serve as windbreaks to control
the drifting of snow across public and private roadways shall be
required.
A. It is the policy of this Township that all subdivided lands shall have
immediate access to a public street. Because of unique property
configuration and location, this Township recognizes the need for
limited exceptions to the foregoing general policy.
B. No subdivision will be approved on a private street or road if more than
two lots already front on such street or road or if after subdivision more
than two lots will front on such private street or road.
A. In order to promote the highest environmental quality possible, the
degree to which the applicant of a subdivision or land development plan
has preserved existing salient natural features and land forms intrinsic
to the site shall be assessed. Terms of approval of a plat may be subject
to the manner in which the layout or design of the plan has preserved
existing natural features such as, but not limited to, trees, wooded
areas and watercourses.
B. Open space. Where the applicant is offering for dedication, or is
required by ordinance to establish, a reservation of open space or
preserve an area of scenic or historic importance, a "limit of work,"
which will confine excavation, earthmoving procedures and other
changes to the landscape, may be required to ensure preservation and
prevent despoliation of the character of the area in open space.
§ 195-80 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-83
1:667
§ 195-84. Erosion and sediment control.
C. Tree preservation. Whenever possible, trees shall not be removed
unless they are located within the proposed street right-of-way, within
the proposed building area, or within utility locations and equipment
access areas. In areas where trees are retained, the original grade level
shall be maintained, if possible, so as not to disturb the trees.
D. Topsoil preservation. All of the topsoil from areas where cuts and fills
have been made should be stockpiled and redistributed uniformly after
grading. All areas of the site shall be stabilized by seeding or planting
on slopes of less than 10% and shall be stabilized by sodding on slopes
10% or more and planted in ground cover on slopes 20% or greater.
E. Landscaping. For all multifamily, apartment, office, commercial, and
industrial subdivisions or land developments, a landscaping plan shall
be provided and shall include sufficient plantings for the required open
space, planting strips, screenings, formal gardens, shade trees and
natural barriers.
F. Buffer planting requirements. Buffer yard requirements should be as
specified in the Township Zoning Ordinance.154
G. Preserved landscaping. When there is a conscientious effort to preserve
the existing natural integrity and character of a site and where such
preservation effectuates areas of woodland and trees comparable to
required planting improvements, i.e., landscaping and buffer screening,
the plan may be approved in lieu of additional landscaping
requirements.
H. Trees. The planting of trees within the street right-of-way line shall not
be permitted without the consent of the Township. The planting of any
trees within the private property of each residential lot shall be at the
discretion of the landowner and/or developer.
I. Watercourse protection. Where a subdivision or land development is
traversed by a natural watercourse, there shall be provided a drainage
easement or right-of-way conforming substantially with the line of such
watercourse and of such width as will be adequate to preserve natural
drainage.
A. General purpose.
(1) The Township Board of Commissioners finds that the minimization
of erosion and control of sedimentation in connection with land
development and subdivision are in the public interest, affecting
public health, safety and welfare, and therefore those regulations
governing erosion control and sedimentation control are necessary
for the Township.
154. Editor's Note: See Ch. 225, Zoning.
§ 195-83 SHALER CODE § 195-84
1:668
(2) No changes shall be made in the contour of the land, and no
grading, excavating, removal or destruction to the topsoil, trees or
other vegetative cover of the land shall be commenced, until such
time that a plan for minimizing erosion and sedimentation has been
processed with and reviewed by the Township Engineer and/or the
Allegheny County Conservation District, or there has been a
determination by the above entities that such plans are not
necessary.
(3) No subdivision or land development plan shall be approved unless:
i) there has been an erosion and sedimentation control plan
approved by the Township Board of Commissioners that provides
for minimizing erosion and sedimentation, and an improvement
bond or other acceptable securities are deposited with the
Township in the form of an escrow guaranty which will ensure
installation and completion of the required improvements; or ii)
there has been a determination by the Township Board of
Commissioners that a plan for minimizing erosion and
sedimentation is not necessary.
(4) Where not specified, measures used to control erosion and reduce
sedimentation shall as a minimum meet the standards and
specifications of the Allegheny County Conservation District and
the State Clean Streams Act,155 and shall comply with applicable
regulations of the Department of Environmental Protection. The
Township Engineer, or other officials as designated, shall ensure
compliance with the appropriate specifications, copies of which are
available from the Soil and Water Conservation District.
B. Performance principles. The following measures are effective in
minimizing erosion and sedimentation and shall be included where
applicable in the control plan:
(1) Stripping of vegetation, regrading or other development shall be
done in such a way that will prevent all but minor erosion.
(2) Development plans shall preserve salient natural features, keep
cut-fill operations to a minimum, and ensure conformity with
topography so as to create the least erosion potential and
adequately handle the volume and velocity of surface water runoff.
(3) Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected,
and supplemented.
(4) The disturbed area and the duration of exposure shall be kept to a
practical minimum.
(5) Disturbed soils shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable.
155. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 195-84 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-84
1:669
(6) Temporary vegetation and/or mulching shall be used to protect
exposed critical areas during development.
(7) The permanent final vegetation and structural erosion control and
drainage measures shall be installed as soon as practical in the
development.
(8) Sediment in the runoff water shall be trapped until the disturbed
area is stabilized by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt
traps, or similar measures.
C. Grading for erosion and other environmental controls. In order to
provide a suitable site for building and other uses, improve surface
drainage, and control erosion, the following requirements shall be met:
(1) Streets shall be improved to a mud-free or otherwise permanently
passable condition as one of the first items of work done on a
subdivision or development. The wearing surface shall be installed
as approved in the final plan.
(2) Provisions shall be made to prevent surface water from damaging
the cut face of excavation, or the sloping surfaces of fills, by
installation of temporary or permanent drainage across or above
these areas.
(3) Fill shall be placed and compacted so as to minimize sliding or
erosion of the soil.
(4) Fills placed adjacent to watercourses shall have suitable protection
against erosion during periods of flooding.
(5) During grading operations, necessary measures for dust control
will be exercised.
(6) Grading equipment will not be allowed to enter into flowing
streams, unless permitted by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection.
D. Responsibility.
(1) Whenever sedimentation damage is caused by stripping vegetation,
grading or other development, it shall be the collective
responsibility of the applicant, and of the contractor, person,
corporation and other entity causing such sedimentation, to
remove it from all adjoining surfaces, drainage systems and
watercourses and to repair any damage at their expense as quickly
as possible.
(2) Maintenance of all erosion and sedimentation control facilities
during the construction and development period is the
responsibility of the applicant.
§ 195-84 SHALER CODE § 195-84
1:670
§ 195-85. Floodplain area regulations.
See Chapter 130, Flood Damage Prevention.
(3) It is the responsibility of any applicant, and any person,
corporation, or other entity doing any act on or across a communal
stream, watercourse or swale, or upon the floodplain or right-ofway,
to maintain as nearly as possible in its present state the
stream, watercourse, swale, floodplain or right-of-way during the
pendency of the activity to return it to its original or equal
condition after such activity is completed.
(4) The applicant shall provide and install, at his expense, in
accordance with Township requirements, all drainage and erosion
control improvements (temporary and permanent) shown on the
erosion and sediment control plan.
E. Compliance with regulations and procedures.
(1) The Township Board of Commissioners, in its consideration of all
preliminary plans of subdivision and land development, shall
condition its approval upon the execution of erosion and sediment
control measures.
(2) The installation and design of the required erosion and sediment
control measures shall be in accordance with standards and
specifications of the Allegheny County Soil Conservation District
and EPA Clean Water Act.156
(3) Stream channel construction. Stream channel construction on
watersheds with drainage areas in excess of 1/2 square mile, or in
those cases where downstream hazards exist, will conform to
criteria established by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection.
156. Editor's Note: See 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
§ 195-84 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-85
1:671

ARTICLE VI
Administration
§ 195-86. Fees.
§ 195-87. Public hearings.
Before acting on an application for approval, the Township Board of
Commissioners, and/or the Planning Commission, may hold a public hearing
thereon, pursuant to public notice, as defined by this chapter.
§ 195-88. Permits.
No lot in a subdivision shall be sold, no permit to erect, alter or repair
any building upon land in a subdivision or development shall be issued,
and no building shall be erected in a subdivision or development, until a
final plan has been approved by the Township and properly recorded, and
A. The Township Board of Commissioners shall establish, by resolution, a
collection procedure and schedule of fees to be paid hereunder by the
landowner and/or developer at the time of filing a preliminary plan.
Said resolution shall also establish a fee for public hearings.
B. Review fees shall be assessed for each subdivision and land
development preliminary and final application, based on a specific fee
schedule adopted by resolution, reflecting the actual costs incurred by
the Township in reviewing the plan.
C. In order to defray a portion of the cost incurred by the Township in
inspecting the installation of the improvements required by this
chapter, and to ensure compliance with these regulations, the
landowner and/or developer shall present a check or money order,
made payable to the Township, in an amount equal to 2% of the
estimated cost of the improvement(s) used in the determination of the
construction guarantee, as determined by the Township Engineer. This
fee is separate from and in addition to any application fees required by
the Township. The fee shall be paid at the time of submission of the
development agreement, and kept in a separate account used solely for
the purposes this section. Upon completion of all inspections and other
requirements, the remainder of the funds held in this account retained
by the Township shall be returned to the landowner and/or developer
along with an itemized statement evidencing the expenditures of the
funds from the account. This fee shall be paid at the time of submission
of the development agreement.
D. Said schedule of fees shall be posted in the municipal offices and shall
be available for inspection upon request.
E. No final plan shall be approved unless and until all fees and charges are
paid in full.
§ 195-86 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-88
1:673
further, until the required improvements have been constructed or their
construction guaranteed.
§ 195-89. Liability for Township roads.
Where any road, public in the Township, including the paved area, gutters,
utilities and the right-of-way, is hereafter damaged in any manner
whatsoever, the person or persons directly responsible for said damage and
the subcontractor and/or general contractor for whom said persons or their
superiors work, or with whom they have contracted, shall be jointly liable
for any and all damage to said Township roads, and shall repair said damage
within 90 days of any written notification by the Township. All repairs shall
meet Township standards and shall be subject to Township inspection.
§ 195-90. Notice to school district.
As per § 508.1 of the MPC,157 as amended, each month the Township shall
notify in writing the superintendent of the school district in which a plan for
a residential development was finally approved by the Township during the
preceding month. The notice shall include, but not be limited to, the location
of the development, the number and types of units to be included in the
development and the expected construction schedule of the development.
157. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10508.1.
§ 195-88 SHALER CODE § 195-90
1:674
ARTICLE VII
Amendment and Review by County
§ 195-91. Amendments.
Amendments to this chapter shall become effective only after a public
hearing held by the Township Board of Commissioners pursuant to public
notice. The Planning Commission shall make recommendations to the
Township Board of Commissioners on any amendment within 30 days prior
to the date of the public hearing.
§ 195-92. County review.
A copy of the proposed amendment shall be forwarded to the Allegheny
County Department of Economic Development for review and
recommendation in accordance with the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code.158
§ 195-93. Copy forwarded.
Within 30 days after adoption, the Township Board of Commissioners shall
forward a certified copy of any amendment to this chapter to the Allegheny
County Department of Economic Development for its files.
§ 195-94. Public examination.
The text of any amendment to this chapter may be examined at a place
designated by the Township Board of Commissioners prior to its
consideration and in accordance with Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code Section 506(a).159
158. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
159. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10506(a).
§ 195-91 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-94
1:675

ARTICLE VIII
Enforcement Remedies
§ 195-95. Violations.
§ 195-96. Preventative remedies.
A. No subdivision or land development of any lot, tract or parcel of land
shall be made, and no street, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, water main
or other improvements in connection therewith shall be laid out,
constructed, opened or dedicated for public use or travel, or for the
common use of occupants of buildings abutting thereon, except in
accordance with this chapter. Per Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code Section 515.2, Jurisdiction,160 District Justices shall have initial
jurisdiction in proceedings brought under this section.
B. Any such person, partnership or corporation, including the members of
such partnership or the officers of the corporation, or the agent of any
of them, responsible in law or in fact for such violation, upon being
found liable thereof in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by
Shaler Township, must pay a judgment of not more than $500 plus all
court costs, including reasonable attorney fees, incurred by the
Township as a result thereof. Each day that a violation continues shall
be a separate violation.
C. No judgment shall commence or be imposed or payable until the
District Justice having jurisdiction determines the date of violation.
D. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the
Township shall enforce the judgment pursuant to the rules of civil
procedure.
E. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted to
grant to any person or entity other than the Township the right to
commence any action for enforcement.
F. Any fines or judgments collected shall be deposited in the Township's
general fund.
A. In addition to other remedies, the Township may institute and maintain
appropriate actions by law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate
violations or to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or
premises. A description by metes and bounds in the instrument of
transfer or other documents used in the process of selling or
transferring shall not exempt the seller or transferor from such
penalties or from the remedies herein provided.
B. The Township may refuse to issue any permit or grant any approval
necessary to further improve or develop any real property which has
been developed or which has resulted from a subdivision of real
160. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10515.2.
§ 195-95 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-96
1:677
property in violation of this chapter. This authority to deny such a
permit or approval shall apply to any of the following applicants:
(1) The landowner of record at the time of such violation.
(2) The vendee or lessee of the landowner of record at the time of such
violation without regard as to whether such vendee or lessee had
actual or constructive knowledge of the violation.
(3) The current landowner of record who acquired the property
subsequent to the time of violation without regard as to whether
such current landowner had actual or constructive knowledge of
the violation.
(4) The vendee or lessee of the current landowner of record who
acquired the property subsequent to the time of violation without
regard as to whether such vendee or lessee had actual or
constructive knowledge of the violation. As an additional condition
for issuance of a permit or the granting of an approval to any such
owner, current owner, vendee or lessee for the development of any
such real property, the Township may require compliance with the
conditions that would have been applicable to the property at the
time the applicant acquired an interest in such real property.
§ 195-96 SHALER CODE § 195-96
1:678
ARTICLE IX
Severability and Repealer
§ 195-97. Severability.
§ 195-98. Repealer.
All resolutions, ordinances or amendments to ordinances, or parts of
resolutions or ordinances, inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed as
stated or deleted in their entirety in the prefatory paragraph of this chapter.
Specifically, the prior Subdivision Ordinance shall be repealed in its entirety.
§ 195-99. Effect on Zoning Ordinance.
Nothing herein contained shall be interpreted to permit any waiver or
modification of the restrictions or requirements of the Township's Zoning
Ordinance, as amended.161
A. Should any section, clause, provision or portion of this chapter be
declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or
unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect or impair the validity of
any other section, clause, provision or portion of this chapter.
B. It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Township Board of
Commissioners that this chapter would have been adopted by the
Township had such invalid or unconstitutional provisions not been
included herein, and the remaining portions of this chapter shall remain
in effect as though the portion declared invalid or unconstitutional had
never been a part hereof.
C. Continuation. The modification or repeal of any prior ordinance,
resolution or regulation by this chapter shall not annul or otherwise
relieve any party from any permit issued, condition imposed, approval
granted, approval denied, order issued, or violation, penalty or other
liability incurred pursuant to such affected ordinance, resolution or
regulation.
161. Editor's Note: See Ch. 225, Zoning.
§ 195-97 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-99
1:679

ARTICLE X
Mobile Home Parks
§ 195-100. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to set forth provisions pertaining to the design
and construction of mobile home parks and related utilities and facilities.
See also § 195-2 of this chapter.
§ 195-101. Land development control.
See § 195-3 of this chapter.
§ 195-102. Other regulations incorporated herein.
See § 195-4 of this chapter.
§ 195-103. Conflicts between regulations and modifications.
See § 195-5 of this chapter.
§ 195-104. Effect of chapter.
See § 195-6 of this chapter.
§ 195-105. Effect of noncompliance.
See § 195-7 of this chapter.
§ 195-106. Effect on prior applications or approvals.
See § 195-8 of this chapter.
§ 195-107. Definitions.
See Article II of this chapter.
§ 195-108. Classifications of approvals and applications.
See Article III of this chapter.
§ 195-109. Installations, inspection and acceptance of
improvements.
See Article IV of this chapter.
§ 195-110. Design standards.
See Article V of this chapter.
§ 195-100 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-111
1:681
§ 195-111. Administration.
See Article VI of this chapter.
§ 195-112. Amendment and review by County.
See Article VII of this chapter.
§ 195-113. Enforcement remedies.
See Article VIII of this chapter.
§ 195-114. Severability and repealer.
See Article IX of this chapter.
§ 195-111 SHALER CODE § 195-114
1:682
ARTICLE XI
Required Signature and Stamp Blocks
§ 195-115. Purpose.
The purpose of the signature and stamp blocks is to officially acknowledge
the Township's decision on submitted and approved drawings. As
applicable, the Township may require additional certifications, as outlined
by Allegheny County as included in the Allegheny County Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance, Appendix 3: Required Certifications.
§ 195-116. Shaler Township signature block.
An area for the following signature block shall be included on the plan set
submittal, allowing two signature lines for the President of the Township
Board of Commissioners and the Township Manager. The signature block
shall read: "Approved by Shaler Township this 10th day of January, 2017,
and shall become effective immediately."
§ 195-117. Allegheny County Department of Economic Development
signature block.
See the Allegheny County Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
§ 195-118. Certification stamp blocks.
Certification stamp blocks, size two inches by 2 1/4 inches, shall also be
included for each of the following entities/project team members:
A. Shaler Township Board of Commissioners.
B. Shaler Township Planning Commission.
C. Township staff representative.
D. Allegheny County Department of Real Estate.
E. Allegheny County Department of Economic Development.
F. Surveyor.
G. Engineer (as applicable).
H. Architect (as applicable).
I. Landscape Architect (as applicable).
J. Notary.
K. Any other required seal identified by the Allegheny County Subdivision
and Land Development Ordinance.
§ 195-115 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-118
1:683

ARTICLE XII
Effective Date
§ 195-119. Effective date.
This chapter is ordained and enacted this 10th day of January, 2017, and
shall become effective immediately.
§ 195-119 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-119
1:685
Chapter 199
SWIMMING POOLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 90.
Fences, walls and hedges — See Ch. 118.
Zoning — See Ch. 225.
§ 199-1. Application.
This chapter shall apply to all outdoor swimming pools hereafter
constructed as well as existing swimming pools, either above ground or in
the ground, having a depth of 24 inches or more at any one point.
§ 199-2. Construction permit and approval.
§ 199-3. Enclosures.
A. Before any work is commenced on the construction of a swimming pool
or on any alteration, addition, remodeling or other improvement to a
swimming pool, an application for a permit for construction, together
with plans and specifications pertinent to the construction, as well as
explanatory data, shall be submitted to the Building Inspector of the
Township for approval. No part of the work shall be commenced until
such approval has been granted to the applicant by a written permit.
B. All plans shall include a plot plan that bears the name and seal of a
registered architect or registered engineer. The plot plan shall show the
location of all buildings and the proposed pool on the property, together
with the distances to all property lines in the immediate vicinity of the
swimming pool and dwelling, together with any other auxiliary facilities
and structures, including, but not limited to, source of water supply,
plumbing facilities, discharge facilities, electrical wiring and fixtures.
The plot plan shall also show the location, height and type of all fencing
or enclosures as may be required by § 199-3 of this chapter. The plot
plan shall also show the locations of any wells and sewage disposal
systems as well as all rights-of-ways and easements on the property.
A. Every outdoor swimming pool shall be completely surrounded by a
fence, wall or similar enclosure not less than four feet in height, which
shall be so constructed as to have no openings, holes or gaps larger
than four inches in any dimension. If the fence or wall is a picket fence,
the horizontal dimensions maintained shall not exceed four inches. A
dwelling or accessory building may be used as part of such enclosure.
B. All gates or door openings through such enclosure shall be equipped
with a self-closing, self-latching device on the pool side for keeping the
gate or door securely closed at all times when not in use, except that
§ 195-119 SHALER CODE § 199-3
1:686
§ 199-4. Location on property.
§ 199-5. Fees.
The application fee for the construction or alteration of a swimming pool
shall be in the same amount as determined by the Township, based on the
estimated cost of construction.
§ 199-6. Design and construction requirements.
No permit to construct a new swimming pool shall be issued unless and until
the swimming pool complies with the following requirements:
the door of any dwelling or any accessory building which forms a part
of the enclosure need not be so equipped.
C. Fences shall be erected around all new swimming pools prior to their
use.
A. Non-corner lots. On non-corner lots, a swimming pool shall be located
directly behind the applicant's dwelling and shall be set back a
minimum of 10 feet from all property lines.
B. Corner lots abutting two streets. On corner lots abutting two streets, a
swimming pool shall be located behind the rear facade line of the
applicant's dwelling and shall be set back a minimum of 10 feet from
any non-street-abutting property line.
C. No swimming pool or appurtenances, including decks and shelters,
shall be erected nearer to any property line than a building could be
erected in the same use district as set forth in the Shaler Township
Zoning Ordinance.162
D. No swimming pool shall be so located as to interfere with the operation
of a well or on-site septic system or to be located where there is a
potential danger of a septic system discharging into the pool or onto the
adjacent area around the pool.
E. No swimming pool or appurtenances shall be erected within a public
right-of-way or municipal easement unless the applicant has first
entered into a license agreement allowing the structure to be located
within the public right-of-way under terms and conditions agreed to by
Shaler Township and its Municipal Solicitor.
A. Material. The material used for lining a swimming pool shall be one
which is light in color, is impervious and will provide a tight tank with
easily cleaned surfaces. Sand or dirt bottoms are prohibited if
uncovered.
162. Editor's Note: See Ch. 225, Zoning.
§ 199-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 199-6
1:687
§ 199-7. Safety equipment.
All pools, including existing pools, shall be equipped with a ladder or
suitable stairs. Other equipment, consisting of life preservers, ropes or
poles, shall be readily available at the pool site.
§ 199-8. Portable pools.
Portable aboveground pools having walls four feet or greater in height may
be excluded from the enclosure requirements of § 199-3, provided such
pools are equipped with access ladders which may be raised and locked
in a near vertical position or removed when the pool is unattended. All
aboveground pools having walls four feet or greater in height and which
are served by ladders or steps which cannot be raised and locked so as
to prevent access by small children shall be enclosed in accordance with
§ 199-3 of this chapter.
§ 199-9. Shielding lights.
Lights used to illuminate any swimming pool shall be so arranged as to
reflect light away from adjoining premises.
§ 199-10. Electrical connection.
B. Walls and bottoms. All pool walls and bottoms shall be designed to
withstand water pressure from within and to resist the pressure of
earth or groundwater when the pool is empty.
C. Makeup water. Pools shall be equipped with suitable facilities for
adding makeup water as required. There shall be no physical
connection between the water supply line and the pool system. When
makeup water is added to the pool, the inlet shall be at least six inches
above the pool water surface.
D. Drainage outlet. A drain line for a swimming pool may be connected to a
public storm sewer if one is available. Where a storm sewer is not
available, a pool drainage system shall be constructed to permit the
water to drain evenly over the property of the owner of the swimming
pool and in such a way that it does not create a hazard or nuisance or
danger to adjacent or abutting property owners.
E. Recirculation. Provision shall be made for complete circulation of water
through all parts of the pool. The system shall be designed and
constructed so that a "turnaround" of at least one time in every 12
hours shall be provided. Recirculation systems shall consist of pumping
equipment, hair-and-lint catcher, filters, together with all necessary
pipe connections to the pool inlets and outlets, facilities and pipe
connections necessary for backwashing or cleaning filters.
A. All electrical installations shall conform to the specifications of the
National Electric Code. No electric wires or conductors shall cross,
§ 199-6 SHALER CODE § 199-10
1:688
§ 199-11. Inspections.
The Building Inspector shall inspect or cause to be inspected all pools at
such times as deemed necessary to carry out the intent of this chapter.
The Building Inspector is hereby authorized to enter upon any premises
to take such samples of water from such pools at such times as may be
deemed necessary and to require the owner to comply with the provisions
of this chapter. The Building Inspector shall have the power to suspend the
construction or use of said pool until such time as the provisions of this
chapter are fully complied with.
§ 199-12. Violations and penalties.
§ 199-13. Additional relief; nuisances.
No provision of this chapter shall prevent the Township from instituting
proceedings and seeking relief in the courts of equity of the commonwealth
either overhead or underground, on any part of a swimming pool, nor
shall any electric wiring be installed to any pool wall closer than five
feet, if underground, unless enclosed in a rigid conduit, or within five
feet, if overhead.
B. All underwater lights must be watertight, self-contained units with
"ground" connections running from a waterproof junction box to a
proper ground facility or medium. All underground electric wires
supplying current to said lights within a distance of five feet of the pool
wall or walls shall be enclosed in rigid conduits.
C. All metal fences, enclosures or railings near or adjacent to a swimming
pool which might become electrically charged as a result of contact
with broken overhead conductors, or from any other cause, shall be
effectively grounded.
A. Any person, persons, firm, partnership or corporation that violates
§ 199-2 of this chapter shall, upon conviction by the Magisterial District
Judge for the magisterial district which includes the Township of Shaler,
be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600 plus costs of
prosecution, or imprisoned not more than 90 days, or both. Each and
every day that a violation occurs shall constitute a separate and distinct
summary offense under this chapter and shall be subject to separate
and distinct penalties.
B. Any person, persons, firm, partnership or corporation that violates any
provision of this chapter except § 199-2 shall, upon conviction by the
Magisterial District Judge for the magisterial district which includes the
Township of Shaler, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000
plus costs of prosecution, or imprisoned not more than 90 days, or both.
Each and every day that such a violation occurs shall constitute a
separate and distinct summary offense under this chapter and shall be
subject to separate and distinct penalties.
§ 199-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 199-13
1:689
if the Township shall deem such action necessary to abate any violation of
this chapter which constitutes a public nuisance.
Chapter 201
TAXATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 115.
§ 199-13 SHALER CODE § 199-13
1:690
ARTICLE I
Earned Income Tax
[Adopted 11-8-1966 by Ord. No. 1121; amended in its entirety
11-9-2011 by Ord. No. 1898]
§ 201-1. Definitions.
For purposes of this article, all terms defined in the Local Tax Enabling Act,
53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq., shall have the meanings set forth therein, except
as modified below. The following terms shall have the meanings set forth
herein:
DOMICILE — The place where a person lives and has a permanent home
and to which the person has the intention of returning whenever absent.
Actual residence is not necessarily domicile, for domicile is the fixed place
of abode which, in the intention of the taxpayer, is permanent rather than
transitory. Domicile is the voluntarily fixed place of habitation of a person,
not for a mere special or limited purpose, but with the present intention of
making a permanent home, until some event occurs to induce the person to
adopt some other permanent home. In the case of a business, domicile is
that place considered as the center of business affairs and the place where
its functions are discharged.
EARNED INCOME — The compensation as required to be reported to or as
determined by the Department of Revenue under Section 303 of the Act of
March 4, 1971 (P.L. 6, No. 2), known as the "Tax Reform Code of 1971," and
rules and regulations promulgated under that section. Employee business
expenses as reported to or determined by the Department of Revenue
under Article III of the Tax Reform Code of 1971 shall constitute allowable
deductions in determining earned income. The term does not include offsets
for business losses. The amount of any housing allowance provided to a
member of the clergy shall not be taxable as earned income.
EFFECTIVE DATE — January 1, 2012.
LOCAL TAX ENABLING ACT — The Local Tax Enabling Act, 53 P.S.
§ 6924.101 et seq., and as amended in the future, including any regulations
adopted by the Department of Community and Economic Development
thereunder.
NET PROFITS — The net income from the operation of a business, other
than a corporation, as required to be reported to or as determined by the
Department of Revenue under Section 303 of the Act of March 4, 1971
(P.L. 6, No. 2), known as the "Tax Reform Code of 1971," and rules and
regulations promulgated under that section.
NONRESIDENT — A person or business domiciled outside the political
subdivision levying the tax.
RESIDENT — A person or business domiciled in the political subdivision
levying the tax.
TAX — The tax imposed by this article.
§ 201-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 201-1
1:691
TAX OFFICER — The person or entity appointed as Tax Officer pursuant to
the Local Tax Enabling Act to collect the tax in the TCD.
TAXPAYER — A person or business required under this article or the Local
Tax Enabling Act to file a return of an income tax or to pay an income tax.
TAX RETURN — A form prescribed by the Tax Officer for reporting the
amount of tax or other amount owed or required to be withheld, remitted or
reported under this article or the Local Tax Enabling Act.
TAX YEAR — The period from January 1 to December 31.
TCC — The tax collection committee established to govern and oversee
the collection of earned income tax within the TCD under the Local Tax
Enabling Act.
TCD — The Allegheny North Tax Collection District or any future tax
collection district to which the Township or any part of the Township is
assigned under the Local Tax Enabling Act.
§ 201-2. Imposition of tax.
A. General purpose resident tax. The Township hereby imposes a tax for
general revenue purposes at the rate of 0.5% on earned income and net
profits of individual residents of the Township.
B. General purpose municipal nonresident tax. The Township also imposes
a tax for general revenue purposes at the rate of 0.5% on earned
income and net profits derived by an individual nonresident from any
work, business, profession or activity of any kind engaged in within the
boundaries of the Township.
C. Ongoing tax. The tax shall continue at the above rates during the
current tax year and each tax year thereafter, without annual
reenactment, until this article is repealed or the rate is changed.
D. Credits and deductions.
(1) Payments of tax on income due any state other than Pennsylvania
or to any political subdivision thereof by residents thereof,
pursuant to any state or local law, to the extent that such income
includes salaries, wages, commissions, bonuses, incentive
payments, fees, tips and other compensation or net profits of
businesses, professions or other activities, but in such proportions
as hereinafter set forth, shall be credited to and allowed as a
deduction from the liability of such person for the tax imposed by
this article on salaries, wages, commissions, bonuses, incentive
payments, fees, tips and other compensation or net profits of
businesses, professions or other activities, if residents of Shaler
Township receive like credits and deductions of a similar kind to a
like degree from the tax on income imposed by the other state or
political subdivision thereof.
§ 201-1 SHALER CODE § 201-2
1:692
§ 201-3. No exemption from tax.
Although credits and deductions against tax are permitted under certain
circumstances as provided herein and in applicable law and regulations, no
individuals are exempt from tax based on age, income or other factors.
§ 201-4. Individual tax returns and payments.
Every taxpayer receiving earned income or earning net profits in any tax
year shall file tax returns and pay tax in accordance with the Local Tax
Enabling Act and the policies and procedures of the TCC and Tax Officer.
Tax imposed on net profits and all earnings not subject to withholding at
source must be reported and paid on a quarterly basis in accordance with
the Local Tax Enabling Act. A taxpayer is required to file a return even if no
tax payment is due and owing.
§ 201-5. Employer withholding, remittance and tax returns.
Every employer shall register, withhold and remit the tax and file tax
returns in accordance with the Local Tax Enabling Act and the policies and
procedures of the TCC and Tax Officer.
§ 201-6. Tax Officer.
The tax will be collected from individuals and employers by the Tax Officer.
The Tax Officer is authorized to file an action in the name of the Township
for the recovery of income taxes due to the Township and unpaid. Nothing
in this section shall affect the authority of the Township to file an action in
(2) Where a credit or deduction is allowable, it shall be allowed in
proportion to the concurrent periods for which taxes are imposed
by the other state or respective political subdivisions, but not in
excess of the amount paid for the concurrent period and not in
excess of the local tax liability.
E. Local Tax Enabling Act applicable. The tax is imposed under authority
of the Local Tax Enabling Act, and all provisions thereof that relate to a
tax on earned income or net profits are incorporated into this article.
Any future amendments to the Local Tax Enabling Act that are required
to be applied to a tax on earned income or net profits will automatically
become part of this article upon the effective date of such amendment,
without the need for formal amendment of this article, to the maximum
extent allowed by 1 Pa.C.S.A. § 1937.
F. Applicable laws, regulations, policies and procedures. The tax shall be
collected and administered in accordance with all applicable laws and
regulations and policies and procedures adopted by the TCC or by the
Tax Officer in conformity with the Local Tax Enabling Act. This includes
any regulations, policies and procedures adopted in the future to the
maximum extent allowed by 1 Pa.C.S.A. § 1937.
§ 201-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 201-6
1:693
its own name for collection of income taxes under the Local Tax Enabling
Act.
§ 201-7. Interest, penalties, costs and fines.
Individuals and employers are subject to interest, penalties, costs and fines
in accordance with the Local Tax Enabling Act, including costs of collection
imposed by the Tax Officer in accordance with authorization by the TCC.
§ 201-8. Collection of local incomes taxes and delinquent earned
income taxes.
§ 201-9. Purpose; repealer.
§ 201-10. Construction.
This article is intended to be consistent with the Local Tax Enabling Act
and to include all necessary authorizations to permit the Tax Officer to take
such tax collection, administration, disbursement, enforcement and other
A. The earned income tax collector (Article XIII, Tax Officer) appointed
and designated by resolution in 2010 shall be the Tax Officer
responsible for administering the collection of that earned income tax
delinquent in Shaler Township as of December 31, 2011.
B. The person or entity appointed and designated by resolution for Shaler
Township, effective January 1, 2012, shall be the Tax Officer responsible
for administering the collection of all income tax owing and due in
Shaler Township subsequent to January 1, 2012 under this article or the
Local Tax Enabling Act.
A. The primary purpose of this article is to confirm the earned income and
net profits tax imposed pursuant to the Local Tax Enabling Act, as
amended and restated by Act 32 of 2008, and to do so within the time
frame required by Act 32.
B. Any prior ordinance or part of any prior ordinance conflicting with the
provisions of this article is rescinded insofar as the conflict exists. To
the extent the same as any ordinance in force immediately prior to
adoption of this article, the provisions of this article are intended as a
continuation of such prior ordinance and not as a new ordinance. If this
article is declared invalid, any prior ordinance levying a similar tax shall
remain in full force and effect and shall not be affected in any manner
by adoption of this article. The provisions of this article shall not affect
any act done or liability incurred, nor shall such provision affect any
suit or prosecution pending or to be initiated to enforce any right or
penalty or to punish offense under the authority of any ordinance in
force prior to adoption of this article. Subject to the foregoing
provisions of this section, this article shall supersede and repeal on the
effective date any ordinance levying a tax on earned income or net
profits in force immediately prior to the effective date.
§ 201-6 SHALER CODE § 201-10
1:694
activities as authorized by the Local Tax Enabling Act, subject to the policies
and procedures of the TCC.
§ 201-11. Effective date.
The provisions of this article shall become effective on January 1, 2012, and
shall apply to earned income received or earned and net profits earned or
made by a taxpayer during calendar year 2012 and each year thereafter
without annual reenactment unless the rate of tax is subsequently changed.
Changes in the rate of tax shall become effective on the date specified in the
ordinance imposing such change.
§ 201-11.1. Names of lessees. [Added 3-13-2012 by Ord. No. 1905]
Any person, corporation, association, partnership or any other entity
owning real property situate in the Township of Shaler and leasing the
same for occupancy by a person or persons for residential purposes shall,
within 30 days of leasing such property, submit the name and address of all
occupants of such leased premises to the Tax Officer of the Allegheny North
Tax Collection District.
§ 201-11.2. Violations and penalties. [Added 3-13-2012 by Ord. No.
1905]
Any person, corporation, association, partnership or any other entity who
fails, neglects or refuses to comply with § 201-11.1 shall, upon conviction
thereof before any Magisterial District Judge or court of competent
jurisdiction in Allegheny County, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less
than $50 nor more than $300 for each offense and costs and, in default of
payment of said fine and costs, to be imprisoned for a period not exceeding
10 days.
§ 201-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 201-11.2
1:695

ARTICLE II
Market Houses or Places
[Adopted 8-8-1972 by Ord. No. 1297]
§ 201-12. Definitions.
For the purpose of the article, the following terms, phrases, words and their
derivation shall have the following meanings:
MARKET HOUSES OR PLACES — A place where commodities are sold by
persons to the general public from spaces or stalls, which spaces or stalls
are not permanently installed and to which an occupant thereof does not
have exclusive right to possession of the ground covered by it.
OCCUPIERS — Those persons, partnerships, corporations, associations or
any other entities who have the right to sell their commodities from a space
or stall at a market house or place.
OPERATORS — Those persons, partnerships, corporations, associations or
any other entities who provide or obtain spaces or stalls for occupiers and
charge such occupiers for such occupiers' use of such spaces or stalls.
§ 201-13. Imposition of tax.
There is hereby imposed an annual license tax on each operator of a market
house or place situate in the Township of Shaler, which tax shall be paid
annually on or before the commencement of operation of the same for each
year said market house or place is in operation, said license tax being
payable at the office of the Secretary of the Township of Shaler, 300 Wetzel
Road, Glenshaw, Pennsylvania.
§ 201-14. Calculation of tax; fee.
Such license tax shall be based upon the number of spaces or stalls
comprising such market house or place and the number of days per year
such market house or place is open for business to the general public. Such
annual license fee shall be set by resolution of the Board of Commissioners
for each such market house or place situate in the Township of Shaler. All
operators shall be required to maintain accurate records of such days of
operation and such number of stalls or places.
§ 201-15. Operation without payment of tax.
From and after the effective date of this article, it shall be unlawful for
any operator to conduct a market house or place situate in the Township of
Shaler without having first paid the license tax as provided by this article.
§ 201-16. Food and beverage permits.
No operator shall permit any occupier of a market house or place for
which such operator is the licensee to sell, nor shall any occupier sell, any
prepared foods or beverage without such occupier first having obtained any
§ 201-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 201-16
1:697
and all necessary permits from all governmental agencies relating to the
sale of the same.
§ 201-17. Operation on sidewalks.
No operator shall permit the occupation of, nor shall any occupier occupy,
any portion of any sidewalk in the operation of such market house or place
for which such operator is the licensee.
§ 201-18. Blocking of fire lanes.
No operator shall permit the premises upon which a market house or place
of which he is the licensee to be used in such a manner as to block fire lanes.
§ 201-19. Submission of plans or drawings.
The operator of any market house or place, as a condition of obtaining a
license to operate the same, shall submit a plan or drawing showing the
area of the same which is to be used for selling and the area reserved for
the parking of motor vehicles. Such plan or drawing additionally shall be
annotated to indicate the required fire lane or lanes. Any deviation from
such plan or drawing shall be a violation of this article and grounds for
termination of the operator's license.
§ 201-20. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-15-1988 by Ord.
No. 1631]
Any person, partnership, corporation or association or any other entity who
violates this article shall be subject to a fine of not less than $50 nor
more than $600, plus the cost of proceedings, the same to be collected in
the name of the Township of Shaler by civil proceedings, or, in default of
payment of the fine and costs, shall be committed to the Allegheny County
Jail for a period not to exceed 90 days.
§ 201-16 SHALER CODE § 201-20
1:698
ARTICLE III
Local Services Tax
[Adopted 1-11-1977 by Ord. No. 1409; amended in its entirety
11-25-2008 by Ord. No. 1871]
§ 201-21. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Local Services Tax
Ordinance."
§ 201-22. Definitions.
As used in this article, unless the context clearly indicates a different
meaning, the following words shall have the meanings set forth below:
COLLECTOR — The entity designated by the Board of Commissioners of the
Township of Shaler.
COMPENSATION — Salaries, wages, commissions, tips, bonuses, fees,
gross receipts or any other income derived from engaging in an occupation.
DCED — The Department of Community and Economic Development of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
EARNED INCOME and NET PROFITS — Shall have the same meanings as
those terms are given in Section 13 of the Local Tax Enabling Act, Act 511
of 1965, as amended (53 P.S. § 6913).163
EMERGENCY SERVICES — Emergency services which shall include
emergency medical services, police services and/or fire services.
EMPLOYER — Any person, partnership, limited partnership,
unincorporated association, institution, trust, corporation, governmental
agency or any other body engaged in business or situated in the Township
employing one or more employees engaged in any occupation, on a salary,
wage, commission or other compensation basis, including a self-employed
person, other than domestic servants.
EXEMPTION CERTIFICATE — An exemption certificate substantially in the
form of the uniform certificate prescribed by the Pennsylvania Department
of Community and Economic Development affirming that the person
reasonably expects to receive earned income and net profits from all
sources within the Township of less than $12,000 in the calendar year for
which the exemption certificate is filed, which exemption certificate has
attached to it a copy of all of the employee's last pay stubs or W-2 forms
from employment within the Township for the year prior to the fiscal year
for which the employee is requesting to be exempted from the tax.
LOCAL SERVICES — Emergency services; road construction and/or
maintenance; reduction of property taxes; and property tax relief through
163. Editor's Note: Former 53 P.S. § 6913 was repealed by Act 32 of 2008, effective 6-30-2012.
See now 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq. The definitions of "earned income" and "net profits" are
now in 53 P.S. § 6924.501.
§ 201-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 201-22
1:699
implementation of a homestead and farmstead exclusion in accordance with
53 Pa.C.S.A. Chapter 85, Subchapter F (relating to homestead property
exclusion).164
OCCUPATION — Includes any livelihood, job, trade, profession, business or
enterprise of any kind, including services, domestic or other, for which any
compensation is received.
TAX — The tax imposed by this article.
TAXPAYER — Any natural person liable for the tax levied by this article.
TAX YEAR — The period of January 1 until December 31 in any year; a
calendar year.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Shaler.
§ 201-23. Levy of tax.
For local services purposes, a tax is hereby levied upon the privilege of
engaging in any occupation within the Township. Each natural person who
exercises such privilege for any length of time in any year shall be assessed
and shall pay the tax in the amount equal to the pro rata share of the annual
amount of $52 in accordance with the provisions of this article, subject
to the exemptions set forth in § 201-24 of this chapter. This tax levy shall
continue in force from year to year without annual reenactment.
§ 201-24. Exemptions.
The tax levied by § 201-23 shall not be imposed upon the following persons:
A. Any person who served in any war or armed conflict in which the United
States was engaged and is honorably discharged or released under
honorable circumstances from active service if, as a result of military
service, the person is blind, paraplegic or a double or quadruple
amputee or has a service-connected disability declared by the United
States Veterans' Administration or its successor to be a total onehundred-
percent permanent disability.
B. Any person who serves as a member of a reserve component of the
armed forces and is called to active duty at any time during the taxable
year. For purposes of this subsection, "reserve component of the armed
forces" shall mean the United States Army Reserve, United States Navy
Reserve, United States Marine Corps Reserve, United States Coast
Guard Reserve, United States Air Force Reserve, the Pennsylvania
Army National Guard, or the Pennsylvania Air National Guard.
C. Any natural person whose total earned income and net profits from all
sources within the Township during the taxable year is not in excess of
$12,000.
164. Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 8581 et seq.
§ 201-22 SHALER CODE § 201-25
1:700
§ 201-25. Duty of employers to collect.
A. Every employer not registered under the provisions of the Earned
Income Tax Ordinance of the Township165 shall, within 15 days after
first becoming an employer, register with the Collector the employer's
name, address and such other information as the Collector may require.
B. As to each taxpayer employed for any length of time during any payroll
period of an employer during the calendar year, each employer shall
deduct a pro rata share of the tax from compensation payable to the
taxpayer with respect to such payroll period. The pro rata share of the
tax assessed on a taxpayer for a payroll period shall be determined by
dividing the rate of the tax levied for the calendar year by the number of
payroll periods established by the employer for the calendar year. For
purposes of determining the pro rata share of the tax, an employer shall
round down the amount of tax deducted for each payroll period to the
nearest $0.01. Each employer shall file a return on a form prescribed by
the Collector and pay the Collector the full amount of all such taxes
deducted during a calendar quarter within 30 days after the end of the
calendar quarter.
C. Any employer who discontinues business or ceases operation before
December 31 of any year shall, within 15 days after discontinuing
business or ceasing operation, file the required return and pay the tax
to the Collector.
D. The failure of any employer to deduct the tax shall not relieve the
employee from the duty to file and pay the tax. Any employer who fails
to deduct the tax as required by this article, or who fails to pay such tax
to the Collector, shall be liable for such tax in full as though the tax had
originally been levied against such employer. No employer shall be
liable for failure to deduct the tax if the failure to deduct the tax arises
from incorrect information submitted by the employee as to the
employee's place or places of employment, the employee's principal
office or where the employee is principally employed.
E. The employer shall not deduct the tax but shall maintain adequate
records concerning the employees in the cases described in Subsection
E(1) and (2) below:
(1) In the case of concurrent employment, if the employee provides a
recent pay statement from a principal employer that includes the
name of the employer, the length of the payroll period and the
amount of the tax deducted, and a statement from the employee
that the pay statement is from the employee's principal employer
and that the employee will notify other employers of a change in
the principal place of employment within two weeks of its
occurrence.
165. Editor's Note: See Art. I, Earned Income Tax, of this chapter.
§ 201-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 201-25
1:701
§ 201-26. Direct payment by taxpayers.
Every taxpayer who is self-employed, or whose tax for any other reason is
not collected under § 201-25 of this article, shall file a return on a form
(2) In the case of an employee claiming the exemption set forth in
§ 201-24C, if the employee has provided an exemption certificate to
the employer, the Collector has not otherwise instructed the
employer, the employer has not received notification from the
person who claimed the exemption or from the Collector that the
person has received earned income and net profits from all sources
within the Township equal to or in excess of $12,000 in that
calendar year or that the person is otherwise ineligible for the tax
exemption for that calendar year, and the employer has not paid to
the person earned income within the Township in an amount equal
to or in excess of $12,000 in that calendar year.
F. The employer shall file with the Collector a copy of each exemption
certificate, including attachments, received by the employer no later
than the end of the first payroll period as to which the employee claims
the exemption set forth in § 201-24C.
G. If a person has claimed the exemption from the tax under § 201-24C for
a given calendar year, but either the employer has received notification
from the person who claimed the exemption or from the Collector that
the person has received earned income or net profits from all sources
within the Township equal to or in excess of $12,000 in that calendar
year or that the person is otherwise ineligible for the tax exemption for
that calendar year, or the employer has paid to the person earned
income within the Township in an amount equal to or in excess of
$12,000 in that calendar year, then the employer shall withhold the tax
for the remainder of that calendar year and the employer shall withhold
from the person, for the first payroll period after receipt of the
notification described above or for the first payroll period after
payments described above have been made, a lump sum equal to the
amount of the tax that was not withheld from the person due to the
exemption claimed by the person, plus the per-payroll amount due for
that first payroll period. The amount of tax withheld per payroll period
for the remaining payroll periods in that calendar year shall be the
same amount withheld for other employees. In the event the
employment of a person subject to withholding of the tax under this
subsection is subsequently severed in that calendar year, the person
shall be liable for any outstanding balance of tax due, and the Collector
may pursue collection under this article.
H. Each employer shall ensure that exemption certificate forms are readily
available to employees at all times and shall furnish each new employee
with an exemption certificate form at the time of hiring.
I. A person seeking exemption from the tax imposed under § 201-23 must
annually file an exemption certificate with the Collector.
§ 201-25 SHALER CODE § 201-26
1:702
prescribed by the Collector and shall pay a pro rata share of the tax directly
to the Collector within 30 days after the end of each calendar quarter. The
pro rata share of the tax assessed on a taxpayer for a calendar quarter shall
be determined by dividing the rate of the tax levied for the calendar year by
four.
§ 201-27. Nonresident taxpayers subject to tax.
Both resident and nonresident taxpayers shall, by virtue of engaging in an
occupation within the Township, be subject to the tax and the provisions of
this article.
§ 201-28. Administration and enforcement.
The Collector, on behalf of the Township, shall collect and receive the taxes,
interest, fines and penalties imposed by this article and shall maintain
records showing interest, fines and penalties imposed by this article and
shall maintain records showing the amounts received and the dates such
amounts were received. The Collector shall prescribe and issue all forms
necessary for the administration of the tax and may adopt and enforce
regulations relating to any matter pertaining to the administration of this
article, including, but not limited to, requirements for collection through
employers, requirements for evidence and records, and provisions for the
examination and correction of returns. The Collector and agents designated
by him may examine the records of any employer or supposed employer or
of any taxpayer or supposed taxpayer in order to ascertain the tax due or
verify the accuracy of any return. Every employer or supposed employer
and every taxpayer or supposed taxpayer shall give the Collector, and
any agent designated by him, all means, facilities and opportunity for the
examinations hereby authorized.
§ 201-29. Recovery of unpaid tax; interest; collection costs;
payment under protest.
The Collector shall collect, by suit or otherwise, all taxes, interest, costs,
fines and penalties due under this article and unpaid. If for any reason
any tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6% per year on the
amount of unpaid tax and an additional penalty of 1/2 of 1% of the amount
of unpaid tax, for each month or fraction of month during which the tax
remains unpaid, shall be added and collected. Whenever suit is brought
for the recovery of unpaid tax, the taxpayer shall, in addition, be liable for
the costs of collection as well as for interest and penalties. The Collector
may accept payment under protest of the tax claimed by the Township in
any case where any person disputes the Township's claim for the tax. If
a court of competent jurisdiction thereafter decides that there has been
overpayment to the Collector, the Collector shall refund the amount of the
overpayment to the person who paid under protest.
§ 201-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 201-30
1:703
§ 201-30. Refunds; receipts.
Any person who has overpaid the tax may obtain a refund by making a
written application for a refund to the Collector no later than one year after
payment of the tax or three years after the due date for payment of the
tax, whichever is later, and satisfactorily proves to the Collector that he is
entitled to the refund. Refunds made within 75 days of a refund request or
75 days after the last day the employer is required to remit the tax to the
Collector for the last quarter of the calendar year, whichever is later, shall
not be subject to interest imposed under 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 8426 (relating to
interest on overpayment). A refund shall be provided only for an amount
overpaid in a calendar year that exceeds $1. The Collector shall provide a
taxpayer a receipt of payment of the tax upon request by the taxpayer.
§ 201-30.1. Violations and penalties.
Whoever makes any false or untrue statement on any return required by
this article, or whoever refuses inspection of the books, records or accounts
in his or her custody and control setting forth the number of employees
subject to this tax who are in his or her employment, or whoever fails
or refuses to file any return required by this article or shall violate any
other provision of this article shall be guilty of a summary offense and,
upon conviction thereof, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $600 and costs of prosecution and, in default of payment thereof, to
imprisonment for not more than 30 days. The action to enforce the penalty
herein prescribed may be instituted against any person in charge of the
business of any employer who shall have failed or who refuses to file a
return required by this article.
§ 201-30.2. Applicability.
The tax shall not apply to any subject of tax or person not within the taxing
power of the Township under the Constitution of the United States and the
laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 201-30 SHALER CODE § 201-30.2
1:704
ARTICLE IV
Delinquent Real Estate Taxes
[Adopted 9-12-1978 by Ord. No. 1454]
§ 201-31. Penalty for nonpayment.
All taxpayers who shall fail to make payment of any taxes charged against
them for four months after the date of the tax notice shall be charged
a penalty of 10%, which penalty shall be added to the taxes by the Tax
Collector and be collected by him.
§ 201-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 201-31
1:705

ARTICLE V
Interest on Liened Taxes
[Adopted 9-30-1983 by Ord. No. 1547]
§ 201-32. Interest rate.
All taxpayers who shall fail to make payment of any taxes liened against
them shall be charged interest at the rate of 10% per annum from the date
of the liening of said taxes, which amount shall be added to the taxes by the
Tax Collector and be collected by him.
§ 201-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 201-32
1:707

ARTICLE VI
Realty Transfer Tax
[Adopted 3-10-1987 by Ord. No. 1609]
§ 201-33. Short title.
This article shall be known as the "Realty Transfer Tax Ordinance of Shaler
Township."
§ 201-34. Authority.
A realty transfer tax for general revenue purposes is hereby imposed upon
the transfer of real estate or interest in real estate situated within Shaler
Township, regardless of where the documents making the transfer are
made, executed or delivered or where the actual settlements on such
transfer took place as authorized by Article XI-D, Local Real Estate Transfer
Tax, 72 P.S. § 8101-D et seq.
§ 201-35. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ASSOCIATION — A partnership, limited partnership or any other form of
unincorporated enterprise owned or conducted by two or more persons
other than a private trust or decedent's estate.
CORPORATION — A corporation, joint-stock association, business trust
or banking institution which is organized under the laws of this
commonwealth, the United States or any other state, territory, foreign
country or dependency.
DOCUMENT — Any deed, instrument or writing which conveys, transfers,
demises, vests, confirms or evidences any transfer or demise of title to
real estate, but does not include wills, mortgages, deeds of trust or other
instruments or like character given as security for a debt and deeds of
release thereof to the debtor, land contracts whereby the legal title does not
pass to the grantee until the total consideration specified in the contract has
been paid or any cancellation thereof unless the consideration is payable
over a period of time exceeding 30 years, or instruments which solely grant,
vest or confirm a public utility easement. "Document" shall also include
a declaration of acquisition required to be presented for recording under
§ 201-38 of this article.
FAMILY FARM CORPORATION — A corporation of which at least 75% of its
assets are devoted to the business of agriculture and at least 75% of each
class of stock of the corporation is continuously owned by members of the
same family. The business or agriculture shall not be deemed to include:
Recreational activities, such as but not limited to hunting, fishing,
camping, skiing, show competition or racing;
A.
§ 201-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 201-35
1:709
MEMBERS OF THE SAME FAMILY — Any individual, such individual's
brothers and sisters, the brothers and sisters of such individuals parents
and grandparents, the ancestors and lineal descendants of any of the
foregoing, a spouse of any of the foregoing and the estate of any of the
foregoing. Individuals related by the half-blood or legal adoption shall be
treated as if they were related by the whole-blood.
PERSON — Every natural person, association or corporation whenever used
in any clause prescribing and imposing a fine or imprisonment, or both.
The term "person" as applied to associations shall include the responsible
members or general partners thereof and, as applied to corporations, the
officers thereof.
REAL ESTATE —
REAL ESTATE COMPANY — A corporation or association which is primarily
engaged in the business of holding, selling or leasing real estate, 90% or
more of the ownership interest in which is held by 35 or fewer persons, and
which:
TITLE TO REAL ESTATE —
The raising, breeding or training of game animals or game birds, fish,
cats, dogs or pets, or animals intended for use in sporting or
recreational activities;
B.
C. Fur farming;
D. Stockyard and slaughterhouse operations; or
E. Manufacturing or processing operations of any kind.
All lands, tenements or hereditaments within this governing body,
including, without limitation, buildings, structures, fixtures, mines,
minerals, oil, gas, quarries, spaces with or without upper or lower
boundaries, trees and other improvements, immovables or interests
which by custom, usage or law pass with a conveyance or land, but
excluding permanently attached machinery and equipment in an
industrial plant.
A.
B. A condominium unit.
A tenant-stockholder's interest in a cooperative housing corporation,
trust or association under a proprietary lease or occupancy agreement.
C.
Derives 60% or more of its annual gross receipts from the ownership or
disposition of real estate; or
A.
Holds real estate, the value of which comprises 90% or more of the
value of its entire tangible asset holdings exclusive of tangible assets
which are freely transferable and actively traded on an established
market.
B.
Any interest in real estate which endures for a period of time, the
termination of which is not fixed or ascertained by a specific number of
A.
§ 201-35 SHALER CODE § 201-35
1:710
TRANSACTION — The making, executing, delivering, accepting or
presenting for recording of a document.
VALUE —
§ 201-36. Imposition of tax; interest.
years, including, without limitation, an estate in fee simple, life estate
or perpetual leasehold; or
Any interest in real estate enduring for a fixed period of years but
which, either by reason of the length of the term or the grant of a
right to extend the term by renewal or otherwise, consists of a group
of rights approximating those of an estate in fee simple, life estate or
perpetual leasehold, including, without limitation, a leasehold interest
or possessory interest under a lease or occupancy agreement for a term
of 30 years or more or a leasehold interest or possessory interest in real
estate in which the lessee has equity.
B.
In the case of any bona fide sale of real estate at arm's length for
actual monetary worth, the amount of the actual consideration therefor
paid or to be paid, including liens or other encumbrances thereon
existing before the transfer and not removed thereby, whether or not
the underlying indebtedness is assumed, and ground rents, or a
commensurate part thereof, which such liens or other encumbrances
and ground rents also encumber or are charged against other real
estate, provided that, where such documents shall set forth a nominal
consideration, the "value" thereof shall be determined from the price
set forth in or actual consideration for the contract of sale;
A.
In the case of a gift, sale by execution upon a judgment or upon the
foreclosure of a mortgage by a judicial officer, transactions without
consideration or for consideration less than the actual monetary worth
of the real estate, a taxable lease, an occupancy agreement, a leasehold
or possessory interest, any exchange of properties or the real estate
of an acquired company, the actual monetary worth of the real estate
determined by adjusting the assessed value of the real estate for local
real estate tax purposes for the common level ratio factor developed
by the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue for Pennsylvania realty
transfer tax base calculations;
B.
In the case of an easement or other interest in real estate the value of
which is not determinable under Subsection A or B, the actual monetary
worth of such interest; or
C.
The actual consideration for or actual monetary worth of any executory
agreement for the construction of buildings, structures or other
permanent improvements to real estate between the grantor and other
persons existing before the transfer and not removed thereby or
between the grantor, the agent or principal of the grantor of a related
corporation, association or partnership and the grantee existing before
or effective with the transfer.
D.
§ 201-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 201-36
1:711
§ 201-37. Exempt parties.
The United States, the commonwealth, or any of their instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions shall be exempt from payment of the tax
imposed by this article. The exemption of such governmental bodies shall
not, however, relieve any other party to a transaction from liability for the
tax.
§ 201-38. Excluded transactions.
A. Every person who makes, executes, delivers, accepts or presents for
recording any document or in whose behalf any document is made,
executed, delivered, accepted or presented for recording shall be
subject to pay for and in respect to the transaction or any part thereof a
tax at the rate of 1% of the value of the real estate represented by such
document, which tax shall be payable at the earlier of the time the
document is presented for recording or within 30 days of acceptance of
such document or within 30 days of becoming an acquired company.
B. The payment of the tax imposed herein shall be evidenced by the
affixing of an official stamp or writing by the Recorder, whereon the
date of the payment of the tax, amount of the tax and the signature of
the collecting agent shall be set forth.
C. It is the intent of this article that the entire burden of the tax imposed
herein on a person or transfer shall not exceed the limitations
prescribed in the Local Tax Enabling Act, Act of December 31, 1965,
P.L. 1257, 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.,166 so that if any other political
subdivision shall impose or hereafter shall impose such tax on the same
person or transfer, then the tax levied by Shaler Township under the
authority of that Act shall, during the time such duplication of the tax
exists, except as hereinafter otherwise provided, be 1/2 of the rate, and
such 1/2 rate shall become effective without any action on the part of
Shaler Township; provided, however, that Shaler Township and any
other political subdivision which impose such tax on the same person or
transfer may agree that, instead of limiting their respective rates to 1/2
of the rate herein provided, they will impose respectively different
rates, the total of which shall not exceed the maximum rate permitted
under the Local Tax Enabling Act.
D. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate in
effect at the time the tax is due shall be added and collected.
A. The tax imposed by § 201-36 shall not be imposed upon:
(1) A transfer to the commonwealth or to any of its instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions by gift, dedication or deed in lieu
of condemnation or deed of confirmation in connection with
166. Editor's Note: Pursuant to P.L. 197, No. 32, enacted 7-2-2008, sections of the Local Tax
Enabling Act, formerly codified in 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq., have been revised and
renumbered. See now 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 201-36 SHALER CODE § 201-38
1:712
condemnation proceedings or a reconveyance by the condemning
body of the property condemned to the owner of record at the time
of condemnation, which reconveyance may include property line
adjustments, provided that said reconveyance is made within one
year from the date of condemnation.
(2) A document which Shaler Township is prohibited from taxing under
the Constitution or statutes of the United States.
(3) A conveyance to a municipality, township, school district or county
pursuant to acquisition by the municipality, township, school
district or county of a tax delinquent property at sheriff sale or tax
claim bureau sale.
(4) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration which corrects or
confirms a transfer previously recorded, but which does not extend
or limit existing record legal title or interest.
(5) A transfer of division in kind for no or nominal actual consideration
of property passed by testate or intestate succession and held by
cotenants; however, if any of the parties take shares greater in
value than their undivided interest, tax is due on the excess.
(6) A transfer between husband and wife, between persons who were
previously husband and wife who have since been divorced,
provided that the property or interest therein subject to such
transfer was acquired by the husband and wife or husband or wife
prior to the granting of the final decree in divorce, between parent
and child or the spouse of such child, between brother or sister or
spouse of a brother or sister and brother or sister or the spouse of a
brother or sister, and between a grandparent and grandchild or the
spouse of such grandchild, except that a subsequent transfer by the
grantee within one year shall be subject to tax as if the grantor
were making such transfer.
(7) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration of property
passing by testate or intestate succession from a personal
representative of a decedent to the decedent's devisee or heir.
(8) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration to a trustee of an
ordinary trust where the transfer of the same property would be
exempt if the transfer was made directly from the grantor to all of
the possible beneficiaries, whether or not such beneficiaries are
contingent or specifically named. No such exemption shall be
granted unless the Recorder of Deeds is presented with a copy of
the trust instrument that clearly identifies the grantor and all
possible beneficiaries.
(9) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from a trustee to a
beneficiary of an ordinary trust.
§ 201-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 201-38
1:713
(10) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from trustee to
successor trustee.
(11) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration between principal
and agent or straw party; or from or to an agent or straw party
where, if the agent or straw party were his principal, no tax would
be imposed under this article. Where the document by which title is
acquired by a grantee or statement of value fails to set forth that
the property was acquired by the grantee from or for the benefit of
his principal, there is a rebuttable presumption that the property is
the property of the grantee in his individual capacity if the grantee
claims an exemption from taxation under this clause.
(12) A transfer made pursuant to the statutory merger or consolidation
of a corporation or statutory division of a nonprofit corporation,
except where the Department reasonably determines that the
primary intent for such merger, consolidation or division is
avoidance of the tax imposed by this article.
(13) A transfer from a corporation or association of real estate held of
record in the name of the corporation or association where the
grantee owns stock of the corporation or an interest in the
association in the same proportion as his interest in or ownership of
the real estate being conveyed and where the stock of the
corporation or the interest in the association has been held by the
grantee for more than two years.
(14) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee or property conveyed by the grantee to that
agency or authority as security for a debt of the grantee or a
transfer to a nonprofit industrial development agency or authority.
(15) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee purchasing directly from it, but only if the
grantee shall directly use such real estate for the primary purpose
of manufacturing, fabricating, compounding, processing,
publishing, research and development, transportation, energy
conversion, energy production, pollution control, warehousing or
agriculture, and the agency or authority has the full ownership
interest in the real estate transferred.
(16) A transfer by a mortgagor to the holder of a bona fide mortgage in
default in lieu of a foreclosure or a transfer pursuant to a judicial
sale in which the successful bidder is the bona fide holder of a
mortgage, unless the holder assigns the bid to another person.
(17) Any transfer between religious organizations or other bodies or
persons holding title for a religious organization, if such real estate
is not being or has not been used by such transferor for commercial
purposes.
§ 201-38 SHALER CODE § 201-38
1:714
§ 201-39. Associations and corporations.
Except as otherwise provided in § 201-38, documents which make, confirm
or evidence any transfer or demise of title to real estate between
associations or corporations and the members, partners, shareholders or
stockholders thereof are fully taxable. For the purposes of this article,
corporations and associations are entities separate from their members,
partners, stockholders or shareholders.
§ 201-40. Acquired company.
(18) A transfer to a conservancy which possesses a tax-exempt status
pursuant to Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954
[68A Stat. 3, 26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3)] and which has as its primary
purpose preservation of land for historic, recreational, scenic,
agricultural or open space opportunities.
(19) A transfer of real estate devoted to the business of agriculture to a
family farm corporation by a member of the same family which
directly owns at least 75% of each class of the stock thereof.
(20) A transfer between members of the same family of an ownership
interest in a real estate company or family farm corporation.
(21) A transaction wherein the tax due is $1 or less.
(22) Leases for the production or extraction of coal, oil, natural gas or
minerals and assignments thereof.
B. In order to exercise any exclusion provided in this section, the true, full
and complete value of the transfer shall be shown on the statement of
value. A copy of the Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax Statement of
Value may be submitted for this purpose. For leases of coal, oil, natural
gas or minerals, the statement of value may be limited to an explanation
of the reason such document is not subject to tax under this article.
A. A real estate company is an acquired company upon a change in the
ownership interest in the company, however effected, if the change
does not affect the continuity of the company and of itself or together
with prior changes has the effect of transferring, directly or indirectly,
90% or more of the total ownership interest in the company within a
period of three years.
B. With respect to real estate acquired after February 16, 1986, a family
farm corporation is an acquired company when, because of voluntary or
involuntary dissolution, it ceases to be a family farm corporation or
when, because of issuance or transfer of stock or because of acquisition
or transfer of assets that are devoted to the business of agriculture, it
fails to meet the minimum requirements of a family farm corporation
under this article.
§ 201-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 201-40
1:715
§ 201-41. Credits against tax.
§ 201-42. Extension of lease.
In determining the term of a lease, it shall be presumed that a right or
option to renew or extend a lease will be exercised if the rental charge
to the lessee is fixed or if a method for calculating the rental charge is
established.
§ 201-43. Proceeds of judicial sale.
The tax herein imposed shall be fully paid and have priority out of the
proceeds of any judicial sale of real estate before any other obligation,
claim, lien, judgment, estate or costs of the sale and of the writ upon which
the sale is made except the state realty transfer tax, and the Sheriff or other
C. Within 30 days after becoming an acquired company, the company shall
present a declaration of acquisition with the recorder of each county in
which it holds real estate, for the affixation of documentary stamps and
recording. Such declaration shall set forth the value of real estate
holdings of the acquired company in such county. A copy of the
Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax Declaration of Acquisition may be
submitted for this purpose.
A. Where there is a transfer of a residential property by a licensed real
estate broker, which property was transferred to him within the
preceding year as consideration for the purchase of other residential
property, a credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the
transfer to him shall be given to him toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
B. Where there is a transfer by a builder of residential property which was
transferred to the builder within the preceding year as consideration
for the purchase of new, previously unoccupied residential property, a
credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the transfer to the
builder shall be given to the builder toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
C. Where there is a transfer of real estate which is leased by the grantor, a
credit for the amount of tax paid at the time of the lease shall be given
the grantor toward the tax due upon the transfer.
D. Where there is a conveyance by deed of real estate which was
previously sold under a land contract by the grantor, a credit for the
amount of tax paid at the time of the sale shall be given the grantor
toward the tax due upon the deed.
E. If the tax due upon the transfer is greater than the credit given under
this section, the difference shall be paid. If the credit allowed is greater
than the amount of tax due, no refund or carry-over credit shall be
allowed.
§ 201-40 SHALER CODE § 201-43
1:716
officer conducting said sale shall pay the tax herein imposed out of the first
moneys paid to him in connection therewith. If the proceeds of the sale are
insufficient to pay the entire tax herein imposed, the purchaser shall be
liable for the remaining tax.
§ 201-44. Duties of Recorder of Deeds.
§ 201-45. Statement of value.
Every document lodged with or presented to the Recorder of Deeds for
recording shall set forth therein and as a part of such document the true,
full and complete value thereof or shall be accompanied by a statement
of value executed by a responsible person connected with the transaction,
showing such connection and setting forth the true, full and complete value
thereof or the reason, if any, why such document is not subject to tax under
this article. A copy of the Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax Statement of
Value may be submitted for this purpose. The provisions of this section
shall not apply to any excludable real estate transfers which are exempt
from taxation based on family relationship. Other documents presented
for the affixation of stamps shall be accompanied by a certified copy of
the document and statement of value executed by a responsible person
connected with the transaction, showing such connection and setting forth
the true, full and complete value thereof or the reason, if any, why such
document is not subject to tax under this article.
§ 201-46. Civil penalties.
A. As provided in 16 P.S. § 11011-6, as amended by the Act of July 7, 1983
(P.L. 40, No. 21), the Recorder of Deeds shall be the collection agent for
the local realty transfer tax, including any amount payable to Shaler
Township based on a redetermination of the amount of tax due by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax,
without compensation from Shaler Township.
B. In order to ascertain the amount of taxes due when the property is
located in more than one political subdivision, the Recorder shall not
accept for recording such a deed unless it is accompanied by a
statement of value showing what taxes are due each municipality.
C. On or before the 10th of each month, the Recorder shall pay over to
Shaler Township all local realty transfer taxes collected, less 2% for use
of the County, together with a report containing the information as is
required by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in reporting collections
of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax. The two-percent commission
shall be paid to the County.
D. Upon a redetermination of the amount of realty transfer tax due by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the Recorder shall rerecord the deed
or record the additional realty transfer tax form only when both the
state and local amounts and a rerecording or recording fee has been
tendered.
§ 201-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 201-46
1:717
§ 201-47. Lien.
The tax imposed by this article shall become a lien upon the lands,
tenements or hereditaments or any interest therein lying, being situated,
wholly or in part, within the boundaries of Shaler Township, which lands,
tenements, hereditaments or interest therein are described in or conveyed
by or transferred by the deed which is the subject of the tax imposed,
assessed and levied by this article, said lien to begin at the time when the
tax under this article is due and payable, and continue until discharge by
payment or in accordance with the law, and the Solicitor is authorized to file
a municipal or tax claim in the Court of Common Pleas of Allegheny County
in accordance with the provisions of the Municipal Claims and Liens Act of
1923, 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq., its supplements and amendments.
§ 201-48. Collection; enforcement.
A. If any part of any underpayment of tax imposed by this article is due to
fraud, there shall be added to the tax an amount equal to 50% of the
underpayment.
B. In the case of failure to record a declaration required under this article
on the date prescribed therefor, unless it is shown that such failure is
due to reasonable cause, there shall be added to the tax 5% of the
amount of such tax if the failure is for not more than one month, with an
additional 5% for each additional month or fraction thereof during
which such failure continues, not exceeding 50% in the aggregate.
A. All taxes imposed by this article, together with interest and penalties
prescribed herein, shall be recoverable as other debts of like character
are recovered.
B. The Treasurer/Tax Collector of Shaler Township is charged with
enforcement and collection of the tax and is empowered to promulgate
and enforce reasonable regulations for enforcement and collection of
the tax. The regulations which have been promulgated by the
Pennsylvania Department of Revenue, under 72 P.S. § 8101-C et seq.,
are incorporated into and made a part of this article.
§ 201-46 SHALER CODE § 201-48
1:718
ARTICLE VII
Senior Citizens Tax Exemption
[Adopted 5-8-2007 by Ord. No. 1852167]
§ 201-49. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Shaler Township Senior Citizen Tax
Rebate Ordinance."
§ 201-50. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACT 77 — The Act of December 22, 1993, Public Law 529, No. 77, codified
as the Allegheny Regional Asset District Law, 16 P.S. § 6101-B et seq.
ALLEGHENY REGIONAL ASSET DISTRICT LAW — See the definition of
"Act 77" above.
BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS — The Board of Commissioners of Shaler
Township.
ELIGIBLE TAXPAYER — A longtime owner/occupant of a principal residence
in Shaler Township, who:
HOUSEHOLD INCOME — All income received by an eligible taxpayer and
the taxpayer's spouse while residing in his or her principal residence during
the preceding calendar year for which a rebate is claimed as shown on the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Property Tax or Rent Rebate Program form.
INCOME — All income from whatever source derived, including but not
limited to salaries, wages, bonuses, commissions, income from selfemployment,
alimony, support money, cash public assistance and relief,
the gross amount of any pensions or annuities, including 50% of railroad
retirement benefits after 1999, 50% of all benefits received under the
Is a single person aged 65 or older during a calendar year in which
Shaler Township real property taxes are assessed and paid;
A.
Are married persons if either spouse is age 65 or older during a
calendar year in which Shaler Township real property taxes are
assessed and paid;
B.
Is a widow or widower who is 50 years of age or older during a calendar
year in which Shaler Township real property taxes are assessed and
paid; or
C.
Is a permanently disabled person 18 years of age or older during
a calendar year in which Shaler Township real property taxes are
assessed and paid.
D.
167. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. VII, Senior Citizens Tax
Exemption, adopted 4-11-1995 by Ord. No. 1717.
§ 201-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 201-50
1:719
Federal Social Security Act (except Medicare benefits) for calendar year
1999 and thereafter, all benefits received under state unemployment
insurance laws and veteran's disability payments, all interest received from
the federal or any state government or any instrumentality or political
subdivision thereof, realized capital gains, rentals, worker's compensation
and the gross amount of loss-of-time insurance benefits, life insurance
benefits and proceeds (except the first $5,000 of the total of death benefit
payments), and gifts of cash or property (other than transfers by gift
between members of a household), in excess of a total value of $300,
but shall not include surplus food or other relief in kind supplied by a
governmental agency or property tax or rent rebate or inflation dividend.
LONGTIME OWNER/OCCUPANT — Any person who, for at least 10
continuous years, has owned and occupied the same dwelling place as a
principal residence and domicile in Shaler Township.
MUNICIPALITY — Shaler Township.
PERMANENTLY DISABLED PERSON — A person who is unable to engage
in any substantial gainful activity by reason of any medically determinable
physical or mental impairment which can be expected to continue
indefinitely as verified by a sworn declaration of such status, except as
provided in 53 P.S. § 6926.1304(b)(3) and (c).
PERSON — A natural person.
PRINCIPAL RESIDENCE — The dwelling place of a person, including the
principal house and lot, and such lots as are used in connection therewith
which contribute to its enjoyment, comfort and convenience.
REAL ESTATE PROPERTY TAXES — Township of Shaler real estate property
taxes paid to the Tax Collector of Shaler Township.
SENIOR CITIZENS PROPERTY TAX AND RENT REBATE ASSISTANCE ACT
— The Act of June 27, 2006, Public Law 1873, No. 1 (Spec. Sess. No. 1), as
codified at 53 P.S. § 6926.1301 et seq.
TREASURER — The elected Treasurer for Shaler Township.
WIDOW OR WIDOWER — The surviving wife or the surviving husband, as
the case may be, of a deceased individual, and who has not remarried as
verified by a sworn declaration of such status.
§ 201-51. Rebate granted.
All eligible taxpayers in the Township of Shaler who are longtime owner/
occupants shall be entitled to have a portion of their Township of Shaler
real estate property taxes rebated in an amount set by resolution of the
Township Board of Commissioners if the eligible taxpayer household income
does not exceed $20,000 and otherwise qualifies for a property tax rebate
under the Senior Citizens Property Tax and Rent Rebate Assistance Act.
§ 201-50 SHALER CODE § 201-52
1:720
§ 201-52. Participation in program.
Any eligible taxpayer paying property taxes to the Township of Shaler may
apply to the Township Treasurer and participate in the tax rebate program
authorized under this article. In order to be eligible to participate in the
program, the person must meet the following conditions:
§ 201-53. Rules and regulations; administration.
The Township's Manager/Secretary shall have the authority to issue rules
and regulations with respect to the administration of the tax rebate
program established under this article. Such rules and regulations shall
include, but not be limited to, reasonable proof of household income, proof
of residence, proof of qualification for and receipt of a property tax rebate
under the Senior Citizens Property Tax and Rent Rebate Assistance Act,
receipt showing payment of Shaler Township real estate property taxes for
the current year, verification of status as widow, widower or permanently
disabled person, and any other reasonable requirements, conditions and
forms as may be necessary to operate the tax rebate program.
§ 201-54. Amount of rebate.
Eligible taxpayers are entitled to claim a rebate of Shaler Township
property taxes beginning in 1995 and each year thereafter in an amount
set by resolution of the Township Board of Commissioners. In filing for a
A. The person must be a single person aged 65 or older, or be married
persons with either spouse being 65 years of age or older;
B. The person must be a longtime owner/occupant;
C. The property owned by the person must be the principal residence and
domicile of the resident;
D. If the person or his spouse is not 65 years of age or older, the person
must be an eligible widow, widower or permanently disabled person, as
defined herein;
E. The person's household income must qualify him or her to receive a
property tax rebate under the Senior Citizens Property Tax and Rent
Rebate Assistance Act and the annual household income does not
exceed $20,000;
F. The taxpayer must have paid his Shaler Township real estate property
taxes in full during the calendar year in which a tax rebate is claimed;
G. Income eligibility under the Senior Citizens Property Tax and Rent
Rebate Assistance Act must exist in the preceding calendar year for
which a real estate property tax rebate is claimed; and
H. An eligible taxpayer must request the real estate property tax rebate in
the same calendar year in which the real estate property tax is paid.
§ 201-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 201-54
1:721
property tax rebate, an eligible taxpayer may claim a tax rebate for the
current tax year and one prior tax year.
§ 201-55. Effective date.
This article is effective January 1, 1995, and shall include Shaler Township
real estate property taxes paid to Shaler Township in calendar year 1995
and each year thereafter.
§ 201-54 SHALER CODE § 201-55
1:722
ARTICLE VIII
Earned Income Tax Registration
[Adopted 1-9-1996 by Ord. No. 1730]
§ 201-56. Short title.
This article shall be known as the Township of Shaler "Earned Income Tax
Registration Ordinance."
§ 201-57. Purpose and intent.
This article is adopted to promote the efficient and systematic collection of
earned income taxes by the Shaler Township Earned Income Tax Collector,
to set forth a uniform time within which all employed residents must
register with the Earned Income Tax Collector, and to discourage attempts
to avoid payment of the earned income tax by failing to register employment
with the Earned Income Tax Collector.
§ 201-58. Rules of construction.
In the construction of this article, the rules and definitions contained in
this section shall be observed and applied, except when the context clearly
indicates otherwise:
§ 201-59. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms will have the meanings indicated:
DOMICILE — The place where one lives and has his permanent home and
to which he has the intention of returning whenever he is absent. Actual
residence is not necessarily domicile, for domicile is the fixed place of
abode which, in the intention of the taxpayer, is permanent rather than
transitory. Domicile is the voluntarily fixed place of habitation of a person,
not for a mere special or limited purpose, but with the present intention of
making a permanent home, until some event occurs to induce him to adopt
some other permanent home. In the case of businesses or associations, the
domicile is that place considered as the center of business affairs and the
place where its functions are discharged.
EARNED INCOME TAX COLLECTOR — The person, public employee or
private agency designated by the Board of Commissioners of the Township
of Shaler to collect and administer the tax on earned income and net profits.
A. Words used in the singular shall include the plural, and the plural the
singular.
B. Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense.
C. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary.
D. The word "may" is permissive.
§ 201-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 201-59
1:723
RESIDENT — A person, partnership, association or other entity domiciled
in the Township of Shaler.
TAXPAYER — A person, partnership, association or any other entity
required hereunder to file a return of earned income or net profits or
income tax thereon.
§ 201-60. Registration required.
All employed residents of the Township of Shaler shall register with the
Earned Income Tax Collector within 30 days of residency or, if already a
resident, within 30 days of employment, whichever first occurs.
§ 201-61. Failure to register.
It is a violation of this article for any employed Township resident or
taxpayer to not register with the Earned Income Tax Collector within 30
days of residency or, if already a resident, within 30 days of employment,
whichever first occurs.
§ 201-62. Violations and penalties.
Any person, partnership or corporation who violates any of the provisions
of this article shall, upon conviction in a summary proceeding, be fined not
less than $500 and, in default of the payment of fines and costs, shall be
committed to the Allegheny County Jail for a period not to exceed 30 days.
Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to preclude the Township to seek
other relief or avail itself of any remedy that may be available at law or in
equity to prevent continuing violations of the terms of this article.
§ 201-63. Filing of copies.
The Township Manager shall file an exact copy of this article with the
Department of Community and Economic Development as well as with the
Chief Clerk of Allegheny County, together with the name, position and
phone number of the municipal officer responsible for compliance with this
article.
§ 201-59 SHALER CODE § 201-63
1:724
ARTICLE IX
Interim Tax Assessment
[Adopted 2-8-2011 by Ord. No. 1892]
§ 201-64. Reassessment of improved property.
Whenever the Township issues an occupancy permit for a building or a
building is otherwise occupied after there is substantial completion of new
construction or other substantial improvement to a building (hereinafter
collectively referred to as an "addition") after the first day of any calendar
year, and the value of the addition is not included in the tax duplicate of
the Township, the Township shall request and direct the Allegheny County
Office of Property Assessments, or similarly charged agency/official of
Allegheny County, to inspect and reassess the real property upon which the
addition has been made, subject to the right of appeal and adjustment as
provided under applicable laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. The
addition shall then be added to the respective tax duplicate, and the real
property shall be taxable for Township purposes at the reassessed valuation
for that proportionate part of the fiscal year of the Township remaining after
the issuance of an occupancy permit or a building is otherwise occupied
after substantial completion of the addition. Any addition for which an
occupancy permit is issued or which is occupied during the month shall be
computed as having been occupied on the first day of the month. A certified
copy of the revisions to the tax duplicate shall be furnished to the Township
Secretary, or her or his designee, and the Township Tax Collector by the
Allegheny County Office of Property Assessments.
§ 201-65. Notice of revision to tax duplicate.
A certified copy of the additions or revisions to the tax duplicate pursuant
to this article shall be furnished by the Township Board of Commissioners,
or its designee, to the Township Tax Collector, together with the Board's
warrant for collection of the same, and within 10 days thereafter the
Township Tax Collector shall notify the owner of the property of the taxes
due the Township.
§ 201-66. Payment of taxes under revised tax duplicate.
The taxes under the revised tax duplicate shall be due and payable at the
then prevailing discount rate for a period of 60 days from the date of billing
and at the face amount within 120 days of the date of billing if not paid
during the discount period.
§ 201-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 201-66
1:725
Chapter 207
TREES AND SHRUBS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass or weeds — See Ch. 87. Property maintenance — See Ch. 172.
§ 201-66 SHALER CODE § 201-66
1:726
ARTICLE I
Dangerous Trees
[Adopted 7-9-2002 by Ord. No. 1797]
§ 207-1. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Shaler Township Dangerous Tree
Ordinance."
§ 207-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to require the removal of dead, dying or
dangerous trees on Township of Shaler (hereinafter "Township") rights-ofway
to protect the public health, safety and welfare and to eliminate a
potential menace to public travel.
§ 207-3. Restrictions on dead, dying and dangerous trees.
From and after the passage and approval of this article, no person, firm or
corporation shall permit any dead, dying or dangerous tree to remain on a
Township right-of-way in any residential area and which is owned, leased or
occupied by said person, firm or corporation.
§ 207-4. Declaration of nuisance.
Dead, dying or dangerous trees on Township rights-of-way are hereby
declared to be a nuisance.
§ 207-5. Notice to remove.
Whenever it shall be reported to the Township Building Inspector that any
owner of any real estate in any recorded plan in the Township of Shaler has
failed or neglected to comply with any of the provisions of this article, the
Building Inspector shall cause a written notice to be served upon the owner,
by personal service or by United States Mail, directing the owner to comply
with all of the provisions of this article within 10 days. If the premises shall
be vacant, service of such notice shall be made by posting a copy thereof in
a conspicuous place on the premises and mailing a copy of such notice by
certified mail to the owner or owners of such premises at the owner's last
known post office address.
§ 207-6. Performance of work by Township; assessment of costs and
charges.
In the event of the failure of the owner or holder of said real estate within
the Township to cut and remove such dead, dying or dangerous tree, or
to have such dead, dying or dangerous tree removed, within 10 days after
being notified to do so, the Township of Shaler shall have the nuisance
removed and bill the owner or holder for the actual cost thereof.
§ 207-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-7
1:727
§ 207-7. Other remedies.
In addition to the other penalties provided by this article, the Township of
Shaler may file an assumpsit action in the courts of Allegheny County or in
an equity action in a court of equity to require the owners of the real estate
in any recorded plan of lots in the Township to comply with the provisions
of this article.
§ 207-8. Costs, attorneys' fees and charges as lien.
The cost of removal, attorneys' fees, and costs of filing a lien hereinabove
mentioned may be entered by the Township as a lien against the property in
accordance with existing provisions of law.
§ 207-9. Violation and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation found in violation of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof before any issuing authority, be subject to a fine of up to
$1,000 and may be sentenced to a period of incarceration not exceeding 90
days in the Allegheny County Jail. Each incident in violation of this article
shall be considered a separate offense and may be punishable as such.
§ 207-10. Authority.
This article is adopted pursuant to the powers and authority of the statutes
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, 36 P.S. § 2664 (relating to removal
of trees menacing travel); the First Class Township Code, 53 P.S. § 56526
(relating to nuisances); as well as 53 P.S. § 7101 (relating to municipal
claims for the removal of nuisances).
§ 207-7 SHALER CODE § 207-10
1:728
Chapter 212
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire lanes — See Ch. 123.
Motorized vehicles — See Ch. 155.
Noise — See Ch. 158.
Seized vehicles — See Ch. 215.
§ 207-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-10
1:729

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 212-1. Definitions and interpretation.
§ 212-2. Manner of adopting permanent traffic and parking
regulations.
All traffic and parking regulations of a permanent nature shall be enacted
as ordinances or as parts of ordinances or as amendments to ordinances of
the Township of Shaler.
§ 212-3. Temporary and emergency regulations.
§ 212-4. Experimental regulations.
A. Words and phrases, when used in this chapter, except for sections or
articles to which different or additional definitions apply, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in the Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et
seq. (the Act of June 17, 1976, P.L. 162, No. 81), as amended, except
that in this chapter the word "street" may be used interchangeably with
the word "highway" and shall have the same meaning as the word
"highway" as defined in the Vehicle Code.
B. The term "legal holidays," as used in this chapter, shall mean and
include New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day,
Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day.
C. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall
include the singular, and the masculine shall include the feminine.
A. The Emergency Management Coordinator shall have the following
powers to regulate traffic and parking temporarily and in time of
emergency:
(1) In the case of fire, flood, storm or other emergency, to establish
temporary traffic and/or parking regulations.
(2) In the case of emergency public works or public events of limited
scope or duration, to restrict or prohibit traffic and/or parking in
limited areas for periods of not more than 72 hours.
B. These temporary and emergency regulations shall be enforced by the
Emergency Management Coordinator and the police in the same
manner as permanent regulations. Any person who drives or parks a
vehicle in violation of any such regulation or who shall move, remove,
destroy, injure or deface any sign or marking erected, posted or made to
give notice of any such regulation shall, upon conviction thereof, be
liable to the penalty set forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter for
a violation of such nature.
§ 212-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-4
1:731
§ 212-5. Streets closed or restricted for construction, maintenance
or special events.
§ 212-6. Authority of police officers.
The police shall have authority to direct traffic on the streets in the
Township, at intersections in public and in other places where the Vehicle
Code or this chapter applies.
A. The Board of Commissioners may, from time to time, designate places
upon and along the streets in the Township where, for a period of not
more than 90 days, specific traffic and/or parking regulations,
prohibitions and restrictions shall be in force and effect and shall
designate those locations by proper signs and markings. Such
regulations, prohibitions and restrictions shall be effective just as if
they had been specified in this chapter. No person shall drive or park a
vehicle in violation of any such regulation, prohibition or restriction,
and no person shall move, remove, destroy or deface any sign or
marking erected, posted or made by authority of this section. Any
person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction,
be liable to the penalty set out in the law or elsewhere in this chapter
for a violation of such nature.
B. The purpose of this section is to allow for test and experimental
determination of the feasibility and desirability of permanent changes
in the ordinances of the Township relative to traffic and parking.
A. The Board of Commissioners shall have authority to close any street or
specific part of a street to vehicular traffic and to place barriers or
station police officers at each end of the closed portion, while
construction or maintenance work is under way or a special event is
being conducted on the closed portion. It shall be unlawful for any
person to drive a vehicle upon any such closed portion.
B. The Board of Commissioners shall have authority to establish a
restricted traffic area upon any street where construction or
maintenance work is under way and to station flagmen at each end of
the restricted portion. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a
vehicle upon any such restricted traffic area at any time when the
flagman is displaying a sign directing that vehicle to stop or is signaling
that vehicle, by a flag or other device, not to proceed.
§ 212-4 SHALER CODE § 212-6
1:732
ARTICLE II
Traffic Regulations
§ 212-7. Speed limits.
The speed limit for both directions of traffic along the streets or parts
thereof described in Schedule I (§ 212-47), attached to and made a part of
this chapter, is hereby established at the rate of speed indicated in said
schedule. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle at a higher
speed than the maximum prescribed for that street or part of a street.
§ 212-8. Traffic control signals.
Traffic control signals shall be installed and operated (or are ratified if
previously installed) at the intersection of those streets described in
Schedule II (§ 212-48), attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 212-9. Prohibited right turns on red signal.
No person shall make a right turn (or a left turn from a one-way street
into another one-way street) when facing a steady red signal at any of the
locations described in Schedule III (§ 212-49), attached to and made a part
of this chapter.
§ 212-10. Prohibited turns at intersections.
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to make a turn of the kind
designated (left, right, all) at any of the intersections described in Schedule
IV (§ 212-50), attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 212-11. U-turns.
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to make a U-turn on any of
the streets or parts of streets described in Schedule V (§ 212-51), attached
to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 212-12. One-way streets.
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule VI (§ 212-52), attached
to and made a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as one-way streets
in the direction indicated, and it shall be unlawful for any person to drive
a vehicle on any one-way street other than in the direction established for
traffic on that street.
§ 212-13. No-passing zones.
No-passing zones are hereby established along those streets or parts of
streets described in Schedule VII (§ 212-53), attached to and made a part of
this chapter, and it shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to overtake
or pass another vehicle or to drive on the left side of the roadway in any nopassing
zone described in said schedule.
§ 212-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-14
1:733
§ 212-14. Through streets.
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule VIII (§ 212-54),
attached to and made a part of this chapter, are hereby established as
through streets; and the driver of any vehicle, upon approaching any such
street at any intersection thereof (except for such intersections where there
are now or shall hereafter be located official traffic signals), shall come to
a full stop or yield the right-of-way, as the case may be, before entering any
such through street.
§ 212-15. Stop intersections.
The intersections described in Schedule IX (§ 212-55), attached to and made
a part of this chapter, (in addition to intersections with the through streets
established by § 212-14) are hereby established as stop intersections, and
official stop signs shall be erected (or are ratified if previously erected) in
such a position upon the first-named street as to face traffic approaching
the second-named street in the direction or directions indicated in said
schedule. Every driver of a vehicle approaching any such intersection upon
the first-named street, in the direction or directions indicated in each case,
shall come to a full stop before entering any such intersection.
§ 212-16. Yield intersections.
The intersections described in Schedule X (§ 212-56), attached to and made
a part of this chapter, (in addition to intersections with the through streets
established by § 212-14) are hereby established as yield intersections, and
official yield signs shall be erected (or are ratified if previously erected) in
such a position upon the first-named street as to face traffic approaching the
second-named street in the direction or directions indicated. Every driver of
a vehicle approaching any such intersection upon the first-named street, in
the direction or directions indicated in each case, shall slow down or stop
the vehicle and then yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the intersection
or approaching on the second-named street so closely as to constitute a
hazard during the time that the driver is moving across or within such
intersection.
§ 212-17. Vehicle weight limits and operations.
A. Definitions. Whenever the following terms are used in this section, they
shall be defined as follows:
GROSS WEIGHT — The combined weight of a vehicle or combination of
vehicles and its load and driver.
HIGHWAY — The entire width between the boundary lines of every
way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of
the public for the purposes of vehicular travel. The term shall include
roadways, trafficways, shot and chipped roads, and laned roadways.
MOTOR VEHICLES — A vehicle of any kind which is self-propelled,
except one which is propelled solely by human power or by electric
§ 212-14 SHALER CODE § 212-17
1:734
power obtained from overhead trolley wires but not operated upon
rails.
OWNER — A person, other than a lienholder, having the property right
in or title to a vehicle. The term includes a person entitled to the use
and possession of a vehicle subject to a security interest in another
person but excludes a lessee under a lease not intended as security.
PERSON — Includes any individual, partnership, association, company,
firm, corporation or any other legal entity.
SEMITRAILER — A trailer so constructed that some part of its weight
rests upon or is carried by the towing vehicle.
SPECIAL HAULING PERMIT — A document executed under the
signature of the Township Engineer or, in his absence, by his designee,
permitting the operation or movement of a motor vehicle upon
Township roads under certain conditions, setting forth the maximum
gross weight permitted with a maximum time period for use of 90 days,
which may be renewed by the Township Engineer for one additional
ninety-day period.
TRAILER — A vehicle designated to be towed by a motor vehicle.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which any person or property
is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices
used exclusively upon rails or tracks. The term does not include a
self-propelled wheelchair or an electrical mobility device operated by
and designed for the exclusive use of a person with a mobility-related
disability.
B. From and after the effective date of this section, it shall be unlawful to
drive, move, operate or be in the actual physical control of a motor
vehicle, semitrailer, trailer or equipment having a gross weight,
including chassis, body, load and driver, in excess of 26,000 pounds over
and upon any highway under the jurisdiction of the Township of Shaler
within the physical boundaries of the Township of Shaler except as
hereinafter set forth.
C. Any person desiring to drive, move, operate or be in the actual physical
control of a motor vehicle, semitrailer, trailer or equipment in excess of
26,000 pounds over and upon any highway under the jurisdiction of and
within the physical boundaries of the Township of Shaler, prior to
driving, moving, operating or being in the actual physical control of any
motor vehicle, semitrailer, trailer or equipment in excess of 26,000
pounds upon any Township highway, shall apply in writing, showing
good cause, to the Township Engineer of Shaler, or his appointee in his
absence, who shall inspect, together with such person, all Township
highways over which travel is desired. Under conditions and
circumstances when, in the opinion of the Township Engineer, any
Township street, road or bridge would not, by reason of deterioration,
rain, snow or other climactic conditions, be seriously damaged or
destroyed, he may issue or may cause to be issued a special hauling
§ 212-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-17
1:735
permit, setting forth the maximum gross weight permitted, upon a form
prepared by the Township.
D. When any person shall apply to the Township Engineer for a special
hauling permit, such person shall post a bond issued by an A-rated
carrier or irrevocable letter of credit, in form and amount as shall be
determined by the Township Engineer, guaranteeing to the Township of
Shaler 100% of the replacement costs of possible damage, as
determined by the Township Engineer; and the person shall and will,
upon notice from the Township, repair or pay for any damage to any
highway, Township property or appurtenance damaged by such person
as a result of the operation of the motor vehicle authorized by the
special hauling permit. All persons shall post and deliver such bond or
irrevocable letter of credit to the Township Engineer or his appointee
prior to driving, moving, operating or being in actual physical control of
such vehicles in excess of 26,000 pounds upon any Township highway.
After such driving, movement or operation has been completed, the
Township Engineer, together with such person, shall again inspect all
traveled Township highways and property for possible damage, and
such bond shall remain in effect for a period of one year after such date
of inspection for possible latent damage.
E. Each application for a special hauling permit shall state the name and
address of the owner of the vehicle as well as the location where
damage claims may be filed by affected property owners, the desired
route and written evidence of county approval when using such
trafficways in the Township. Each application of each vehicle must also
be accompanied by a special hauling permit fee as defined by resolution
of the Board of Commissioners. If the person desires that the special
hauling permit be renewed for an extension of time, which shall not
exceed 90 days, such person shall reapply to the Township Engineer
and shall pay a renewal fee as defined by resolution of the Board of
Commissioners and post the appropriate bond.
F. Every special hauling permit shall be carried in the motor vehicle and
shall be open to inspection by any police officer or authorized agent of
the Township of Shaler or any person having any accident involving
such vehicle.
G. The Township Engineer, or his appointee in his absence, shall specify
when and what movements require special escort services of
department personnel, flagmen and/or directional personnel.
H. The Township Engineer or his appointee, as the case may be, may,
within his sole and absolute discretion, revoke the special hauling
permit at any time for cause. Permits may be conditioned by limiting the
number of trips or by establishing seasonal or other time limitations,
geographical limitations or limitations as to prescribed roads and
streets or by otherwise prescribing conditions of operation under the
permit as the Township Engineer may deem necessary.
§ 212-17 SHALER CODE § 212-17
1:736
I. No person, individual, partnership, association, firm or corporation or
other legal entity shall drive, operate, move or be in actual physical
control of a motor vehicle, semitrailer, trailer or equipment upon the
roadways, streets or trafficways of the Township in such a manner as to
cause damage to the roadway, street or trafficway when the roads are
soft because of weather conditions.
J. No person shall drive, move, operate or be in actual physical control of
any motor vehicle, semitrailer, trailer or equipment within the Township
of Shaler unless such motor vehicle is so constructed and loaded so as
to prevent any load, contents or litter from being blown or deposited
upon any street, roadway or trafficway in the Township.
K. No person shall drive, move or operate any motor vehicle, semitrailer,
trailer or equipment within the Township, the wheels of which carry
onto or deposit on any street, roadway or trafficway in the Township
any mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter or foreign matter of any kind.
L. If in the course of excavation, building, construction or development of
any property any mud or dirt or any other foreign substance is
unavoidably carried or washed onto any street, roadway or trafficway in
the Township, it shall be the duty of the property owner and/or
contractor having supervision over the job to remove the same no later
than 5:00 p.m., prevailing time, of each day so as to make the street,
roadway or trafficway clean and safe for the passage of normal
vehicular traffic.
M. The Township shall erect or cause to be erected and maintained weight
restrictions signs designating the restriction at each end of a bridge or
portion of road or street restricted. In the case of a restriction on a
bridge or a road or street which does not begin or end at an intersection
with an unrestricted highway, the Township shall also place an advance
informational sign at the intersection nearest each end of the restricted
bridge or portion of road or street. No person shall be convicted of
violating Subsection B, C, D, E, F or G of this section unless the
restriction sign designating the restricted bridge, road or street to
traffic moving in the direction the person was driving was posted as
required by this section. However, failure to post the restriction sign
designating the restricted bridge, road or street to traffic moving in the
opposite direction or failure to post any advance informational sign
shall not constitute a defense to a violation of this section.
N. Penalties.
(1) Whoever violates any provisions of Subsection B, C, D, E, F, G or H
is guilty of an offense and shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to
pay a fine of not less than $300 plus costs, and any person
exceeding the maximum allowable gross weight by more than
3,000 pounds shall pay an additional fine of $75 for each 500
pounds or part thereof in excess of 3,000 pounds over the
§ 212-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-17
1:737
maximum allowable gross limit. Each day of operation shall
constitute a separate offense.
(2) Whoever violates Subsection I, J, K or L or whoever drives, moves,
operates or is in the actual physical control of a motor vehicle in
violation of any restriction of the special hauling permit is guilty of
a summary offense and shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay
a fine of not more than $300 plus costs. Each day a violation is
committed or is permitted to continue shall constitute a separate
violation.
(3) Upon imposition of any fine and costs of prosecution imposed, the
driver shall be allowed 48 hours to obtain the funds and pay the
fine and costs of prosecution, during which time the vehicle,
equipment or combination shall be rendered temporarily
inoperative by such police officer as the issuing authority shall
designate. On default of payment within said forty-eight-hour
period, the issuing authority shall impound the vehicle, equipment
or combination and order a police officer to seize it. Upon
impoundment, the issuing authority shall forthwith notify the
appropriate law enforcement officer of the county in which the
violation occurred, who shall store the impounded vehicle,
equipment or combination. The officer shall give immediate notice
by the most expeditious means and by certified mail, return receipt
requested, of the impoundment and location of the vehicle,
equipment or combination to the owner of the vehicle, equipment
or combination and to the owner of the load, if the names and
addresses of the owner are known or can be ascertained. The
police officer's costs, reasonable storage costs and all other
reasonable costs incident to seizure and impounding shall be
recoverable in addition to costs of prosecution.
(4) The title to the load of an impounded vehicle, equipment or
combination remains in the owner, who may repossess the load at
any time upon presentation of proof of ownership to the Sheriff. If
the load spoils during impoundment, the loss shall be on the owner,
subject to any right of recovery of damages that the owner may
have against the owner of the vehicle, equipment or combination or
against any other party, and the costs of disposition of the load shall
be recoverable in addition to the costs of prosecution. In case any
impounded vehicle, equipment or combination is unredeemed or
the load is unclaimed for a period of 60 days after notice of
impoundment is given, it shall be sold at a public sale by the Sheriff
upon order of the issuing authority and after 10 days' notice of sale
to the owners, lienholders or secured parties of the vehicle or load,
except that, if the Sheriff determines it to be necessary to preserve
their value, goods which may spoil may be sold in any commercially
reasonable manner prior to expiration of the sixty-day period and, if
impractical to do so, without giving notice to the owners,
lienholders or secured parties. The proceeds of sale shall first be
§ 212-17 SHALER CODE § 212-17
1:738
§ 212-18. Use of exit and entrance lanes.
§ 212-19. Vehicle repair.
applied to the payment of fine and costs and secondly to the
payment of the encumbrances. The balance shall be remitted to the
owner.
O. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any fire equipment,
school buses, Township road equipment, emergency vehicles, refuse
disposal equipment, snowplows or any other equipment owned,
operated or contracted by or on behalf of the Township of Shaler, the
County of Allegheny or the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
P. It shall be the responsibility of the Shaler Township Building Inspector
to provide a copy of this section to all persons obtaining a building
permit in Shaler Township. Failure to do so by the Building Inspector
shall not constitute a defense to the violation hereof.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
MOTOR VEHICLE — Every vehicle which is self-propelled.
OPERATOR — Every person who is in actual physical control of a motor
vehicle.
PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY — Every road or drive not open to the
use of the general public for purposes of vehicular travel.
PUBLIC HIGHWAY — Every way or place, of whatever nature, open
to the use of the public as a matter of right for purposes of vehicular
travel.
B. From and after the effective date hereof, it shall be unlawful for any
operator of any motor vehicle to leave the public highway and to enter
any private road or driveway where said private road or driveway
indicates by a posted sign or signs that said private road or driveway is
for the purpose of exit only.
C. From and after the effective date hereof, it shall be unlawful for any
operator of any motor vehicle to enter the public highway from any
private road or driveway where said private road or driveway indicates
by a posted sign or signs that said private road or driveway is for the
purpose of entrance only.
A. No person shall repair or cause to be repaired any motor vehicle or
other vehicle or part thereof upon any public road or highway in the
Township of Shaler; provided, however, that a person may make
necessary temporary repairs in an emergency or may take off and
replace a tire which has been blown out, become punctured or has
otherwise failed.
§ 212-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-19
1:739
§ 212-20. Driving or operating on private property prohibited.
From and after the effective date of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for
any person to operate any motorcycle, motor scooter or bicycle with motor
attached on any private property other than the property of the owner of
such vehicle without the written permission of the owner of such property.
B. No person shall repair or cause to be repaired any motor vehicle or
other vehicle or part thereof upon any lot in a residential district where
said vehicle is not owned and registered by the owner of said lot. Any
vehicle repair activity shall be permitted to take place only within the
hours permissible for construction work, contractor work and the like,
as defined in Chapter 158, Noise.
§ 212-19 SHALER CODE § 212-20
1:740
ARTICLE III
Parking Regulations
§ 212-21. Vehicles to be parked within marked spaces.
Wherever a space is marked off on any street for the parking of an individual
vehicle, every vehicle parked there shall be parked wholly within the lines
bounding that space, and it shall be a violation of this article for any person
to park a vehicle or allow it to remain parked otherwise.
§ 212-22. Angle parking.
No person shall park a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts thereof
described in Schedule XI (§ 212-57), attached to and made a part of this
chapter, except at the angle designated and only within the painted stall
lines. On all streets or portions thereof where angle parking is now or shall
hereafter be authorized, all vehicles parked thereon shall be parked with
the front thereof nearest the curb.
§ 212-23. Parking prohibited at all times.
A. No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or
parts thereof described in Schedule XII (§ 212-58), attached to and
made a part of this chapter.
B. No person shall park a commercial vehicle or commercial equipment at
any time upon any Township highway or street except:
(1) While actively engaged in loading or unloading passengers,
merchandise or materials.
(2) If the commercial vehicle or equipment is involuntarily parked
because of mechanical failure or other emergency.
(3) While actively engaged in a construction project.
C. No person shall park a recreational vehicle at any time upon any
Township highway or street except:
(1) If the recreational vehicle is parked on a street or alley immediately
abutting the street lot line of the lot upon which the owner or
operator of the recreational vehicle resides and the parking is
solely for the purpose of a planned trip, outing or vacation,
commencing or ending on the same day of such departure or
return, including any loading or unloading of persons and personal
effects, or for the preparation of the vehicle in regards to such
departure or return; provided, however, that such parking may not
occur on more than two consecutive days or on more than two days
in any seven-day period and shall not be occupied while parked on
the street or highway.
§ 212-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-23
1:741
§ 212-24. Parking prohibited certain hours.
No person shall park a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts of streets
described in Schedule XIII (§ 212-59), attached to and made a part of this
chapter, during the hours specified in said schedule, on any day except
Saturdays, Sundays and holidays.
§ 212-25. Time limit parking.
No person shall park a vehicle or allow the same to remain parked upon
any of the streets or parts of streets described in Schedule XIV (§ 212-60),
attached to and made a part of this chapter, between the hours specified,
for longer than the time indicated in said schedule.
§ 212-26. Special purpose parking zones.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle or to allow the
same to remain parked in any special purpose parking zone established in
Schedule XV (§ 212-61), attached to and made a part of this chapter, except
as specifically provided for such zone.
§ 212-27. Penalties for parking violations.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction,
be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $25 and costs; provided,
however, that it shall be the duty of the police officers and of parking
enforcement personnel of the Township to report to the Chief of Police all
violations of any provision of this article, indicating in each case the section
violated, the license number of the vehicle involved in the violation, the
location where the violation took place and any other facts that might be
necessary in order to secure a clear understanding of the circumstances
attending the violation. The police officer or other person making the report
shall also attach to or place upon every such vehicle a notice stating that
the vehicle was parked in violation of this article. The notice shall contain
instructions to the owner or driver of the vehicle that if he will report to the
office of the Chief of Police and pay the sum of $10 within 48 hours after
the time of the notice, or if he will place the sum of $25, enclosed within the
envelope provided, in the special parking fine box installed at the Municipal
Building prior to 10 days, that act will save the violator from prosecution
and from payment of the fine and costs prescribed in the first sentence of
this section.
(2) No recreational vehicle shall be parked on a street or highway
within 50 feet of any intersection or crosswalk at any time.
§ 212-23 SHALER CODE § 212-27
1:742
ARTICLE IV
Removal and Impounding of Certain Vehicles
§ 212-28. Applicability and scope.
This article is enacted under authority of Section 6109(a)(22) of the Vehicle
Code and gives authority to the Township to remove and impound vehicles
that are parked overtime on any street in the Township in violation of any
provision of Article I, Article II or Article III of this chapter.
§ 212-29. Authority to remove and impound.
The Township shall have authority to remove and impound, or to order
the removal and impounding, of any vehicle parked overtime or otherwise
illegally, provided that the circumstances of its parking were within the
conditions stated in § 212-28 of this article, and provided that no such
vehicle shall be removed or impounded except in strict adherence to the
provisions of this article.
§ 212-30. Designation of approved storage garages; bonding;
storage.
Impounding of vehicles under this article shall be done only by approved
storage garages that shall be designated from time to time by the Board
of Commissioners. Every such garage shall submit evidence to the Board
of Commissioners that it is bonded or has acquired liability insurance in
an amount satisfactory to the Board of Commissioners as sufficient to
indemnify owners of impounded vehicles against loss or damage to those
vehicles while in the custody of the garage keeper for the purpose of
towing or storage. The approved storage garage shall submit to the Board
of Commissioners its schedule of charges under this article, and when the
schedule is approved by the Board of Commissioners, those charges shall
be adhered to by the approved storage garage. No different schedule of
charges shall be adopted without approval of the Board of Commissioners,
and no different charges shall be demanded of or collected from any person
whose vehicle is removed or impounded under this article by any approved
storage garage. The Board of Commissioners shall delete from its list of
approved storage garages any garage that makes any unapproved charge in
connection with any vehicle removed or impounded under this article.
§ 212-31. Notification of removal and impounding.
Within 12 hours from the time of removal of any vehicle under authority
granted by this article, notice of the fact that the vehicle was removed shall
be sent by the Township to the owner of record of the vehicle. The notice
shall designate the place from which the vehicle was removed, the reason
for its removal and impounding, and the garage in which it was impounded.
§ 212-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-32
1:743
§ 212-32. Effect of payment of towing and storage fees.
The payment of any towing and storage charges authorized by this article
shall, unless payment is made under protest, be final and conclusive and
shall constitute a waiver of any right to recover the money so paid. If
payment of any towing or storage charges is made under protest, the
offender shall be entitled to a hearing before a Magisterial District Court.
Payment of towing and storage charges shall not relieve the owner or driver
of any vehicle from liability for any fine or penalty for the violation of the
provision of this chapter for which the vehicle was removed or impounded.
§ 212-33. Records of vehicles removed and impounded.
The Township shall cause a record to be kept of all vehicles impounded
under this article and shall be able at all reasonable times to furnish the
owners or the agents of the owners of those vehicles with information as to
the place of storage of the vehicle.
§ 212-34. Restrictions upon removal of vehicles.
No vehicle shall be removed under the authority of this article if, at the
time of the intended removal, the owner or the person for the time being in
charge of the vehicle is present and expresses a willingness and intention
to remove the vehicle immediately.
§ 212-32 SHALER CODE § 212-34
1:744
ARTICLE V
Dumpsters and Portable Storage Units
§ 212-35. Prohibition.
On and after the effective date of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for
any person or entity to construct or place a dumpster or a PODS® upon
any Township street, avenue, highway, lane, alley or public place in the
Township except as authorized by this chapter and without first having
obtained a permit to do so from the Township. Cleaning dumpsters on a
street or a sidewalk is not permitted.
§ 212-36. Hazardous materials.
The use of dumpsters or portable storage units for the storage of hazardous
materials is prohibited. Upon reasonable suspicion and reasonable notice
to the applicant or resident, the Township Code Enforcement Officer may
inspect a dumpster or a portable storage unit to ensure no such materials
are being stored therein.
§ 212-37. Permit required for streets or other public places.
A permit is required from the Township to construct or place a dumpster or
a PODS® upon any Township street, avenue, highway, lane, alley, a public
sidewalk or other public right-of-way or public place in the Township.
§ 212-38. Requirements for issuance of a permit.
A. The Township Code Enforcement Officer may issue a permit to
construct or place a dumpster or a PODS® on a Township street,
avenue, highway, lane, alley or public place in the Township but only if
the dumpster or portable storage unit will not create a danger to
vehicular and pedestrian traffic or public safety and only if the
applicant establishes a hardship by satisfying one or more of the
following criteria:
(1) There are unique physical circumstances or conditions, including
irregularity, narrowness or shallowness of lot size or shape or
exceptional topographical or other physical conditions peculiar to
the particular property, and that the unnecessary hardship is due to
such conditions and to the circumstances or conditions generally
created by the provisions of this chapter in the neighborhood or
district in which the property is located, making the placement of
the dumpster or portable storage unit elsewhere on said private
property or on a public area difficult, if not impossible.
(2) That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the
applicant.
§ 212-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-38
1:745
(3) That the requested permit, if granted, will not substantially impair
the appropriate use of any other property and will not be
detrimental to the public welfare.
(4) That the permit if issued will be issued only after the Code
Enforcement Officer has inspected the specific requested location
where the dumpster or PODS® is to be constructed or placed.
B. Before placing a dumpster or a portable storage unit on a Township
street, avenue, highway, lane, alley or public place in the Township, the
applicant shall submit an application, together with a permit fee in the
amount of $75 or such other fee as the Board of Commissioners may set
from time to time by resolution, and receive a permit from the
Township. A liability insurance certificate in the amount of $100,000
and naming the Township of Shaler as an additional insured party shall
be provided by the company supplying the dumpster or PODS® and
must accompany the application. However, a liability insurance
certificate is not required to be submitted by the applicant if the
Township already has on file an insurance certificate submitted by the
same company within the past calendar year and the insurance
certificate remains current. At time of application, the applicant shall
also deposit with the Township the sum of $500 guaranteeing that the
applicant shall repair any street or highway damaged by the permitted
dumpster or portable storage unit, which sum shall be returned to the
applicant but only if, in the opinion of the Code Enforcement Officer, no
damage to the street or highway occurs.
C. The Code Enforcement Officer may attach such reasonable safeguards
as deemed necessary so that the dumpster or a PODS® will not create a
danger to vehicular and pedestrian traffic or public safety, including but
not limited to:
(1) Flashers and reflectors on the outside corners facing traffic at all
times. Where traffic may approach from either direction, the
dumpster must have flashers and reflectors on the outside corners
on both sides.
(2) Type I and Type II barricades may be used as an alternative to
flashers and reflectors if authorized by the Code Enforcement
Officer and the Township Police Department.
(3) Dumpsters and portable storage units may not restrict the sight
lines of intersections as determined by the Code Enforcement
Officer.
D. A permit issued under this section by the Code Enforcement Officer to
construct or place a dumpster or a PODS® on a Township street,
avenue, highway, lane, alley or public place in the Township shall be for
a maximum period of 30 days. Permits to construct or place a dumpster
or a PODS® on a Township street, avenue, highway, lane, alley or public
place in the Township for a period in excess of 30 days shall require the
approval of the Township Board of Commissioners.
§ 212-38 SHALER CODE § 212-38
1:746
§ 212-39. Removal.
Any dumpster or PODS® which is not removed at the end of the time
for which it may lawfully remain on any street or other public place or
immediately upon the direction of the Township Code Enforcement Officer
for removal of such dumpster or POD for safety reasons may be removed
by the Township immediately, without notice, and the cost of such removal,
together with the cost of administration of its removal, may be assessed
against the property on which the dumpster or PODS® was located and may
be filed as a lien against such property.
§ 212-40. Violations and penalties.
Any person, persons, firm, partnership or corporation violating any of the
provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof before any
Magisterial District Judge, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more $600 plus
costs of prosecution and may be sentenced to a period of incarceration not
exceeding 90 days, or both. Each and every day that the offense continues
shall be considered as a separate offense and shall be subject to separate
and distinct penalties.
§ 212-41. Additional penalties; abatement.
In addition to the penalties provided in § 212-40 above, the Board of
Commissioners shall have the power, in default of the abatement of the
violation by the person, firm or corporation involved after proper notice,
to cause the necessary work to be done to accomplish said abatement and
collect the cost, together with a penalty of 10% of said cost therefor, from
the person, firm or corporation responsible therefor.
§ 212-42. (Reserved)168
E. Any permit may be revoked by the Code Enforcement Officer if it is
determined that the location of the dumpster or portable storage unit is
affecting traffic flow or public safety.
168. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 225, Zoning, Art. IX, Subarticle D, Dumpsters and PODS®.
§ 212-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-42
1:747

ARTICLE VI
Snow and Ice Emergencies
§ 212-43. Declaration of snow and ice emergency.
In order to facilitate the movement of traffic and to combat the hazards of
snow and ice on the snow emergency routes named pursuant to § 212-45 of
this article, the Emergency Management Coordinator, in his discretion, may
declare a snow and ice emergency (designated in this article as a "snow
emergency"). Information on the existence of a snow emergency may be
given by the Township through radio, newspaper or other available media,
and information on the termination of the emergency may be given by use
of the same media.
§ 212-44. Parking and driving restrictions.
After any snow emergency is declared, it shall be unlawful, at any time
during the continuance of the emergency, for any person:
§ 212-45. Snow emergency routes.
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule XVI (§ 212-62),
attached to and made a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as snow
emergency routes.
§ 212-46. Violations and penalties.
A. To park a motor vehicle or to allow that vehicle to remain parked
anywhere on any snow emergency route designated pursuant to
§ 212-43; or
B. To drive any motor vehicle on any such snow emergency route unless
that vehicle is equipped with approved emergency equipment, snow
tires or chains.
A. If at any time during a period of snow emergency declared under
§ 212-43 of this article a person shall park a motor vehicle or allow a
motor vehicle to remain parked anywhere upon a snow emergency
route, that person shall be guilty of a violation of this article and, upon
conviction, shall be punishable as provided in § 212-27 of this chapter.
B. If at any time during a period of snow emergency declared under
§ 212-43 of this article a person shall drive a motor vehicle upon a snow
emergency route without having that vehicle equipped with snow tires
or chains, that person shall be guilty of a violation of this article and,
upon conviction, unless another penalty is expressly provided by the
Vehicle Code (75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.), or except as herein specified,
every person convicted of a violation of a provision of this chapter, or
any supplement thereto shall be liable to a penalty of $25 and costs of
prosecution.
§ 212-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-46
1:749

ARTICLE VII
Schedules
§ 212-47. Schedule I: Speed Limits.
In accordance with the provisions of § 212-7, the speed limit for both
directions of traffic along the streets or parts thereof described below is
hereby established at the rate of speed indicated:
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Anderson Road 35 Between Wible Run Road and
Vilsack Road
Babcock Boulevard (S.R.
4011)
35 Between Millvale Borough line
and Ross Township line
Burchfield Road (S.R.
1006)
25 Between William Flinn Highway
(S.R. 0008) and Indiana Township
line
Butler Plank Road (S.R.
4060)
30 Between William Flinn Highway
(S.R. 0008) and Kleber Road (S.R.
4060)
Clare Street (S.R. 4018) 25 Between Scott Avenue (S.R.
4018) and West Sutter Road (S.R.
4018)
East Ohio Street (S.R.
0028)
45 Between Ann Street. (S.R. 0028)
and Evergreen Road (S.R. 4009)
Etna Borough line to Millvale
Borough line
Evergreen Road 25 Between Wible Run Road and
Babcock Boulevard (S.R. 4011)
Evergreen Road (S.R.
4009)
25 Between E. Ohio Street (S.R.
0028) and Millvale Borough line
Friday Road 35 Between Millvale Borough line
and Washington Street
Geyer Road (S.R. 4002) 35 Between Babcock Boulevard (S.R.
4011) and Reserve Township line
Glenn Avenue 35 Between Butler Plank Road
(Township portion) to Mount
Royal Boulevard (S.R. 4019)
Glenshaw Avenue (S.R.
4062)
25 Between Mount Royal Boulevard
(S.R. 4019) and Butler Plank
Road (Township portion)
Kittanning Street (S.R.
1003)
35 Between Etna Borough line and
Sharpshill Road (S.R. 1007)
§ 212-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-47
1:751
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Kleber Road (S.R. 4060) 30 Between Butler Plank Road (S.R.
4060) and Mount Royal
Boulevard (S.R. 4019)
Little Pine Creek Road
(S.R. 4017)
35 Between Wetzel Road (S.R. 4006)
and Etna Borough line
Middle Road 35 Between Saxonburg Boulevard
(S.R. 1013) and Indiana Township
line
Mt. Royal Boulevard169 30 Between Etna Borough line and
Hampton Township line
Parker Street (S.R. 4004) 35 Between Etna Borough line and
Seavey Road (S.R. 4004)
Saxonburg Boulevard
(S.R. 1013)
30 Between Butler Street (S.R.
0008) and O'Hara Township line
Scott Avenue (S.R. 4018) 25 Between Mount Royal Boulevard
(S.R. 4019) and Clare Street (S.R.
4018)
Seavey Road (S.R. 4004) 35 Between Parker Street (S.R.
4004) and Millvale Borough line
Sharpshill Road (S.R.
1007)
30 Between Kittanning Street (S.R.
1003) and Ravine Street (S.R.
1007) on O'Hara Township line
Soose Road (S.R. 4013) 35 Between Parker Street (S.R.
4004) and Wible Run Road
Vilsack Road 25 Between Mount Royal Boulevard
(S.R. 4019) and Thompson Run
Road
Washington Street 35 Between Koehler Street and the
Etna Borough line
West Sutter Road (S.R.
4018)
25 Between Clare Street (S.R. 4018)
and Ross Township line
Wetzel Road (S.R. 4006) 25 Between Mount Royal Boulevard
(S.R. 4019) and Wible Run Road
Wible Run Road 35 Between Evergreen Road and
Anderson Road
169. Editor's Note: This entry was originally added to the Vehicles and Traffic chapter
3-11-1997 by Ord. No. 1746. The ordinance also established that any person who violates
any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $35. Any
person exceeding the maximum speed limit by more than five miles shall pay an additional
fine of $2 for each mile in excess of five miles per hour over the maximum speed limit.
§ 212-47 SHALER CODE § 212-47
1:752
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
William Flinn Highway
(S.R. 0008)
40 Between Etna Borough line and
Hampton Township line
§ 212-48. Schedule II: Traffic Control Signals.
In accordance with the provisions of § 212-8, traffic control signals shall
be installed and operated (or are ratified if previously installed) at the
intersections described below:
Intersection
Babcock Boulevard (S.R. 4011) at Evergreen Road
Butler Plank Road (S.R. 4060) at 1671 Butler Plank Road driveway and
1660 Butler Plank Road driveway. (Giant Eagle and Shaler Area School
District Maintenance respectively)
Mt. Royal Boulevard (S.R. 4019) at Kleber Road (S.R. 4060) and Vilsack
Road
Mt. Royal Boulevard (S.R. 4019) at Wetzel Road (S.R. 4006)
William Flinn Highway (S.R. 0008) at Burchfield Road
William Flinn Highway (S.R. 0008) at Butler Plank Road and Get Go
entrance
William Flinn Highway (S.R. 0008) at Duquesne Street
William Flinn Highway (S.R. 0008) at East Pennview Street
William Flinn Highway (S.R. 0008) at Elfinwild Road/Felicity Road/East
Elfinwild Road
William Flinn Highway (S.R. 0008) at Fall Run Road
William Flinn Highway (S.R. 0008) at Glenshaw Crossing and Spencer
Lane
William Flinn Highway (S.R. 0008) at Saxonburg Boulevard (S.R. 1013)
William Flinn Highway (S.R. 0008) at Shop 'N' Save Driveway
William Flinn Highway (S.R. 0008) at Spencer Lane Extension
§ 212-49. Schedule III: Prohibited Right Turns on Red Signal.
In accordance with the provisions of § 212-9, no person shall make a right
turn (or a left turn from a one-way street into another one-way street) when
facing a steady red signal at any of the locations described below:
Onto southbound Mount Royal Boulevard (S.R. 4019) from Vilsack Road
Onto southbound William Flinn Highway (S.R. 0008) from East Pennview
Street
From William Flinn Highway (S.R. 0008) onto East Pennview Street
§ 212-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-49
1:753
Onto William Flinn Highway (S.R. 0008) from Fall Run Road
Onto William Flinn Highway (S.R. 0008) from Glenshaw Crossing or
Spencer Lane or Alley at 1440 William Flinn Highway (S.R. 0008)
From Spencer Lane Extension onto William Flinn Highway (S.R. 0008)
northbound
Onto southbound William Flinn Highway (S.R. 0008) from Butler Plank
Road (S.R. 4060)
From southbound William Flinn Highway (S.R. 0008) onto Butler Plank
Road (S.R. 4060)
From eastbound Duquesne Street onto southbound William Flinn Highway
(S.R. 0008)
From eastbound Elfinwild Road (S.R. 4024) onto southbound William Flinn
Highway (S.R. 0008)
From southbound William Flinn Highway (S.R. 0008) onto West Elfinwild
Road (S.R. 4024)
From driveway of 1660 Butler Plank Road (S.R. 4060) onto northbound
Butler Plank Road (S.R. 4060)
§ 212-50. Schedule IV: Prohibited Turns at Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 212-10, no driver of any vehicle shall
make a turn of the kind designated below at any of the following locations:
From westbound West Elfinwild Road prohibited left turn onto Willett
Road
From the northernmost end of Spencer Lane prohibited left turn to
southbound William Flinn Highway (S.R. 0008)
From southbound William Flinn Highway (S.R. 0008) prohibited left turn
into the driveway at 970 William Flinn Highway
From westbound East Pennview Street prohibited right hand turn onto
northbound Mount Royal Boulevard (S.R. 4019)
From southbound Butler Plank Road (S.R. 4060) prohibited left turn into
the driveway of 1660 Butler Plank Road (S.R. 4060)
From eastbound Vilsack Road prohibited left turn onto Iola Street
§ 212-51. Schedule V: U-Turns.
In accordance with the provisions of § 212-11, no driver of any vehicle shall
make a U-turn on any of the streets or parts of streets described below:
Name of Street Location
William Flinn Highway (S.R. 0008) Northbound at Butler Plank Road (S.R.
4060) (trucks only)
William Flinn Highway (S.R. 0008) Southbound at 1700 William Flinn
Highway (S.R. 0008). (trucks only)
§ 212-49 SHALER CODE § 212-52
1:754
§ 212-52. Schedule VI: One-Way Streets.
In accordance with the provisions of § 212-12, the following described
streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as one-way streets in the
direction indicated:
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Limits
East Sutter Road East Between 201 and 1667 East
Sutter Road
Fall Run Road
[Repealed 9-9-2014
by Ord. No. 1926]
Hill Street South Between Davis Avenue (S.R.
4004) and Parker Street
Lucille Street South Between Vilsack Road and
Morewood Road
§ 212-53. Schedule VII: No-Passing Zones.
In accordance with the provisions of § 212-13, no-passing zones are hereby
established upon the following described streets or parts of streets: A list of
all no-passing zones is maintained by the Township and is available from the
Township Police Department. That list is incorporated herein by reference.
§ 212-54. Schedule VIII: Through Streets.
In accordance with the provisions of § 212-14, the following described
streets or parts of streets are hereby established as through streets: A list of
all through streets is maintained by the Township and is available from the
Township Police Department. That list is incorporated herein by reference.
§ 212-55. Schedule IX: Stop Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 212-15, the following described
intersections are hereby established as stop intersections, and stop signs
shall be erected thereon as indicated in § 212-15. A list of all stop
intersections is maintained by the Township and is available from the
Township Police Department. That list is incorporated herein by reference.
§ 212-56. Schedule X: Yield Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 212-16, the following described
intersections are hereby established as yield intersections, and yield signs
shall be erected thereon as indicated in § 212-16.
§ 212-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-56
1:755
Yield Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Butler Street (S.R.
0008)
Northbound Entering onto northbound
Saxonburg Boulevard (S.R.
1013)
§ 212-57. Schedule XI: Angle Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 212-22, no person shall park a vehicle
upon any of the streets or parts of streets thereof described below except at
the angle designated:
(Reserved)
§ 212-58. Schedule XII: Parking Prohibited at All Times.
In accordance with the provisions of § 212-23, no person shall park a vehicle
at any time upon any of the following described streets or parts of streets:
(Reserved)
§ 212-59. Schedule XIII: Parking Prohibited Certain Hours.
In accordance with the provisions of § 212-24, no person shall park a vehicle
between the hours specified below of any day, except Saturdays, Sundays
and holidays, upon any of the streets or parts of streets described below:
(Reserved)
§ 212-60. Schedule XIV: Time Limit Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 212-25, no person shall park a vehicle
or allow the same to remain parked upon any of the streets or parts of
streets described below, between the hours specified, for longer than the
time indicated below:
(Reserved)
§ 212-61. Schedule XV: Special Purpose Parking Zones.
In accordance with the provisions of § 212-26, the following are hereby
established as special purpose parking zones:
(Reserved)
§ 212-62. Schedule XVI: Snow Emergency Routes.
In accordance with the provisions of § 212-45, the following streets or parts
of streets are hereby designated as snow emergency routes:
(Reserved)
§ 212-56 SHALER CODE § 212-62
1:756
Chapter 215
VEHICLES, SEIZED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 40. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 212.
§ 215-1. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the
meanings given to them in this section unless the context clearly indicates
otherwise:
EVIDENCE — Motor vehicles or parts of motor vehicles or other vehicles
which are contraband, the fruits of a crime, things otherwise criminally
possessed, property which is or has been used as the means of committing
a criminal offense or property which constitutes evidence of the commission
of a criminal offense.
EVIDENCE STORAGE FEE — The daily charge imposed under this chapter
for the storage and protection of a motor vehicle or other vehicles while in
the custody of the Shaler Township Police Department.
LAWFULLY SEIZED — Evidence which is seized upon process issued by any
court having jurisdiction or when there is probable cause to believe that the
property seized constitutes evidence.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle, motorcycle, truck, trailer, camper,
house trailer, mobile home, motor home, motorized pedalcycle, semitrailer
or part thereof, upon or by which any person or property is or may be
transported or drawn upon a highway, which constitutes evidence.
OTHER VEHICLES — All other conveyances, including aircraft, boats or
vessels, which are used or are intended for use to transport or, in any
manner, to facilitate the transportation of persons or property, which
constitutes evidence, except common carriers.
OWNER — A person, including a lienholder, having the property right in or
title to a motor vehicle or other vehicle. The term includes a person entitled
to the use and possession of a motor vehicle or other vehicle subject to a
security interest in another person.
§ 215-2. Daily fee imposed.
After the effective date of this chapter, there is hereby imposed upon the
owner of any lawfully confiscated or seized motor vehicle or other vehicle
an evidence storage fee of $8 per day, for each and every day that the
motor vehicle or other vehicle is stored or remains in the custody of the
Shaler Township Police Department, as calculated in § 215-4 of this chapter.
The Board of Commissioners may, from time to time by resolution, either
increase or decrease said fee.
§ 212-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-3
1:757
§ 215-3. Computation of fee.
The evidence storage fee imposed under the chapter shall be computed as
to exclude the first day of storage and include the last day of such period.
§ 215-4. Municipal lien.
The Township shall have a lien upon all motor vehicles or other vehicles for
storage of said evidence prior to sale or other disposition thereof. The lien
shall attach as of the date the evidence was seized or confiscated.
§ 215-5. Waiver of fee.
The Chief of the Shaler Township Police Department or, in his absence, the
Acting Chief is hereby authorized to waive, in whole or in part, the daily
evidence storage fee required hereunder when forfeiture of the evidence
occurs pursuant to federal or state law.
§ 215-6. Violations and penalties.
It shall be unlawful for any member of the Shaler Township Police
Department to release from the custody of the Shaler Police Department,
except as provided in § 215-5 hereof, any motor vehicle or other vehicle
lawfully confiscated or seized without the payment of the evidence storage
fee mandated by this chapter. For each and every violation of the provisions
of this chapter, any person or persons, firm, partnership or corporation
violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a summary
offense and, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay of fine of not less
than $50 nor more than $300.
Chapter 218
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Grading, excavating and filling — See Ch. 140. Sewers — See Ch. 181.
§ 215-3 SHALER CODE § 215-6
1:758
ARTICLE I
Waterline Extensions
§ 218-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTHORITY — The Hampton-Shaler Water Authority or such other
authority by whom water is supplied to premises in Shaler Township.
COSTS — Includes, but is not limited to, the costs of all materials (pipes,
valves, fittings, fire hydrants, etc.) and the labor of any authority personnel
in connecting a waterline extension to the main authority waterline and in
supervision and inspection, rights-of-way and legal and engineering fees.
CUSTOMER — The owner of the premises to which water is furnished by an
authority or is to be furnished by a waterline extension.
NEGLIGENCE — The failure to exercise the care that a reasonably prudent
person would exercise in like circumstances. For purposes of this section,
negligent conduct shall also include intentional or reckless conduct.
§ 218-2. Rules and regulations of authority.
All waterline extensions shall comply fully with the rules and regulations
of that authority which supplies water to the premises, and it shall be
unlawful for any person to extend any waterline in violation of such rules
and regulations.
§ 218-3. Waterline extensions in streets.
All waterline extensions in Township highways, streets, alleys and/or lanes
shall be graded to the satisfaction of the Township of Shaler.
§ 218-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person, individual, partnership, association or corporation who shall
violate § 218-2 of this article, upon summary conviction before a Magisterial
District Judge, shall be sentenced to pay a fine or penalty of not more than
$600 and may be subject to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90
days for each offense. The continuance of any violation of § 218-2 for each
period of 24 hours after notice of the same by the Township shall be deemed
a separate and distinct offense for each twenty-four-hour period. Nothing
contained herein shall be deemed to preclude the Township of Shaler or
the authority supplying water to such customer to seek other relief or avail
itself of any remedy that may be at law or in equity to prevent continuing
violation of the terms of this chapter or to restrain or abate such violation.
§ 218-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 218-4
1:759

ARTICLE II
Metered Service
§ 218-5. Tampering with waterlines and meters prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, adjust or tamper with any
authority water meter or a waterline under any circumstances, and only
authorized employees of an authority may remove or adjust an authority
water meter or a waterline.
§ 218-6. Knowingly using authority water after shutoff prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for the occupant of any property served by any authority
waterline or any water meter providing metered water service to the
Township of Shaler, or for the owner of such property, to make use of the
water from an authority after water service to the premises has been shut
off by said authority; and no person who knows or has reason to know that
such water service has been shut off to the premises may tamper with the
water system, either done by himself or his agent, or avail himself of the
benefits of the tampering with the water system after the date of service
shutoff.
§ 218-7. Water service and prohibitions.
A. Any authority supplying water service to customers in the Township of
Shaler is authorized to reserve a sufficient supply of water at all times
to provide for fires and other emergencies.
B. Any authority supplying water service to customers in the Township of
Shaler is authorized to shut the water off from the premises of any
person using water who has neglected or refused to make application
for the installation of a meter.
C. It shall be unlawful and no person shall sell water to any person or
furnish it by gift, grant or otherwise to any person or persons owning or
occupying premises not served by the authority or from which the water
at any time has been turned off.
D. Any authority supplying water service to customers in the Township of
Shaler is authorized to discontinue water service at any time on account
of leaks, unpaid bills, furnishing water to other persons or premises or
properties, fraud or abuse, and it shall not be turned on again until all
rules and regulations shall have been complied with and all penalties,
fees and fines shall have been paid.
E. Any authority supplying water service to customers in the Township of
Shaler is authorized to reserve the right to limit, curtail or forbid the
use of water for sprinkling or other purposes when the condition of the
water supply renders it necessary to do so. Notice of such contemplated
action or requirement on the part of the authority shall be given
beforehand by advertisement in a newspaper circulated within the
§ 218-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 218-7
1:761
§ 218-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person, individual, partnership, association or corporation who shall
violate this article, upon summary conviction before a Magisterial District
Judge, shall be sentenced to pay a fine or penalty of not more than $1,000
and may be subject to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days for
each offense. The continuance of any violation of this article for each period
of 24 hours after notice of the same by the Township shall be deemed
a separate and distinct offense for each twenty-four-hour period. Nothing
contained herein shall be deemed to preclude the Township of Shaler or
the authority supplying water to such customer to seek other relief or avail
itself of any remedy that may be at law or in equity to prevent continuing
violation of the terms of this chapter or to restrain or abate such violation.
limits of said authority when time permits and, in the alternative, by
broadcast over a radio and/or television station.
F. It shall be unlawful and no person or persons other than the Fire
Department shall use the water from the hydrants or any fireplug
without permission from the authority.
§ 218-7 SHALER CODE § 218-8
1:762
ARTICLE III
Cross-Connection
§ 218-9. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Cross-Connection Control Ordinance of
the Township of Shaler."
§ 218-10. Purposes.
§ 218-11. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, unless the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
AIR GAP SEPARATION — The unobstructed vertical distance through the
free atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet
supplying potable water to a tank, plumbing fixture or other device and the
flood level rim of the receptacle. The differential distance shall be at least
double the diameter (2 x D) of the supply pipe, measured vertically, above
the top of the rim of the vessel. In no case, shall the air gap be less than one
inch.
APPROVED — That a backflow prevention device or method has been
accepted by the public water supplier as suitable for the proposed use.
ATMOSPHERIC VACUUM BREAKER (also known as the "NON-PRESSURETYPE
VACUUM BREAKER") — A device containing a shutoff valve followed
by a valve body containing a float check, a check seat and an air inlet port.
When the shutoff valve is open, the flow of water causes the float to close
the air inlet port. When the shutoff valve is closed, the float falls and forms a
check valve against backsiphonage and at the same time opens the air inlet
port.
AUXILIARY WATER SYSTEM — Any water source or system on the premises
of or available to the customer, except connections to other approved
community water supply systems.
A. Protect the safe drinking water supply of the Township of Shaler from
the possibility of contamination or pollution by requiring compliance
with state and local plumbing codes, health regulations, OSHA and
other applicable industry standards for water system safety within the
consumer's internal distribution systems or private water system.
B. Promote the reasonable elimination or control of cross-connections in
the plumbing fixtures and industrial piping systems of the consumer, as
required by state and local plumbing codes, health regulations, OSHA
and other applicable industry standards to assure water system safety.
C. Provide for the administration of a continuing program of backflow
prevention which will systematically and effectively prevent the
contamination or pollution of all water systems.
§ 218-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 218-11
1:763
BACKFLOW — A flow condition, induced by a differential in pressure, that
causes the flow of water or mixtures of water and other liquids, gases
or other substances into the distribution pipes of a potable water supply
system from a source other than its intended source.
BACKFLOW PREVENTER — A device or other means which will prevent the
backflow of water or liquids of questionable quality into the public water
supply system.
BACKSIPHONAGE — The backflow of water or mixture of water and other
liquid, gases or other substances from a plumbing fixture or other customer
source into a public water supply system main due to a temporary negative
or subatmospheric pressure within the public water supply system.
CONSUMER — The owner or person in control of any premises supplied by
or in any manner connected to a public water supply system.
CONSUMER'S WATER SYSTEM — Any water system located on the
consumer's premises, supplied by or in any manner connected to a public
water supply system. A household plumbing system is considered to be a
"consumer's water system."
CONTAINMENT — Cross-connection control which isolates the customer's
entire facility from the public water supply system so as to provide the
protection necessary to prevent contamination of the public water supply in
the event of backflow from the customer's facility.
CONTAMINATION — The degradation of the quality of the drinking water to
a quality less than accepted drinking water quality. The degradation would
be to a degree which would create an actual hazard to the public health
through poisoning or through the spread of disease and/or to lessen the
quality of the water in the public water supply system.
CROSS-CONNECTION — An arrangement allowing either a direct or
indirect connection through which backflow, including backsiphonage, can
occur between the drinking water in a public water system and a system
containing a source or potential source of contamination.
DEGREE OF HAZARD — An evaluation of the potential risk to health and
the adverse effect upon the public water supply system.
DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY — An assembly composed of two
single, independently acting, check valves, including tightly closing shutoff
valves, located at each end of the assembly, and suitable connections for
testing the watertightness of each check valve.
HEALTH HAZARD — Any condition, device or practice in a water system or
its operation that creates or may create a danger to the health and wellbeing
of its users. The word "severe" as used to qualify "health hazard"
means a hazard to the health of the user that could reasonably be expected
to result in significant morbidity or death.
INTERCHANGEABLE CONNECTION — An arrangement or device that will
allow alternative, but not simultaneous, use of two sources of water.
§ 218-11 SHALER CODE § 218-11
1:764
NONPOTABLE WATER — Water not safe for drinking, personal or culinary
use.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, association, company, corporation,
municipality, municipal authority, political subdivision or any agency of the
federal or state government.
PLUMBING OFFICIAL — An independent building contractor hired by the
consumer who is a registered plumber and has jurisdiction to perform
plumbing work in the County of Allegheny.
POLLUTION — The presence in water of any foreign substance that tends
to degrade its quality or degrades its quality so as to constitute a hazard
or impair the usefulness or quality of the water to a degree which does not
create an actual hazard to the public health, but which does adversely and
unreasonably affect such waters for domestic use.
POTABLE WATER — Water which is satisfactory for drinking, culinary and
domestic purposes and meets the requirements of the Department of
Environmental Protection.
PROCESS FLUIDS — Any fluid or solution which may be chemically,
biologically or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or
concentration such as would constitute a health, pollutional or system
hazard if introduced into the public or a consumer's water system. This
includes, but is not limited to:
PUBLIC WATER SUPPLIER — A person who owns or operates a public
water system.
PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM — A system which provides water to the
public for human consumption, which has at least 15 service connections
or regularly serves an average of at least 25 individuals daily at least 60
days out of the year. The term is either a community or noncommunity water
system and includes any collection, treatment, storage and distribution
facilities not under such control which are used in connection with the
A. Polluted or contaminated waters.
B. Process waters.
Used waters originating from the public water system which may have
deteriorated in sanitary quality.
C.
D. Cooling waters.
Contaminated natural waters taken from wells, lakes, streams or
irrigation systems.
E.
F. Chemicals in solution or suspension.
Oils, gases, acids, alkalis and other liquid and gaseous fluids used in
industrial or other processes or for firefighting purposes.
G.
H. Heating system waters from boilers or heat pumps.
§ 218-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 218-11
1:765
system. The term also includes a system which provides water for bottling
or bulk hauling for human consumption.
REDUCED PRESSURE ZONE (RPZ) DEVICE — A minimum of two
independently acting check valves, together with an automatically operated
pressure differential relief valve located between the two check valves.
During normal flow and at the cessation of normal flow, the pressure
between the two checks shall be less than the supply pressure. In case of
leakage of either check valve, the differential relief valve, by discharging to
the atmosphere, shall operate to maintain the pressure between the checks
at less than the supply pressure. The unit must include tightly closing
shutoff valves located at each end of the device, and each device shall be
fitted with properly located test cocks.
SERVICE CONNECTION — The terminal end of a service line from the
public water supply system. If a meter is installed, then the "service
connection" means the downstream end of the meter.
SYSTEM HAZARD — A condition posing an actual or potential threat of
damage to the physical properties of the public water system or the
consumer's potable water system.
§ 218-12. Authorizations and responsibilities.
A. Authority.
(1) An authority supplying water service to customers in the Township
is authorized to protect the drinking water distribution system from
foreseeable conditions leading to possible contamination or
pollution of the drinking water system due to the backflow of
contaminants or pollutants into the drinking water supply.
(2) An authority supplying water service to customers in the Township
or its representative is authorized to protect its community water
system and require, at the customer's expense, installation of an
approved backflow prevention device at the water service
connection commensurate with the degree of hazard. The authority
may require annual testing of, as well as proper maintenance,
repair and records for, each backflow prevention device installed
on a public, commercial or industrial water account.
B. Consumer's responsibility.
(1) It shall be the responsibility of the consumer to comply with this
article as a term and condition of supply of water by an authority,
and the consumer's acceptance of service is admittance of his/her
awareness.
(2) It shall be the responsibility of the consumer to purchase, install,
test and maintain any backflow prevention device/assembly
required to comply with this article and with construction
standards developed by the Township, authority and/or any
governmental or independent agency, who or which may have an
§ 218-11 SHALER CODE § 218-12
1:766
§ 218-13. Compliance required.
interest in cross-connection control (i.e., county health agency,
Building Code Inspector, etc.).
C. Plumbing Official's responsibility.
(1) The Plumbing Official's responsibility to enforce the applicable
sections of the Plumbing Code begins at the point of service
(consumer side of curb stop) and continues throughout the
developed length of the consumer's water system.
(2) Water vacating the drinking water supply must do so via an
approved air gap, properly installed, and in accordance with the
local plumbing code.
D. Responsibilities of certified backflow assembly technicians, surveyors
or repair persons. Whether employed by the consumer or the authority
to survey, test, repair or maintain backflow prevention assemblies, the
certified backflow technicians, surveyors or repair persons shall have
the following responsibilities:
(1) Ensuring acceptable testing equipment and procedures are used
for testing, repairing or overhauling backflow prevention
assemblies and complying with all state, Allegheny County Health
Department, Township of Shaler and any other governmental
regulations.
(2) Making reports of such testing and/or repair to the consumer, the
authority and any other agency designated by the authority on
forms approved for such use by the authority and within the time
frames prescribed by the authority. The report shall include the list
of materials or replacement parts used.
(3) The certified technician conducting the test must tag each double
check valve, pressure vacuum breaker, reduced-pressure backflow
assembly and high-hazard air gap, showing the serial number, date
tested and by whom. The technician's license number must also be
on this tag.
A. All water service connections to any authority customer in Shaler
Township shall be installed and maintained in compliance with the rules
and regulations of that authority supplying water to the customer.
B. Installation.
(1) All consumers served by the public water supply system shall
install, within the consumer's water system, an approved backflow
preventer in accordance with the rules and regulations of the
authority and this article, as follows:
(a) All commercial consumers shall install an approved backflow
preventer within 180 days of the article's enactment; and
§ 218-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 218-13
1:767
§ 218-14. Violations and penalties.
Any person, individual, partnership, association or corporation who shall
violate this article, upon summary conviction before a Magisterial District
Judge, shall be sentenced to pay a fine or penalty of not more than $1,000
and may be subject to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days for
each offense. The continuance of any violation of this article for each period
of 24 hours after notice of the same by the Township shall be deemed
a separate and distinct offense for each twenty-four-hour period. Nothing
contained herein shall be deemed to preclude the Township of Shaler or
the authority supplying water to such customer to seek other relief or avail
itself of any remedy that may be at law or in equity to prevent continuing
violation of the terms of this article or to restrain or abate such violation.
(b) All residential consumers shall install an approved backflow
preventer upon the earliest occurrence of:
[1] At the time of new construction of any residential dwelling;
or
[2] If not at time of construction, at the time a water meter is
replaced; or
[3] At the time of sale of an existing residential dwelling.
(2) All installations shall be in accordance with the authority's adopted
standards.
C. An authority is authorized to discontinue the delivery of water
immediately and without notice to the customer if a duly authorized
regulatory agency determines that the authority's water distribution
system is being or is in immediate danger of being contaminated or
polluted.
D. The customer's water system shall be open for inspection at all
reasonable times to authorized representatives of the authority to
determine the adequacy of devices installed and to ensure that these
devices have been installed.
E. An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed at the
expense of the customer on each service connection after the water
meter or immediately inside the building being served, but, in all cases,
before the first branch line leading off the service connection lines.
F. It shall be unlawful and no person or persons shall alter, bypass or
render ineffective or inoperable any backflow prevention device
covered by the rules and regulations of an authority.
§ 218-13 SHALER CODE § 218-14
1:768
Chapter 220
WATERWAYS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 130.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 171.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 190.
Dangerous trees — See Ch. 207, Art. I.
§ 220-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
DANGEROUS OBSTRUCTION — Any tree, structure, trash, debris or other
structure or thing which exists, was placed, dumped or which has fallen or
is likely to fall during a subsequent flood or windstorm at a location within
or along a watercourse, streambed or creek, where said obstruction could
cause interference with or a diversion of the stream flow or creek or could
become waterborne during periods of heavy runoff.
§ 220-2. Duty to remove dangerous obstructions.
From and after the passage and approval of this chapter, all owners and
occupiers of property within the Township through whose property streams,
creeks or watercourses flow are required to remove from the same all
dangerous obstructions, including all trash, debris or other structure or
things which impede the flow of water through the stream, creek or
watercourse.
§ 220-3. Noncompliance.
All dangerous obstructions, trees, structures, trash, debris or other
structure or thing which exists, was placed, dumped or which has fallen or
is likely to fall during a subsequent flood or windstorm at a location within
or along a watercourse, streambed or creek, where said obstruction could
cause interference with or a diversion of the stream flow or creek or could
become waterborne during periods of heavy runoff, within Shaler Township,
are hereby declared to be a nuisance.
§ 220-4. Enforcing authority.
The Township Engineer and the Building Inspector are hereby authorized to
make such inspections and take such action as may be required to enforce
the provisions of this chapter.
§ 220-5. Inspection.
The Township Engineer and the Building Inspector shall inspect all trees,
structures and other things within and adjacent to all streams, creeks,
§ 218-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-5
1:769
channels and watercourses within the Township to determine whether or
not such things constitute a dangerous obstruction, as defined herein.
§ 220-6. Notice to remove.
Whenever it shall be ascertained by the Township Engineer or Building
Inspector that any owner or occupier of any real estate in Shaler Township
has failed or neglected to comply with any of the terms of this chapter,
the Building Inspector shall cause a written notice to be served upon the
owner or occupier, by personal service or by United States Mail, directing
the owner or occupier to comply with all the terms of this chapter within
five days. If the premises are vacant, service of such notice shall be made by
posting a copy thereof in a conspicuous place on the premises and mailing
a copy of such notice by certified mail to the owner's or owners' last known
post office address.
§ 220-7. Failure to comply.
In the event of the failure of the owner or occupier of said real estate within
the Township of Shaler to remove such dangerous obstruction within five
days after being notified to do so, the Township of Shaler shall remove and
abate such dangerous obstruction and bill the owner or occupier for the
actual cost thereof, together with a charge of $10.
§ 220-8. Report of dangerous obstruction.
Before the Township removes any obstructions under the provisions of this
chapter, the Township Engineer or Building Inspector shall prepare and file
with the Township Secretary a report setting forth the reasons for finding
the existence of a dangerous obstruction. Wherever possible, photographs
should also be provided.
§ 220-9. Additional remedies.
In addition to the other penalties provided by this chapter, the Township of
Shaler may institute proceedings in courts of equity to require owners of
real estate in the Township of Shaler to comply with the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 220-10. Lien against property.
The cost of removal, fine and penalties hereinabove mentioned may be
entered by the Township of Shaler as a lien against the property in
accordance with existing provisions of law.
§ 220-11. Prohibited acts.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, deface or mutilate any
notice posted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
§ 220-5 SHALER CODE § 220-11
1:770
§ 220-12. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-15-1988 by Ord.
No. 1631]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any other provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof before any issuing authority, forfeit
and pay a fine of not more than $1,000 for each offense and, in default
of payment, shall be imprisoned for a period not exceeding 90 days in the
county jail. Each and every day upon which any owner or occupier of real
estate in the Township of Shaler permits a violation to exist shall constitute
a separate offense.
Chapter 222
WELLHEAD PROTECTION AREAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 90.
Grading, excavating and filling — See Ch. 140.
Sewers — See Ch. 181.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 190.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 195.
Water — See Ch. 218.
Zoning — See Ch. 225.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct, impede or interfere with
any owner or his agent or with any representative of the Township when
engaged in performing any reasonable act for the execution of any
order of abatement issued pursuant hereto.
§ 220-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-12
1:771

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 222-1. Applicability.
§ 222-2. Compatibility with other requirements.
Approvals issued pursuant to this chapter do not relieve the applicant of
the responsibility to secure the required permits or approvals for activities
regulated by other applicable code, rule or ordinance.
A. This chapter shall apply to those areas of the municipality which are
located within wellhead protection areas surrounding a protected
public water supply well as delineated on an official map available for
inspection at the municipal office. A map of the wellhead protection
areas is included in Appendix A for general reference.170 The chapter
shall not apply to any activities of the Township of Shaler or its agents,
servants or employees in performance of their governmental functions.
B. This chapter regulates the following land uses, physical facilities and
activities which have the potential to deplete or contaminate
groundwater:
(1) Light industry.
(2) Sewage disposal.
(3) Manufacturing.
(4) Injection wells.
(5) Storage tanks, underground and aboveground.
(6) Disposal facilities, solid waste, dump sites.
(7) Subdivisions.
(8) Land developments.
(9) Well drilling.
170. Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the Township offices.
§ 222-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 222-2
1:773

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 222-3. Definitions of terms.
ACHD — The Allegheny County Health Department.
AGRICULTURAL OPERATIONS — Those operations which include tilling,
cultivation and animal husbandry and which qualify as earthmoving
pursuant to Chapter 102 of the DEP Rules and Regulations.
CONE OF DEPRESSION — The area surrounding a pumping well within
which the water table elevation has been lowered due to groundwater
withdrawal.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — The Allegheny County Conservation District.
CONSERVATION PLAN — An erosion and sedimentation control plan
prepared for agricultural properties as required by Chapter 102 of the DEP
Rules and Regulations and as reviewed and approved by the Conservation
District.
DEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
DETENTION POND — A basin designed to retard stormwater runoff by
temporarily storing the runoff and releasing it at a predetermined rate
through a defined outlet structure.
ENVIRONMENTAL HAZARD SURVEY FORM — A document authorized by
the Pennsylvania Worker and Community Right-to-Know Act171 which, if
required by the Department of Labor and Industry for a facility, describes
the hazardous substances emitted, discharged or disposed of from the
workplace.
EPA — The Federal Environmental Protection Agency.
GROUNDWATER SOURCES — See Exhibit 1, Groundwater Sources, on file
at the Hampton Shaler Water Authority.172
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL — A product or waste or combination of
substances that, because of the quantity, concentration, physical, chemical
or infectious characteristics, if not properly treated, stored, transported,
used or disposed of, or otherwise managed, would create a potential threat
to public health through direct or indirect introduction into groundwater
resources and the subsurface environment, which includes the soil and all
subsequent materials located below. Such hazardous materials include, but
are not limited to, materials which may be included on one or more of the
following lists:
Occupational Safety and Health Act, 29 CFR Part 1910, Subpart Z,
Extremely Hazardous Substance List.
A.
171. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 7301 et seq., Act 159 of 1984.
172. Editor's Note: Said Exhibit 1, Groundwater Sources, defines the three-tiered wellhead
protection area as provided in the Pennsylvania State Drinking Water Act Regulations for
groundwater sources serving public water supplies.
§ 222-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 222-3
1:775
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE SURVEY FORM — A document required by the
Pennsylvania Worker and Community Right-to-Know Act which provides a
listing of all hazardous substances found in the workplace.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:
LARGE-VOLUME SUBSURFACE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM — A sewage
disposal facility which is designed to discharge directly to the soil profile,
whether natural or enhanced, and which has a design capacity in excess of
10,000 gallons per day.
LIGHT INDUSTRY — Industrial, commercial, public or retail establishments
which engage in manufacturing, fabrication or service activities and which
appear on the following list:
American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists, Threshold
Limit Values for Chemical Substances and Physical Agents in the Work
Environment (latest edition).
B.
National Toxicology Program, Annual Report on Carcinogens (latest
edition).
C.
International Agency for Research on Cancer Monographs (latest
edition).
D.
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Department of Labor and Industry,
Hazardous Substance List (latest edition).
E.
"Hazardous substances" defined pursuant to Section 311 of the Federal
Clean Water Act.
F.
"Toxic materials" defined pursuant to Chapter 75 of the DEP Rules and
Regulations.
G.
"Hazardous wastes" defined pursuant to Section 101 of the Federal
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act.
H.
The improvement of one lot or two more contiguous lots, tracts or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the number of
occupants or tenure; or
(1)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of, streets,
common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other
features.
(2)
A.
B. A subdivision of land.
Development in accordance with Section 503(1.1) of the Municipalities
Planning Code.
C.
§ 222-3 SHALER CODE § 222-3
1:776
MANUFACTURING — Industrial establishments which produce primary
products from raw materials.
MUNICIPALITY — The Township of Shaler.
NUTRIENT MANAGEMENT PLAN — A document applicable to agricultural
properties which describes the storage, handling and application of
fertilizers, including manure, related to agricultural production.
PERSON — An individual, association, public or private corporation for
profit or not-for-profit, partnership, firm, trust, estate, department, board,
bureau or agency of the commonwealth, political subdivision, municipality,
district, authority or any other legal entity whatsoever which is recognized
by law as the subject of rights and duties.
A. Bulk agricultural products dealers and distributors.
B. Mining and quarrying.
C. Highway deicing material storage.
D. Textile and apparel products.
E. Lumber and wood preserving.
F. Printing and publishing.
G. Chemical products.
H. Leather products.
I. Mineral products: glass and cement.
J. Metal products.
K. Machine shops.
L. Electronics and electronic equipment.
M. Transportation maintenance.
N. Scrap trade and metal container recyclers.
O. Chemical and petroleum storage and sales.
P. Automotive repair, service and related parking.
Q. Personal services; laundry, pest control and photo finishing.
R. Repair service; furniture, welding and septage services.
S. Amusement and recreation.
T. Educational, medical and engineering laboratories.
U. Landscapers.
§ 222-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 222-3
1:777
PESTICIDE MANAGEMENT PLAN — A document applicable to agricultural
properties which describes the storage, handling and application of
products to control pests and undesirable vegetation related to agricultural
production.
POLLUTION INCIDENT PREVENTION (PIP) PLAN — An environmental
emergency response document authorized by Chapter 101 of the DEP Rules
and Regulations which is applicable to facilities which handle materials with
the potential for accidental pollution of the waters of the commonwealth.
Specific requirements for a PIP plan are contained in "Guidelines for the
Development and Implementation of Environmental Emergency Response
Plans," PADEP, September 1990.
PREPAREDNESS, PREVENTION AND CONTINGENCY (PPC) PLAN — An
environmental emergency response document required by the Federal
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act173 of facilities which generate,
store, treat or dispose of hazardous wastes. Hazardous wastes are those
defined within the DEP regulations or other wastes which meet specific
characteristic tests.
PROFESSIONAL — A person who, by education, experience, certification or
licensure, has demonstrated expertise in a particular field.
PROTECTED PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY WELL — Any well used or intended
to be used as a groundwater supply source as part of a public water supply
system for which wellhead protection areas have been established.
RETENTION POND — A basin designed to retard stormwater runoff by
temporarily storing the runoff, which does not have a defined outlet
structure and which empties through a combination of evaporation,
transpiration and infiltration.
SARA TITLE III OFF-SITE PLAN — A document required by the Federal
Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act (SARA) which applies to
employers who have extremely hazardous substances in the workplace.
The document identifies the transportation route of extremely hazardous
substances, a description of the workplace, and a risk analysis of the
operation to the surrounding community.
SARA TITLE III TIER I AND TIER II REPORTS — Documents required
by the Federal Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act (SARA)
which apply to employers who have extremely hazardous substances in the
workplace. The Tier I document lists the amounts and locations within the
workplace of extremely hazardous substances by type of hazard (e.g., fire,
explosion, acute health hazard). The Tier II document provides a listing of
each specific extremely hazardous substance in the workplace and each
specific extremely hazardous substance exceeding 10,000 pounds at any
one time.
SEWAGE — Any substance that contains any of the waste products or
excrement or other discharge from the bodies of human beings or animals
and any noxious or deleterious substances being harmful or inimical to the
173. Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C. §6901 et seq.
§ 222-3 SHALER CODE § 222-3
1:778
public health, or to animal or aquatic life, or to the use of water for domestic
water supply or for recreation, or which constitutes pollution under the Act
of June 22, 1937 (P.L. 1987, No. 394), known as "The Clean Streams Law,"
as amended.
SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM — A combination of piping, tanks or other
facilities for the collection, conveyance, treatment and disposal of sewage.
SEWAGE SLUDGE — The course screenings, grit and dewatered or airdried
products of sewage treatment, septic and holding tank pumping and
any other residues from sewage collection and treatment systems which
require disposal.
SINKHOLE — A closed, generally circular depression in the land surface
of variable depths and width, characterized by a distinct breaking of the
ground surface, and formed by solution of carbonate bedrock and
downward movement of soil into bedrock voids or by collapse of underlying
caves.
SPILL PREVENTION CONTROL AND COUNTERMEASURE (SPCC) PLAN
— An environmental quality emergency response document required by the
Federal Clean Water Act for facilities which handle hazardous substances,
as defined in the Clean Water Act. The plan requirements are virtually the
same as for a PIP plan.
SPILL PREVENTION RESPONSE (SPR) PLAN — An environmental
emergency response document required by the Pennsylvania Storage Tank
and Spill Prevention Act (STSPA)174 for facilities with an aboveground
storage tank exceeding a volume of 21,000 gallons. The plan requirements
are specified in Sections 902 and 903 of the STSPA. A downstream
notification requirement applies to regulated tanks adjacent to surface
waters.
STORAGE OF HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — The containment of hazardous
material on a temporary basis in such a manner as not to constitute disposal
of such waste. It shall be presumed that the containment of hazardous
material in excess of one year constitutes disposal. This presumption can be
overcome by clear and convincing evidence to the contrary.
STORAGE TANK, ABOVEGROUND — A tank which contains substances as
regulated under the Storage Tank and Spill Prevention Act (STSPA)175 which
meets the following criteria: a stationary tank with 250 gallons or more
of capacity with greater than 90% of its capacity aboveground. Specific
exceptions to this definition are included within the STSPA.
STORAGE TANK, UNDERGROUND — A tank which contains substances as
regulated under the Storage Tank and Spill Prevention Act (STSPA) which
meets the following criteria: a tank with 110 gallons or more of capacity
with 10% or greater of its capacity beneath the ground surface. Specific
exceptions to this definition are included within the STSPA.
174. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6021.101 et seq.
175. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6021.101 et seq.
§ 222-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 222-3
1:779
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land by
any means into two or more lots, parcels or other divisions of land, including
changes in the existing lot lines for the purpose, whether immediate or
future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs or devisees,
transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided, however,
that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into parcels
of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of access
or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
UNDERGROUND INJECTION WELL — A bored, driven or dug well for the
emplacement of fluids into the ground (except drilling muds and similar
materials used in well construction).
WASTE — Garbage, refuse and other discarded materials, including, but not
limited to, solid and liquid materials resulting from municipal, industrial,
commercial, institutional, agricultural and residential activities.
WELL — Any excavation that is drilled, cored, bored, washed, driven,
dug, jetted or otherwise constructed, and when the intended use of such
excavation is to conduct groundwater from an aquifer or aquifer system to
the surface by pumping or natural flow, or to monitor the characteristics of
groundwater within an aquifer system.
WELLHEAD PROTECTION AREA — The area of the land surface that is
within the area of protected public water supply wells.
§ 222-3 SHALER CODE § 222-3
1:780
ARTICLE III
Wellhead Protection Requirements
§ 222-4. Conformance required.
No activity specified in Article III, § 222-5, shall occur within the wellhead
protection area except in strict conformance with the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 222-5. Wellhead protection areas.
A. Mapping of wellhead protection areas. To implement the provisions of
this Wellhead Protection Areas Chapter, wellhead protection areas
surrounding protected public water supply wells are hereby
established. The boundaries of wellhead protection areas are shown on
an official map which is available for inspection at the municipal office.
A copy of the official map at a reduced scale is included in Appendix A
for general reference.176 The final boundary was determined by Moody
& Associates and the ACHD in 1995. This map is incorporated by
reference and may be amended by the Shaler Township Board of
Commissioners.
B. Examples of regulated activities include, but are not limited to, the
following:
(1) Facilities which generate, store, treat or dispose of hazardous
material and which are required to maintain a pollution incident
prevention (PIP); spill prevention, control and countermeasure
(SPCC); preparedness, prevention and contingency (PPC); spill
prevention response (SPR); or SARA Title III off-site plan.
(2) Bulk agricultural products dealers and distributors.
(3) Large-volume subsurface sewage disposal systems.
(4) Large-volume spray irrigation sewage disposal systems.
(5) Underground injection wells.
(6) Aboveground storage tanks.
(7) Underground storage tanks.
(8) Waste disposal facilities.
(9) Land application of sewage sludge.
(10) Stormwater retention facilities.
(11) Unlined stormwater detention facilities.
(12)Well drilling.
176. Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the Township offices.
§ 222-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 222-5
1:781
(13) Operations and/or facilities which are involved with the
manufacture, storage or processing of materials and which fall
within the following categories:
(a) Bulk agricultural products dealers and distributors.
(b) Mining, subsurface river activities, and quarrying.
(c) Highway deicing material storage.
(d) Textile and apparel products.
(e) Lumber and wood preserving.
(f) Printing and publishing.
(g) Chemical products.
(h) Leather products.
(i) Mineral products: glass and cement.
(j) Metal products.
(k) Machine shops.
(l) Electronics and electronic equipment.
(m) Transportation maintenance.
(n) Scrap trade and metal container recyclers.
(o) Chemical and petroleum storage and sales.
(p) Automotive repair, services and related parking.
(q) Personal services: laundry, pest control and photographic
finishing.
(r) Repair services: furniture, welding and septage services.
(s) Amusements and recreation.
(t) Educational, medical and engineering laboratories.
(u) Landscapers.
§ 222-5 SHALER CODE § 222-5
1:782
ARTICLE IV
General Regulations
§ 222-6. New or continuation of activities at existing or new
locations.
All activities within the protected wellhead area must meet the listed
requirements in Article VI.
§ 222-7. Public water supply projects.
Notwithstanding the provisions of Article III, public water supply projects
which require the use of chemicals for disinfection or treatment will be
allowed in all wellhead protection areas subject to their approval,
construction and operation in accordance with DEP regulations.
§ 222-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 222-7
1:783

ARTICLE V
Subdivision and Land Development
§ 222-8. Conformance required.
No subdivision or land development shall occur within wellhead protection
areas except in strict conformance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 222-9. Wellhead protection areas mapping.
To implement the provisions of this chapter, wellhead protection areas
surrounding protected public water supply wells are hereby established.
The boundaries of wellhead protection areas are shown on an official map
which is available for inspection at the municipal office. A copy of the official
map at a reduced scale is included in Appendix A for general reference.177
§ 222-10. Wellhead protection area restrictions.
A. Subdivisions and land developments within wellhead protection areas
for which stormwater management controls are required pursuant to
the municipal Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance178 shall be
designed consistent with the following:
(1) Stormwater retention basins shall be prohibited.
(2) Stormwater detention basins shall be designed with an
impermeable liner to prohibit the infiltration of impounded water to
the subsurface.
B. Subdivisions and land developments within wellhead protection areas
as mapped in Appendix A shall have the following requirements in
addition to those requirements of the municipal Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance:
(1) A recognized professional with competence in the field shall review
aerial photographs, soils, geologic and other available related data
as the data relates to the subject property. The professional shall
also conduct a site inspection of the property.
(2) Based on the work required in Article V, § 222-9B(1), the
professional shall prepare a map of the site indicating all geologic
features as they may affect water quality.
(3) Based upon the work performed in Article V, § 222-9B(1) and (2),
the professional shall determine what further testing should be
done by the applicant to ensure compliance with the performance
standards set forth in Article V, § 222-9C. Testing methodology
shall be reasonable under the circumstances, including the scale of
177. Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the Township offices.
178. Editor's Note: See Ch. 195, Subdivision of Land.
§ 222-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 222-10
1:785
the proposed development and the hazards revealed by
examination of available data and site inspection.
(4) The applicant shall cause the additional testing established in
Article V, § 222-9B(3), to be done. A study report shall be submitted
and referred to the Municipal Engineer. This study shall include a
map of the area, all test results, and a recommendation on the
mitigating measures to be taken to meet the standards of Article V,
§ 222-9C.
(5) The Municipal Engineer shall report to the Planning Commission,
with a copy to the landowner, his or her opinion as to the adequacy
of the study and as to the capability of the site to support the
proposed development in a manner in which the risks attendant to
the development are either eliminated or minimized.
Recommendations for site development, including stormwater
management, the layout of utility lines, grading and building
location, may be included. Additional studies or testing as deemed
necessary by the Municipal Engineer in order to produce an
adequate study given the scale of the proposed development and
the hazards revealed may be required of the applicant.
C. Subdivision and land developments within wellhead protection areas as
mapped in Appendix A179 shall have the following design requirements:
(1) All buildings, structures, impervious surfaces and utilities shall be
so situated, designed and constructed as to minimize the risk of
new sinkhole formation and of the accelerated introduction of
contaminants and pollution into the wellhead protection area
through existing or future sinkholes.
(2) Stormwater shall not be directed into a sinkhole.
179. Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the Township offices.
§ 222-10 SHALER CODE § 222-10
1:786
ARTICLE VI
Special Wellhead Protection Provisions
§ 222-11. Conformance required.
No activity specified in Article III, § 222-5, shall occur within wellhead
protection areas except in strict conformance with the requirements of this
article.
§ 222-12. Wellhead protection requirements.
A. The following activities, located within wellhead protection areas,
which are specifically allowed in Article III or Article IV of this chapter,
shall meet the following conditions:
(1) Facilities which generate, store, treat or dispose of hazardous
material which are required to maintain pollution incident
prevention (PIP); spill prevention control and countermeasure
(SPCC); preparedness, prevention and contingency (PPC); spill
prevention response (SPR); or SARA Title III off-site plan:
(a) A current PIP, SPCC, PPC, SPR or SARA Title III off-site plan
must be filed with the municipality.
(b) A current hazardous substance survey form, environmental
hazard survey form and SARA Title III Tier I and Tier II report
must be filed with the municipality.
(2) Bulk agricultural products dealers and distributors:
(a) At a minimum, a current plan meeting the requirements of a
PIP plan must be filed with the municipality.
(b) A current hazardous substance survey form, environmental
hazard survey form and SARA Title III Tier I and Tier II report
must be filed with the municipality.
(3) Large-volume subsurface sewage disposal systems and largevolume
spray irrigation sewage disposal systems:
(a) A current permit from the Department of Environmental
Protection must be filed with the municipality.
(b) DEP required water quality monitoring reports must be filed
with the municipality.
(4) Underground injection wells (Classes I, II, III and V):
(a) A current registration from the Environmental Protection
Agency must be filed with the municipality.
(5) Aboveground storage tanks and underground storage tanks:
§ 222-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 222-12
1:787
(a) A current registration from the Department of Environmental
Protection must be filed with the municipality.
(6) Waste disposal systems:
(a) A current permit from the Department of Environmental
Protection must be filed with the municipality.
(b) A current PPC plan, if required for the facility by DEP
regulations, must be filed with the municipality.
(c) DEP required water quality monitoring reports must be filed
with the municipality.
(d) DEP required water pollution abatement plans must be filed
with the municipality.
(7) Agricultural operations:
(a) The conservation plan prepared according to Chapter 102 of
DEP regulations must include a pesticide management plan
and a nutrient management plan.
(8) Sewage disposal facilities:
(a) Sewage disposal facilities must be operated and maintained to
prevent discharge of untreated or partially treated sewage to
the surface waters or groundwaters.
(9) Well drilling:
(a) An aquifer impact assessment, prepared by a qualified
hydrogeologist at the expense of the party conducting the
activity, must be filed with the municipality. The purpose of the
assessment is to demonstrate that the activity will not result in
substantial interference with the public groundwater supply of
the Township of Shaler. The assessment shall include all
potential impacts resulting from the activity to other users of
the aquifer in terms of levels, quantity of water available and
induced quality changes. Proposed measures to mitigate any
adverse impacts, the system for monitoring water quality and
quantity, and a reporting schedule shall be specified.
(10) Paving or otherwise rendering impervious an area of 3,000 square
feet or more:
(a) An aquifer impact assessment, prepared by a qualified
hydrogeologist at the expense of the party conducting the
activity, must be filed with the municipality. The purpose of the
assessment is to demonstrate that the activity will not result in
substantial interference with the public groundwater supply of
the Township of Shaler. The assessment shall include all
potential impacts resulting from the activity to other users of
§ 222-12 SHALER CODE § 222-12
1:788
the aquifer in terms of levels, quantity of water available and
induced quality changes. Proposed measures to mitigate any
adverse impacts, the system for monitoring water quality and
quantity, and a reporting schedule shall be specified.
(11) Subsurface river activities (i.e., dredging, drilling, boring, or
driving):
(a) Applicants for Department of Army permits with the Army
Corps of Engineers under Section 10 of the Rivers and Harbors
Act of 1899180 must file a copy of the application with the
Township of Shaler within three days of making the application
with the Army Corps of Engineers.
(b) Thirty days' notice must be given prior to the start of any
subsurface river activity including replacement of existing
facilities.
B. All required plans, reports, registrations, permits, assessments and
forms must be filed prior to commencing the activity and must be
renewed annually.
180. Editor's Note: See 33 U.S.C. § 403.
§ 222-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 222-12
1:789

ARTICLE VII
Inspections
§ 222-13. Municipal inspections.
§ 222-14. Inspections by County Conservation District.
The County Conservation District shall be authorized to inspect the
following activities located within wellhead protection areas on an asneeded
basis:
§ 222-15. Right-of-entry.
Upon presentation of the proper credentials, duly authorized
representatives of the municipality may enter at reasonable times upon
any property within a wellhead protection area to investigate or ascertain
whether the requirements of this chapter are being met.
A. The Municipal Engineer or the Township's designate shall be
authorized to inspect the following facilities located within wellhead
protection areas for purposes of determining compliance with this
chapter and any federal or state permit or regulation requirements
upon direction by the governing body:
(1) Facilities with PIP, SPCC, PPC, SPR or SARA Title III off-site plans.
(2) Bulk agricultural products dealers and distributors.
(3) Large-volume subsurface sewage disposal systems.
(4) Large-volume spray irrigation sewage disposal systems.
(5) Underground and aboveground storage tanks.
(6) Underground injection wells.
(7) Waste disposal facilities.
(8) Sewage sludge land application sites.
(9) Other industrial and commercial facilities.
B. This schedule of inspections shall be determined by the municipality for
each type of facility. Inspectors shall be responsible for reporting any
violations to the municipality. The municipality shall inform ACHD, DEP
or EPA, as appropriate, of any violations of their regulations for the
purpose of follow-up actions by those agencies.
A. Earthmoving activities covered by an erosion and sedimentation plan
under Chapter 102 of the DEP regulations.
§ 222-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 222-15
1:791

ARTICLE VIII
Wellhead Protection Area Map
§ 222-16. Inclusion by reference.
The attached map, depicting wellhead protection areas, is declared to be a
part of this chapter as amended, as Appendix A.181
181. Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the Township offices.
§ 222-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 222-16
1:793

ARTICLE IX
Enforcement
[Amended 7-8-2014 by Ord. No. 1925]
§ 222-17. Violations and penalties.
Any person, individual, partnership, association or corporation who shall
violate any provision of this chapter, upon summary conviction before a
Magisterial District Judge, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than
$1,000 and may be sentenced to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90
days for each offense. The continuance of any violation of this chapter for
each period of 24 hours after notice of the same by the Township shall be
deemed a separate and distinct offense for each twenty-four-hour period.
Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to preclude the Township from
seeking such other relief or availing itself of any remedy that may be at law
or in equity to prevent continuing violation of the terms of this chapter or to
restrain or abate such violation.
§ 222-18. Restraint of violations.
If any person or other entity carries on any activity within wellhead
protection areas in violation of the requirements of this chapter or fails to
file any required plan, form, report or registration with the Township of
Shaler, then the Township, in addition to any other remedies, may institute
any legal action to prevent, restrain or abate any act constituting a violation
of this chapter and to require compliance with its provisions.
§ 222-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 222-18
1:795
Chapter 223
WIND ENERGY FACILITIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 195. Zoning — See Ch. 225.
§ 223-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Wind Energy Facility Ordinance for
Shaler Township."
§ 223-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the construction and operation
of wind energy facilities in Shaler Township, subject to reasonable
conditions that will protect the public health, safety and welfare.
§ 223-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPLICANT — The person or entity filing an application under this chapter.
FACILITY OWNER — The entity or entities having an equity interest in the
wind energy facility, including their respective successors and assigns.
HUB HEIGHT — The distance measured from the surface of the tower
foundation to the height of the wind turbine hub, to which the blade is
attached.
OCCUPIED BUILDING — A residence, school, hospital, church, public
library or other building used for public gathering that is occupied or in use
when the permit application is submitted.
OPERATOR — The entity responsible for the day-to-day operation and
maintenance of the wind energy facility.
TURBINE HEIGHT — The distance measured from the surface of the tower
foundation to the highest point of the turbine rotor plane.
WIND ENERGY FACILITY — An electric generating facility, whose main
purpose is to supply electricity, consisting of one or more wind turbines
and other accessory structures and buildings, including substations,
meteorological towers, electrical infrastructure, transmission lines and
other appurtenant structures and facilities.
WIND TURBINE — A wind energy conversion system that converts wind
energy into electricity through the use of a wind turbine generator, and
includes the nacelle, rotor, tower, and pad transformer, if any.
§ 222-18 SHALER CODE § 223-4
1:796
§ 223-4. Applicability.
§ 223-5. Systems permitted; compliance required; installation and
maintenance.
A. This chapter applies to all wind energy facilities proposed to be
constructed after the effective date of this chapter, including small wind
energy systems for the purpose of serving commercial buildings on site
and stand-alone wind turbines constructed primarily for commercial
use.
B. Any physical modification to an existing wind energy facility that
materially alters the size, type and number of wind turbines or other
equipment shall require a permit under this chapter.
A. Small wind energy systems for the purpose of serving commercial
buildings on site shall be permitted as an accessory use in the Route 8
and Route 28 Corridor Overlay Districts subject to the requirements of
this section.
B. Plan. The structure employed shall be subject to plan approval by the
Shaler Township Board of Commissioners. Any modification or
substantial change in size or design of the structure shall require
further plan review and approval. The site plan and any subsequent
modifications shall be drawn to be an appropriate scale and shall
provide construction details and show the location of all existing public
roads, existing structures, utility line and all structures, facilities and
power lines to be constructed on the site, as well as identifying
adjoining property owners, and the location of any structures on
adjoining properties within 100 feet of the common property lines.
C. Compliance with Uniform Construction Code. Permit applications for
wind systems shall be accompanied by standard drawings of the wind
turbine structure, including the tower, base and footings. An
engineering analysis of the tower showing compliance with the Uniform
Construction Code and certified by a licensed professional engineer
shall also be submitted for Township approval.
D. Approved wind turbines. Wind turbines must be approved under an
emerging technology program such as the California Energy
Commission, IEC, or other small wind certification program recognized
by the American Wind Energy Association (AWEA) or the U.S.
Department of Energy.
E. Compliance with FAA regulations. Wind energy systems must comply
with applicable FAA regulations, including any necessary approvals for
installations close to airports.
F. Compliance with National Electric Code. Permit applications for wind
energy systems shall be accompanied by a line drawing of the electrical
components in sufficient detail to allow for a determination that the
§ 223-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-5
1:797
manner of the installation conforms to the National Electrical Code, the
Uniform Construction Code.
G. Utility notification. No wind energy system shall be installed until
evidence has been given that the utility company has been informed of
the customer's intent to install an interconnected customer-owned
generator.
H. Towers. Small wind energy systems shall be roof mounted, cannot be
higher than 45 feet above the ground to the highest point of the rotor or
blade, and must be surrounded by a six-foot fence. The maximum rotor
diameter for a small turbine shall be six feet.
I. Setback. No part of the small wind energy system structure, including
any guide wire anchors, may extend closer than 40 feet to the property
boundaries of the installation site. Small wind energy towers shall be
set back a distance equal to 1 1/2 times the total height of the turbine
from all inhabited off-site structures, overhead utility lines, public
roads, and rights-of-way. Other facilities must follow generally
applicable setbacks within the particular zoning district.
J. No more than one wind turbine shall be located upon a property or
serve a single structure.
K. Clearance of the blade. No portion of the small energy wind system
shall extend within 20 feet of the ground. No blades shall extend over
parking areas, driveways or sidewalks.
L. Automatic overspeed controls. All wind energy conversion systems shall
be equipped with manual (electronic or mechanical) and automatic
overspeed controls to limit the blade rotation speed to within the design
limits of the wind energy system.
M. Sound. Noise from small wind energy systems shall not exceed 50db as
measured at the closest neighboring inhabited dwelling or 10db above
ambient noise in any one hour, whichever is higher. The level, however,
may be exceeded during short-term events such as utility outages and/
or severe wind storms.
N. Lighting. No tower shall be permitted that requires any form of lighting
or illumination under federal, state, or local laws.
O. Wiring. All wiring from the tower to the structure must be installed
underground.
P. Appearance. The small wind energy system shall have a flat finish as
applied by the manufacturer and must be neutral in color, with the
objective being to have it appear as inconspicuous as possible. No
signage or advertising of any kind shall be applied to the tower or any
component of the wind energy system.
Q. Insurance. Prior to the issuance of a permit for the installation of a
small wind energy system, the applicant shall provide evidence of
§ 223-5 SHALER CODE § 223-5
1:798
§ 223-6. Remedies; violations and penalties.
Chapter 225
homeowners' insurance in sufficient amounts, but no less than
$1,000,000, that covers damages to person or property resulting from
the installation and operation of the small wind energy system, which
the applicant agrees to maintain so long as the system remains in
question. In addition, the applicant shall provide the Township with an
agreement acceptable to the Township Solicitor agreeing to release,
hold harmless, and indemnify the Township from all claims, lawsuits,
and liabilities of any kind or type whatsoever arising from the
construction, use, or operation of the wind energy system.
R. Removal. Any time a small wind energy system becomes inoperable and
is not put back into service within six months after receiving written
notification from the Township Code Enforcement Officer, the applicant
must remove the turbine, tower, and all related facilities at the
applicant's sole cost and expense.
S. Miscellaneous. The property owner shall construct and maintain the
small wind energy system, tower, and turbine included in a safe and
neat condition so as not to present a danger or an unsightly appearance
to neighbors. Any property owner receiving site plan approval shall
allow annual inspections by the Township Building Inspector or
Township Engineer of the small wind energy system and will be
required to provide, at the property owner's expense, a verified report
of a qualified engineer as to the structural integrity of the system,
including turbine, tower, and related assembly. Failure to provide an
annual report from a qualified engineer within 60 days of written notice
from the Township shall result in the termination of the authorization to
maintain the small wind energy system and may subject the property
owner to an order for immediate removal of the tower.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to violate or fail
to comply with or take any action which is contrary to the terms of this
chapter, or any permit issued under this chapter, or cause another to
violate or fail to comply, or to take any action which is contrary to the
terms of this chapter or any permit issued under this chapter.
B. If the Township of Shaler determines that a violation of this chapter or
the permit has occurred, the Township shall provide written notice to
any person, firm, or corporation alleged to be in violation of this chapter
or permit.
C. Anyone violating this chapter shall be guilty of a summary offense and,
upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine of not more than $600 for
each violation and the costs of prosecution, and upon default in
payment, may be committed to imprisonment for a period not
exceeding 90 days. Each day a violation continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
§ 223-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-6
1:799
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusements and amusement devices — See
Ch. 78.
Building construction — See Ch. 90.
Open burning — See Ch. 95.
Fences, walls and hedges — See Ch. 118.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 130.
Gasoline stations — See Ch. 137.
Grading, excavating and fill — See Ch. 140.
Logging — See Ch. 151.
Maps — See Ch. 153.
Noise — See Ch. 158.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 171.
Sewers — See Ch. 181.
Signs — See Ch. 183.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 190.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 192.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 195.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 199.
Water — See Ch. 218.
Waterways — See Ch. 220.
Wellhead protection areas — See Ch. 222.
§ 223-6 SHALER CODE § 223-6
1:800
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 225-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Zoning Ordinance of the Township of
Shaler," and the map referred to herein and made an integral part of this
chapter shall be known as the "Zoning Map."182
§ 225-2. Repealer; conflict with other provisions.
Ordinance No. 1650, ordained and enacted into law April 24, 1990, and
all amendments thereto, are hereby repealed. Where a provision of this
chapter is found to be in conflict with a provision in any building code
or in any applicable health regulations or in any other ordinance of the
Township existing on the effective date of this chapter or in any regulations
issued under the authority of such code or ordinance, the provision which
establishes the greater restriction for the protection of the health, safety
and welfare of the residents of the Township of Shaler shall prevail.
§ 225-3. Purpose.
This chapter is adopted for the following purposes:
A. To promote, protect and facilitate any or all of the following: the public
health, safety and morals and the general welfare; coordinated and
practical community development and proper density of population;
emergency management preparedness and operations; airports and
national defense facilities; the provision of adequate light and air;
access to incident solar energy, police protection, vehicle parking and
loading space, transportation, water, sewerage, schools, recreational
facilities, public grounds and other public requirements; the provision
of a safe, reliable and adequate water supply for domestic, commercial,
agricultural or industrial use and other requirements; as well as the
preservation of the natural scenic and historic values in the
environment and preservation of forests, wetlands, aquifers and
floodplains.
B. To prevent one or more of the following: overcrowding of land; blight;
danger and congestion in travel and transportation; and loss of health,
life or property from fire, flood, panic or other dangers.
C. To preserve prime agricultural and farmland, considering topography,
soil type and classification and present use.
D. To encourage and facilitate the orderly growth and development of the
Township.
182. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the Township offices.
§ 225-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-3
1:801
E. To protect and maintain the character, stability and value of developed
residential, commercial and industrial areas within the Township.
F. To provide for the use of land within the municipality for residential
housing of various dwelling types encompassing all basic forms of
housing, including single-family and two-family dwellings and a
reasonable range of multifamily dwellings in various arrangements,
mobile homes and mobile home parks; provided, however, that this
chapter shall not be deemed invalid for the failure to provide for any
other specific dwelling type.
G. To provide protection against fire, explosion, noxious fumes and other
hazards in the interest of the public health, safety and general welfare.
H. To accommodate reasonable overall community growth, including
population and employment growth, and opportunities for development
of a variety of residential dwelling types and nonresidential uses.
I. To encourage the most appropriate use of land and structures by the
Township through the establishment of zoning districts, the regulation
of land and the regulation of the construction and alteration of
buildings and other structures in each district.
J. To achieve the following general purposes and objectives concerning
stormwater and drainage:
(1) To manage stormwater runoff resulting from land alterations and
disturbance activities in accordance with the watershed
stormwater management requirements provided in Chapter 190,
Stormwater Management, consistent with the stormwater
management plans adopted by Allegheny County as required by the
Pennsylvania Stormwater Management Act (Act 167 of 1978, as
amended).183
(2) To utilize and preserve the desirable existing natural drainage
systems and to preserve the flood-carrying capacity of streams and
to maintain and improve the quality of streams.
(3) To encourage natural infiltration of rainfall to preserve
groundwater supplies and stream flows.
(4) To provide for adequate maintenance of all permanent stormwater
management structures in the municipality.
K. To provide protection of natural resources and agricultural land and
activities.
L. To provide for the gradual elimination of nonconforming uses and
structures.
183. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
§ 225-3 SHALER CODE § 225-3
1:802
§ 225-4. Administration.
The administration of this chapter is hereby vested in the following boards
and personnel:
M. To define and limit the powers and duties of the administrative officers
and bodies that are assigned responsibilities under this chapter.
N. To regulate transferable development rights on a voluntary basis.
A. The Zoning Officer.
B. The Zoning Hearing Board.
C. The Board of Commissioners.
D. The Planning Commission.
E. The Building Inspector.
§ 225-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-4
1:803

ARTICLE II
Terminology
§ 225-5. Rules of construction.
In the construction of this chapter, the rules and definitions contained in
this section shall be observed and applied, except when the context clearly
indicates otherwise.
A. Words used in the singular shall include the plural and the plural the
singular.
B. Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense.
C. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary.
D. The word "may" is permissive.
E. The word "lot" shall include the words "piece" and "parcel."
F. In interpreting the language of this chapter to determine the extent of
the restriction on the uses of land, buildings or structures, the language
shall be interpreted, where doubt exists as to the intended meaning of
the language, in favor of the property owner and against any implied
extension of the restriction.
G. The word "person" includes corporations, associations and partnerships
and other similar entities.
H. The provisions of applicable law, including the provisions of the
Municipalities Planning Code,184 including all subsequent amendments,
shall control and take precedence over any conflicting provision of this
chapter. Where any provision of this chapter is modeled after or
consistent with the presently applicable law and such applicable law is
hereafter amended or construed by any appellate court, such law, as so
amended or construed, shall control and take precedence over the
provisions of this chapter.
184. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 225-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-5
1:805

ARTICLE III
District Classifications And Boundaries
§ 225-6. District classification.
To carry out the purpose and provisions of this chapter, the Township
of Shaler is hereby divided into classifications of zoning districts for the
purpose of applying the provisions of this chapter. These zoning districts
are:
R-1 Limited One-Family District
R-2 One-Family District
R-3 Two-Family District
R-4 Multifamily Dwelling District
R-5 Apartment District
PRD Planned Residential Development
C Cemetery District
P Professional District
NS Neighborhood Shopping District
GC General Commercial District
I Industrial District
§ 225-7. Definitions applicable to zoning districts.
§ 225-8. Zoning Map.
The location of the zoning districts enumerated in this article and the
boundaries of such zoning districts are hereby established as shown upon
the Zoning Map.185
§ 225-9. District boundaries.
The boundaries of districts shall be as shown by heavy dashed lines on
the Zoning Map. A district boundary shown within a street or way shall be
construed to be in the center thereof and shall remain a boundary if the
street or way is vacated unless the boundary is changed by an amending
ordinance. Where a district boundary is not within a street or way and its
location is not precisely indicated by dimensioned distances from known
lines and where the designation on the Zoning Map indicates that such
A. The term "residence district," as herein used, shall refer to any one or
all of the first five zoning districts enumerated in this article.
B. The term "commercial district," as herein used, shall refer to the
Neighborhood Shopping District and General Commercial District.
185. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the Township offices.
§ 225-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-9
1:807
distance boundary is upon or approximately upon the boundary line of
a recorded lot or separate parcel of land, the district boundary shall be
construed to be said line or recorded lot or parcel of land. In other cases, its
location shall be determined by the use of the scale of the map.
§ 225-10. Overlay districts.
Shaler Township is hereby divided into a series of overlay districts, which
are listed below and shown on the Zoning District Map.
A. Stormwater management districts.
(1) These following districts are established according to the
boundaries of the watersheds designated by the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Preservation in accordance with the
Pennsylvania Storm Water Management Act (Act 167 of 1978, as
amended)186 and the watershed stormwater management plans
prepared pursuant thereto:
(a) Pine Creek Watershed.
(b) Girty's Run Watershed.
(2) Certain watersheds may be further subdivided into hydrologic
subareas as shown on the watershed subarea map in the watershed
plans and on the Zoning District Map. Copies of these maps are
available in the municipal offices.
B. Floodplain management districts. These districts are established as
those areas subject to the one-hundred-year flood as shown in the
federal flood insurance studies. Copies of the studies and maps are
available in the municipal offices.
C. Riverfront Green Overlay District.
(1) Authorized uses. Riverfront infill developments shall be authorized
by conditional use in the Riverfront Overlay.
(2) Compliance. No riverfront development may be finally approved,
nor any structure built, altered, moved or enlarged in any
riverfront development, unless and until the improvements
required in connection therewith have either been constructed or
their construction guaranteed, as herein provided.
(3) Location of overlay. The Riverfront Overlay is located and bounded
as shown on the Shaler Riverfront Overlay Map on file in the
Township office.
(4) Concept. The Riverfront Overlay shall be deemed to be an overlay
on any existing or future zoning districts enacted to regulate the
use of land in the Township.
186. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
§ 225-9 SHALER CODE § 225-10
1:808
(5) Applicability. Where this article conflicts with Chapter 225, Zoning,
or Chapter 195, Subdivision of Land, this article shall apply. Failure
to comply with the provisions of this article with respect to a
riverfront development shall be deemed a violation of this Zoning
Ordinance.
(6) Riverfront development procedure. Riverfront developments may
be allowed or denied by the Commissioners after recommendation
by the Planning Commission in accordance with this article.
(7) General riverfront development criteria. A riverfront development
plan for a riverfront development shall be approved if, and only if, it
is found to meet the following criteria:
(a) Comprehensive Plan. The proposed riverfront development
preserves the community development objectives of this article
and is consistent with the Township Comprehensive Plan and
"Allegheny Places," the Allegheny County Comprehensive Plan.
(b) Compatibility. The proposed riverfront development physically
integrates with the larger community of which it is a part in the
following ways:
[1] Physical access is provided throughout the development in
order to connect the community with the riverfront.
(c) Riverfront. The proposed riverfront development incorporates
plans and means for improving public access to, use of, and
enjoyment of the scenic and other assets of the Allegheny River
and furthers the goals of the Township relative to the use and
preservation of riverfront property.
(d) Comparable departure. Where the proposed riverfront
development departs from zoning and subdivision and land
development regulations otherwise applicable to the subject
property, such departures must be shown to be in the public
interest and promote the health, safety and general welfare of
the public.
(e) Common open space. The proposals for the maintenance and
conservation of any proposed common open space are reliable,
and the amount and extent of improvements of such common
open space are adequate with respect to the purpose, use and
type of development proposed.
(f) Infrastructure. The physical design of the proposed riverfront
development adequately provides for public services,
pedestrian and vehicle traffic facilities and parking, light, air,
recreation and visual enjoyment.
(g) Safety. No use or design feature in the proposed riverfront
development shall involve any element or cause any condition
§ 225-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-10
1:809
or traffic hazard that may be dangerous, injurious or noxious
to any other property or persons. Consideration of potential
traffic hazards shall include, but not be limited to, the effect of
the riverfront development on traffic congestion on the roads,
streets, and highways affected by the riverfront development.
(h) Timing. In the case of a riverfront development plan which
proposes development over a period of years, the riverfront
development will provide at each stage of development a
proportion of open space, planned facilities and amenities, and
other improvements equal to the stage's proportion of the
entire development. Conditions as required in this article and
as intended to protect the interests of the public and of the
residents of the riverfront development and the integrity of the
riverfront development plan shall also be met.
(8) Riverfront infill development.
(a) Procedure. Riverfront infill developments are authorized in the
Township Riverfront Overlay. All riverfront infill developments
shall follow the procedure for conditional use in this chapter.
(b) Authorized uses. The following uses, and only the following
uses, are authorized in a riverfront infill development, provided
their design, arrangement, landscaping, relationship to
adjacent properties and uses, and construction form a
compatible and harmonious group of uses, afford reasonable
protection to adjacent development, and otherwise meet all
requirements set forth in this article:
[1] Parks, open space, trails and fishing access.
[2] Development associated with the municipal wells and
other public infrastructure.
(c) Required improvements. The following improvements shall be
completed in connection with every riverfront infill
development, and such improvements will be in conformance
with such standards as may be specified and required in
Chapter 195, Subdivision of Land, or other Township, county or
state law.
[1] Off-street parking spaces and off-street loading spaces
shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter. The Commissioners may approve alternate design
standards for off-street parking in response to specific site
conditions, such as attendant parking, indoor parking,
interaction between abutting uses, accessibility to mass
transit, bike and pedestrian systems, river transportation,
or a clearly documented difference between expected
parking load and required parking spaces.
§ 225-10 SHALER CODE § 225-10
1:810
[2] Parking lots having an area of 4,000 square feet or more
shall be landscaped with trees, shrubs and other plantings
appropriate in hardiness to their location, in accordance
with the following:
[a] The lot's perimeter shall be bordered with a
landscaped border not less than five feet in width, and
the lot shall be screened from every adjacent
residential use.
[b] A landscaped island of not less than 100 square feet
shall be installed to separate long rows of parking
stalls into groups of 10 or less stalls. Each island shall
contain at least two three-and-one-half-inch-caliper
trees and shall be planted in grass or other ground
cover.
[c] Parking areas which abut a street, structure or open
space may be required to provide a landscaped
hedgerow, low wall or similar landscaping device to
adequately screen parked cars from view of the street
or adjacent use.
[3] Streetlights shall be provided by the developer throughout
the riverfront infill development. Lighting standards for
pedestrian areas and walkways shall not be higher than 12
feet above ground level; lighting standards for parking
areas and streets shall not be higher than 18 feet above
ground level; all lighting shall conform to § 225-50.
Streetlights shall be located to ensure adequate
illumination in order to protect the safety of the visitors
and residents of the riverfront development.
[4] Streets shall be related to street plans or parts thereof as
have been officially adopted by the Township. Proposed
streets shall conform to the requirements herein as well as
to any other plans, statute, ordinance, law or regulation
applicable thereto. Streets shall be logically related to the
topography in order that usable sites and reasonable
grades shall be produced. Provisions will be required to
accommodate traffic from adjacent areas, but minor
streets should be laid out so as to discourage through
traffic.
[5] Where a riverfront development abuts or contains an
existing or proposed major street, the Commissioners may
require marginal access streets, rear service alleys,
reverse frontage lots or such other treatment as will
provide protection for abutting properties, reduction in
the number of intersections with major streets, and
separation of local and through traffic.
§ 225-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-10
1:811
[6] Drainage structures, culverts, storm sewers, ditches and
related installations shall be provided to ensure adequate
drainage of all points along the streets.
[7] Stormwater management facilities should be installed
according to the Pennsylvania Stormwater Best
Management Practices (BMP) Manual.
[8] Pedestrian walks shall be required to assist circulation or
provide access throughout the development and its open
space, along the riverfront and to community facilities.
Walkways shall either be provided between the river and
any structure located beside the river or in a convenient
and attractive location. Walkways shall have a paved width
of not less than four feet and be so improved as to assure
accessibility to handicapped persons.
[9] A multiuse/purpose trail shall be provided along the
riverfront. This trail shall connect with adjacent trails and
form a continuous trail along the riverfront.
[10] Bikeways, where provided, shall meet the requirements of
the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation's Highway
Design Manual (Publication 13M) Chapter 16.
[11] Erosion and sedimentation control. When topsoil has been
removed from the surface on a slope where erosion may
cause a displacement of loose material, the area shall be
seeded or otherwise treated as soon as possible to prevent
damage to adjacent property or streets.
[12] Utilities located within a riverfront development shall all
be located underground.
D. The provisions for the overlay districts shall supplement the
requirements for the underlying zoning districts contained in this
chapter.
§ 225-10 SHALER CODE § 225-10
1:812
ARTICLE IV
Use Regulations
§ 225-11. General regulations.
The principal, accessory and conditional uses and special exceptions
permitted for each zoning district are shown in the following sections of
this article. Uses given in each category shall be in accordance with the
common meaning of the term or in accordance with definitions as listed
in § 225-217 or in accordance with subsequent sections. Only uses listed
or defined within the categories under this article shall be permitted. All
permitted uses are subject to the restrictions and standards set forth in
other provisions of this chapter. Forestry activities shall be a permitted use
in all zoning districts. See MPC Section 603(f).
§ 225-12. Stormwater management.
A. All uses or lots in all districts shall comply with the requirements and
standards for managing stormwater runoff, if any exist, in the
stormwater management district in which the use or lot is located, as
contained in Chapter 195, Subdivision of Land, and applicable
provisions of the Uniform Construction Code, as amended from time to
time (UCC).187
B. Agricultural activities, logging activities, nurseries and forestry
management operations, where permitted by this chapter, shall be
required to provide for the safe management of stormwater runoff in
accordance with the requirements of the Stormwater Management
Ordinance in Chapter 190, Stormwater Management, as well as all
other applicable ordinances, including but not limited to the UCC, as
adopted and as from time to time amended. However, the submission
and approval of a stormwater management plan, as required by
Chapter 190, Stormwater Management, may be waived by the Board of
Commissioners for such activities which have an erosion and
sedimentation control plan approved by the County Conservation
District.
C. Strip mining, where permitted by this chapter, shall have a plan for
control of erosion and sedimentation and stormwater runoff, which is
approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection,
in accordance with the laws and regulations of the commonwealth. If
the strip-mining operation is located within a watershed or watersheds
for which a stormwater management plan has been approved in
accordance with the requirements of the Pennsylvania Stormwater
Management Act, then the erosion/sedimentation plan and any
permanent stormwater runoff controls must be consistent with the
standards and criteria of the watershed plan. A copy of the state-
187. Editor's Note: See Ch. 90, Building Construction.
§ 225-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-12
1:813
§ 225-13. R-1 Limited One-Family District.
approved erosion/sedimentation plan shall be filed with the
municipality prior to commencing mining operations.
A. The permitted principal use shall be one-family dwellings.
B. Accessory uses shall be as follows:
(1) Cultivation of plants (avocation).
(2) Fence, hedgerow, enclosure wall.
(3) Private garage and parking area.
(4) Private residential swimming pool.
(5) Accessory structures.
(6) Utility building.
(7) No-impact home-based businesses.
C. Conditional uses shall be as follows:
(1) Schools.
(2) Libraries.
(3) Colleges.
(4) Museums.
(5) Community swimming pools.
(6) Public parks.
(7) Churches.
(8) Public utility buildings.
(9) Firehouses.
(10) Municipal buildings.
(11) Funeral homes.
(12) Planned residential developments.
(13) Columbarium.
D. Special exceptions: conversion of one-family to multifamily dwelling.
E. Use restrictions. All use restrictions set forth in Article IX, entitled
"Supplemental Regulations," shall apply in all residential districts in
addition to those set forth below:
§ 225-12 SHALER CODE § 225-13
1:814
§ 225-14. R-2 One-Family District.
(1) No-impact home-based businesses. A no-impact home-based
business shall be permitted as an accessory use in an R-1 Limited
One-Family District, subject to the following requirements:
(a) A no-impact home-based business permit is required for all noimpact
home-based businesses before any portion of any
dwelling unit may be used for such use, and a no-impact homebased
business shall not be commenced until after the noimpact
home-based business permit has been obtained.
(b) All persons having a legal interest in the residential property to
be used for a no-impact home-based business shall execute an
application for a no-impact home-based business.
(c) A no-impact home-based business permit shall be issued only
upon certification by the Code Enforcement Officer that the
business or commercial activity complies with this chapter.
F. Conversion of one-family to multifamily dwelling. The Zoning Hearing
Board may authorize as a special exception the conversion of a dwelling
in a residence district from one-family to two-family to multifamily
occupancy, subject to the following requirements:
(1) The lot area per dwelling unit shall not be reduced below the
required lot area applying to a single-family dwelling in the district.
(2) Each family unit shall have not less than 600 square feet of gross
habitable floor area, not including stairs or corridors.
(3) A separate means of access to each living unit shall be provided
without passing through any other living unit except common
doors, hallways, stairs or corridors.
(4) There shall be no extension or structural alteration of the building
exterior except as may be necessary for reasons of safety or to
comply with building regulations or to make the conversion
feasible.
(5) All applicable requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of
Labor and Industry, of Allegheny County, of the Shaler Township
Building Code and the Fire Prevention Code188 shall be complied
with.
A. The permitted principal use shall be one-family dwellings.
B. Accessory uses shall be as follows:
(1) All accessory uses permitted in R-1.
188. Editor's Note: See Ch. 90, Building Construction, as amended by the UCC; and Ch. 125,
Fire Prevention, respectively.
§ 225-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-14
1:815
§ 225-15. R-3 Two-Family District.
§ 225-16. R-4 Multifamily Dwelling District.
C. Conditional uses shall be as follows:
(1) All conditional uses permitted in R-1.
(2) Recreational or community centers.
(3) Grounds for games.
(4) Day nurseries.
(5) Kindergartens.
(6) Municipal and community swimming pools.
(7) Churches and columbaria inside churches if proof of perpetual care
is provided to the Township.
D. Special exceptions: none.
E. Use restrictions shall be the same as those for District R-1.
F. Conversion of one-family to multifamily dwelling. The requirements for
conversion of a one-family to a multifamily dwelling shall be the same as
those for District R-1.
A. Permitted principal uses shall be as follows:
(1) One-family dwelling.
(2) Two-family dwelling.
(3) Apartment building with no more than two dwelling units.
B. Accessory uses shall be as follows:
(1) All accessory uses permitted in R-2.
C. Conditional uses shall be as follows:
(1) All conditional uses permitted in R-2.
D. Special exceptions: none.
E. Use restrictions shall be the same as those provided in § 225-13E.
F. The requirements for conversion of a one-family to multifamily dwelling
shall be the same as those provided in § 225-13F.
A. Permitted principal uses shall be as follows:
(1) One-family dwelling.
(2) Two-family dwelling.
§ 225-14 SHALER CODE § 225-16
1:816
§ 225-17. R-5 Apartment District.
(3) Multifamily dwelling.
B. Accessory uses shall be as follows:
(1) All accessory uses permitted in R-3.
C. Conditional uses shall be as follows:
(1) All conditional uses permitted in R-3.
(2) Nursing homes.
(3) Convalescent homes.
(4) Group-care facility.
D. Special exceptions: none.
E. Use restrictions shall be the same as those provided in § 225-13E.
A. Permitted principal uses shall be as follows:
(1) One-family dwelling.
(2) Two-family dwelling.
(3) Multifamily dwelling.
(4) Apartment building.
(5) Condominium.
(6) Townhouse.
B. Accessory uses shall be as follows:
(1) All accessory uses permitted in District R-1.
C. Conditional uses shall be as follows:
(1) All conditional uses permitted in District R-4.
(2) Professional office and business service office where professional
or business service office occupies ground level or below ground
level space in an apartment building, provided that adequate
parking is available.
(3) Fraternal lodges.
(4) Apartment houses more than three stories or 40 feet in height but
in no case to exceed nine stories or 70 feet.
D. Special exceptions: none.
E. Use restrictions shall be the same as those provided in § 225-13E.
§ 225-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-18
1:817
§ 225-18. C Cemetery District.
§ 225-19. P Professional District.
§ 225-20. NS Neighborhood Shopping District.
A. The permitted principal use shall be the underground burial of human
dead.
B. No accessory uses shall be permitted.
C. Conditional uses shall be as follows:
(1) Columbariums, crematories, mausoleums and mortuaries when
operated in conjunction with and within the boundary of a
cemetery.
(2) communications towers and facilities.
D. No special exceptions shall be permitted.
A. Permitted principal uses shall be as follows:
(1) All uses permitted in abutting least-restricted residential district.
(2) Office relating to professional services.
(3) Office relating to business services.
B. Accessory uses shall be those accessory uses customarily incidental to
permitted principal uses.
C. No conditional uses shall be permitted.
D. No special exceptions shall be permitted.
A. Permitted principal uses shall be retail businesses for local or
neighborhood needs, to the following limited extent:
(1) Sale and manufacture of baked goods.
(2) Sale of confectionery products, dairy products, delicatessen items,
fruits, vegetables, groceries, meats, dry goods and variety
merchandise, clothing, china, floor covering, hardware, household
appliances, radios, paint, wallpaper, books, magazines, sporting
goods and photographic equipment.
(3) Restaurants and other eating places, excluding places providing
dancing, entertainment or alcoholic beverages.
(4) Service establishments, such as banks, savings and loan
associations, barber- or beauty shops, custom tailors, laundry
agencies, self-service laundries, hand laundries, shoe repair and ice
stations.
§ 225-18 SHALER CODE § 225-20
1:818
§ 225-21. GC General Commercial District.
(5) Dry-cleaning, pressing and tailoring shops in which only
nonexplosive and nonflammable solvents are used and no work is
done on the premises for retail outlets elsewhere.
(6) Funeral home or mortuary.
(7) Any other neighborhood store similar to the uses listed in this
section in types of goods or services sold, in business hours, in the
number of persons or cars which can reasonably be expected to be
attracted to the premises and in effect in the adjoining residence
districts.
(8) Professional offices. Offices relating to business services.
B. Accessory uses shall be those accessory uses customarily incidental to
permitted principal uses.
C. Conditional uses shall be as follows:
(1) All residential uses.
(2) Amusement arcades, on the following conditions:
(a) The applicant will comply with the provisions of Chapter 78,
Amusements and Amusement Devices, as now in effect or
hereafter amended or supplemented (which chapter is not
limited hereby).
(b) Not more than five devices or machines will be allowed at any
one location.
(c) The general conditions applicable to conditional uses under
this chapter will be complied with.
D. No special exceptions shall be permitted.
E. Use restrictions. The following use restrictions shall be applicable in all
NS Neighborhood Shopping Districts:
(1) Each permitted use must be conducted wholly within an enclosed
building or enclosed yard.
(2) There shall be no manufacturing or processing except that which is
incidental to a store in which all merchandise is sold at retail on the
premises.
(3) No front yard or sidewalk shall be used for display, sale or storage
of merchandise or for the storage of vehicles, equipment,
containers or waste material.
A. Permitted principal uses shall be as follows:
(1) All uses permitted in NS Neighborhood Shopping District.
§ 225-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-21
1:819
(2) Sale of food and beverage of all kinds.
(3) Sale at retail of general merchandise and apparel of all kinds,
including sales by large department stores.
(4) Sale of furniture and household goods, including furniture storage.
(5) Eating places of all types, including places providing dancing,
entertainment and alcoholic beverages.
(6) Automobile, truck and boat and trailer sales, repair and supply
businesses.
(7) Auditorium.
(8) Medical or dental clinic or laboratory but not methadone treatment
facilities.
(9) Bicycle and motorcycle sale, rental and repair.
(10) Blueprinting, photostating and copying services.
(11) Boardinghouse or rooming house.
(12) Catering services.
(13) Private club or fraternal lodge.
(14) Day nursery.
(15) Drive-in business, other than drive-in theaters.
(16) Feed stores.
(17) Frozen food storage.
(18) Hotels.
(19) Motels.
(20) Music conservatory or studio or dance studio.
(21) Nursery, flower or plant sales, provided that all incidental
equipment and supplies are kept within a building.
(22) Sale of pets.
(23) Photographer's studio.
(24) Printing, minor or job.
(25) Public recreation area.
(26) Repairs of electrical and household appliances.
(27) Theater or movie, except drive-in movies.
§ 225-21 SHALER CODE § 225-21
1:820
§ 225-22. I Industrial District.
(28) Tire sale or repair business.
(29) Pool and billiard halls.
(30) Bowling alleys.
(31) Car wash.
(32) Commercial sale of firearms and guns.
B. Accessory uses shall be those accessory uses customarily incidental to
permitted principal uses.
C. Conditional uses shall be as follows:
(1) All conditional uses permitted in NS Neighborhood Shopping
District.
(2) Communications towers and facilities.
D. No special exceptions shall be permitted.
E. Use restrictions. The following use restrictions shall be applicable in all
GC General Commercial Districts:
(1) There shall be no manufacturing or processing, except that which
is incidental to a store in which all merchandise is sold at retail on
the premises.
A. Permitted principal uses shall be as follows:
(1) Activities of an industrial nature.
(2) All activities permitted in Commercial District.
(3) Wholesale business.
(4) Storage buildings, self-storage, warehouses and yards.
(5) Public garages.
(6) Gasoline service stations.
(7) Mobile home parks.
(8) Drive-in movies.
B. Accessory uses shall be those accessory uses customarily incidental to
permitted principal uses.
C. Conditional uses shall be as follows:
(1) Flea markets.
(2) Amusement arcades, on the following conditions:
§ 225-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-22
1:821
(a) The applicant will comply with the provisions of Chapter 78,
Amusements and Amusement Devices, as now in effect or
hereafter amended or supplemented (which chapter is not
limited hereby).
(b) The general conditions applicable to conditional uses under
this chapter will be complied with.
(3) Communications towers and facilities.
(4) Oil and gas drilling, exploration and operations.
D. Special exceptions shall be as follows:
(1) Methadone treatment facilities.
(a) Establishment and operation.
[1] Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary
and except as provided in Subsection D(1)(b), a methadone
treatment facility shall not be established or operated
within 500 feet of an existing school, public playground,
public park, residential housing area, child-care facility,
church, meetinghouse or other actual place of regularly
stated religious worship established prior to the proposed
methadone treatment facility.
[2] The provisions of this subsection shall apply whether or
not an occupancy permit or certificate of use has been
issued to the owner or operator of a methadone treatment
facility for a location that is within 500 feet of an existing
school, public playground, public park, residential housing
area, child-care facility, church, meetinghouse or other
actual place of regularly stated religious worship
established prior to the proposed methadone treatment
facility.
(b) Notwithstanding Subsection D(1)(a), a methadone treatment
facility may be established and operated closer than 500 feet to
an existing school, public playground, public park, residential
housing area, child-care facility, church, meetinghouse or other
actual place of regularly stated religious worship established
prior to the proposed methadone treatment facility, if, by
majority vote, the governing body for the municipality in which
the proposed methadone treatment facility is to be located
votes in favor of the issuance of an occupancy permit or
certificate of use for said facility at such a location. At least 14
days prior to the governing body of a municipality voting on
whether to approve the issuance of an occupancy permit or
certificate of use for a methadone treatment facility at a
location that is closer than 500 feet to a school, public
playground, public park, residential housing area, child-care
§ 225-22 SHALER CODE § 225-22
1:822
facility, church, meetinghouse or other actual place of
regularly stated religious worship established prior to the
proposed methadone treatment facility, one or more public
hearings regarding the proposed methadone treatment facility
location shall be held within the municipality following public
notice. All owners of real property located within 500 feet of
the proposed location shall be provided written notice of said
public hearings at least 30 days prior to said public hearings
occurring.
(c) This section shall not apply to a methadone treatment facility
that is licensed by the Department of Health prior to May 15,
1999.
(d) As used in this section, the term "methadone treatment
facility" shall mean "a facility licensed by the Department of
Health to use the drug methadone in the treatment,
maintenance or detoxification of persons."
(e) As used in this section, measurement shall be made in a
straight line, without regard to intervening structures or
objects, from the nearest property line of the premises where
the proposed methadone treatment facility is to be conducted
to the nearest property line of an existing school, public
playground, public park, residential housing area, child-care
facility, church, meetinghouse or other actual place of
regularly stated religious worship established prior to the
proposed methadone treatment facility.
E. Use restrictions. The following use restrictions shall be applicable in all
I Industrial Districts:
(1) All uses or processes are forbidden that may be noxious or injurious
by reason of the production or emission of dust, smoke, refuse,
noise, vibration or similar conditions. All uses, processes and
activities shall be subject to the provisions of Article VII,
Performance Standards.
§ 225-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-22
1:823

ARTICLE V
Height, Area And Yard Requirements
§ 225-23. Requirements for all districts.
All requirements contained in this article are minimums except as otherwise
noted. For a graphic statement of requirements, see Exhibits A through F-3,
inclusive.189
§ 225-24. R-1 Limited One-Family District.
Requirements for this district shall be as follows:
A. Lot area: 9,000 square feet.
B. Lot width at building line: 70 feet. For exceptions as to a lot on a cul-desac
or curved street, see Exhibits C and D.190
C. Front yard depth: 25 feet. For exceptions as to a lot on a cul-de-sac or
curved street, see Exhibits C and D.191
D. Rear yard depth.
(1) One-family dwelling:
(a) Not a through lot (see Exhibit B192): 10 feet.
(b) Through lot (see Exhibit B-1193): 25 feet.
(2) Accessory structure: 10 feet.
(3) Utility building: three feet.
E. Side yard width, each side, not abutting street:
(1) One-family dwelling: 10 feet.
(2) Accessory structure: 10 feet.
(3) Utility building: three feet. For exceptions as to a lot on a cul-de-sac
or curved street, see Exhibits C and D.194
F. Side yard width, abutting street:
189. Editor's Note: Exhibits A through F-3 are located in "Street and Building Details" attached
to this chapter.
190. Editor's Note: Exhibits C and D are located in "Street and Building Details" attached to
this chapter.
191. Editor's Note: Exhibits C and D are located in "Street and Building Details" attached to
this chapter.
192. Editor's Note: Exhibit B is located in "Street and Building Details" attached to this
chapter.
193. Editor's Note: Exhibit B-1 is located in "Street and Building Details" attached to this
chapter.
194. Editor's Note: Exhibits C and D are located in "Street and Building Details" attached to
this chapter.
§ 225-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-24
1:825
§ 225-25. R-2 One-Family District.
Requirements for this district shall be as follows:
(1) One-family dwelling: 25 feet.
(2) Accessory structure: 25 feet.
(3) Utility building: 50 feet.
G. Maximum height:
(1) One-family dwelling: 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet.
(2) Accessory structure: 15 feet.
(3) Utility building: 10 feet.
H. First floor area per dwelling unit for one-family dwellings:
(1) One story: 900 square feet.
(2) One and one-half stories: 875 square feet.
(3) Two or two and one-half stories: 645 square feet.
A. Lot area: 5,000 square feet.
B. Lot width at building line: 50 feet. For exceptions as to a lot on a cul-desac
or curved street, see Exhibits C and D.195
C. Front yard depth: 20 feet. For exceptions as to a lot on a cul-de-sac or
curved street, see Exhibits C and D.196
D. Rear yard depth:
(1) One-family dwelling: 10 feet.
(2) Accessory structure: five feet.
(3) Utility building: three feet.
E. Side yard width, each side, not abutting street:
(1) One-family dwelling: five feet.
(2) Accessory structure: five feet.
(3) Utility building: three feet. For exceptions as to a lot on a cul-de-sac
or curved street, see Exhibits C and D.197
195. Editor's Note: Exhibits C and D are located in "Street and Building Details" attached to
this chapter.
196. Editor's Note: Exhibits C and D are located in "Street and Building Details" attached to
this chapter.
197. Editor's Note: Exhibits C and D are located in "Street and Building Details" attached to
this chapter.
§ 225-24 SHALER CODE § 225-25
1:826
§ 225-26. R-3 Two-Family District.
Requirements for this district shall be as follows.
F. Side yard width, abutting street:
(1) One-family dwelling: 20 feet.
(2) Accessory structure: 20 feet.
(3) Utility building: 50 feet.
G. Maximum height:
(1) One-family dwelling: 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet.
(2) Accessory structure: 15 feet.
(3) Utility building: 10 feet.
H. First floor area per dwelling unit for a one-family dwelling:
(1) One story: 900 square feet.
(2) One and one-half stories: 875 square feet.
(3) Two or two and one-half stories: 645 square feet.
A. Lot area:
(1) One-family dwelling: 5,000 square feet.
(2) Two-family dwelling: 7,500 square feet.
B. Lot width at building line:
(1) One-family dwelling: 50 feet.
(2) Two-family dwelling: 70 feet. For exceptions as to a lot on a cul-desac
or curved street, see Exhibits C and D.198
C. Front yard depth:
(1) One-family dwelling: 20 feet.
(2) Two-family dwelling: 20 feet. For exceptions as to a lot on a cul-desac
or curved street, see Exhibits C and D.199
D. Rear yard depth:
(1) One-family dwelling: 10 feet.
198. Editor's Note: Exhibits C and D are located in "Street and Building Details" attached to
this chapter.
199. Editor's Note: Exhibits C and D are located in "Street and Building Details" attached to
this chapter.
§ 225-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-26
1:827
(2) Two-family dwelling: 20 feet.
(3) Accessory structure: five feet.
(4) Utility building: three feet.
E. Side yard width, each side, not abutting street:
(1) One-family dwelling: five feet.
(2) Two-family dwelling: 10 feet.
(3) Accessory structure: five feet.
(4) Utility building: three feet. For exceptions as to a lot on a cul-de-sac
or curved street, see Exhibits C and D.200
F. Side yard width, abutting street:
(1) One-family dwelling: 20 feet.
(2) Two-family dwelling: 20 feet.
(3) Accessory structure: 25 feet.
(4) Utility building: 50 feet.
G. Maximum height:
(1) One-family dwelling: 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet.
(2) Two-family dwelling: 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet.
(3) Accessory structure: 15 feet.
(4) Utility building: 10 feet.
H. First floor area per dwelling unit.
(1) One-family dwelling first floor area:
(a) One story: 900 square feet.
(b) One and one-half stories: 875 square feet.
(c) Two stories: 645 square feet.
(2) Two-family dwelling first floor area:
(a) One story: 1,350 square feet.
(b) One and one-half stories: 1,300 square feet.
(c) Two or two and one-half stories: 645 square feet.
200. Editor's Note: Exhibits C and D are located in "Street and Building Details" attached to
this chapter.
§ 225-26 SHALER CODE § 225-27
1:828
§ 225-27. R-4 Multifamily Dwelling District.
Requirements for this district shall be as follows.
A. Lot area:
(1) One-family dwelling: 5,000 square feet.
(2) Two-family dwelling: 7,500 square feet.
(3) Each dwelling unit in multifamily dwelling: 1,200 square feet per
unit with minimum of 12,000 square feet for dwellings containing
10 units or less.
B. Lot width at building line:
(1) One-family dwelling: 50 feet.
(2) Two-family dwelling: 60 feet.
(3) For each dwelling unit in multifamily dwelling: 20 feet. For
exceptions as to a lot on a cul-de-sac or curved street, see Exhibits
C and D.201
C. Front yard depth:
(1) One-family dwelling: 20 feet.
(2) Two-family dwelling: 20 feet.
(3) Multifamily dwelling: 20 feet. For exceptions as to a lot on a cul-desac
or curved street, see Exhibits C and D.202
D. Rear yard depth:
(1) One-family dwelling: 10 feet.
(2) Two-family dwelling: 20 feet.
(3) Multifamily dwelling: 30 feet.
(4) Accessory structure: 10 feet.
(5) Utility building: three feet.
E. Side yard width, each side, not abutting street:
(1) One-family dwelling: five feet.
(2) Two-family dwelling: 10 feet.
(3) Multifamily dwelling: 10 feet.
201. Editor's Note: Exhibits C and D are located in "Street and Building Details" attached to
this chapter.
202. Editor's Note: Exhibits C and D are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 225-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-27
1:829
§ 225-28. R-5 Apartment District.
Requirements for this district shall be as follows.
(4) Accessory structure: 10 feet.
(5) Utility building: three feet. For exceptions as to a lot on a cul-de-sac
or curved street, see Exhibits C and D.203
F. Side yard width, abutting street:
(1) One-family dwelling: 20 feet.
(2) Two-family dwelling: 20 feet.
(3) Multifamily dwelling: 20 feet.
(4) Accessory structure: 15 feet.
(5) Utility building: 50 feet.
G. Maximum height:
(1) One-family dwelling: 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet.
(2) Two-family dwelling: 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet.
(3) Multifamily dwelling: 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet.
(4) Accessory structure: 15 feet.
(5) Utility building: 10 feet.
H. First floor area per dwelling unit.
(1) One-family dwelling first floor area:
(a) One story: 900 square feet.
(b) One and one-half stories: 875 square feet.
(c) Two stories: 645 square feet.
(2) Two-family dwelling first floor area:
(a) One story: 1,350 square feet.
(b) One and one-half stories: 1,300 square feet.
(c) Two or two and one-half stories: 645 square feet.
A. Lot area:
(1) One-family dwelling: 5,000 square feet.
203. Editor's Note: Exhibits C and D are located in "Street and Building Details" attached to
this chapter.
§ 225-27 SHALER CODE § 225-28
1:830
(2) Two-family dwelling: 7,500 square feet.
(3) Each dwelling unit in multifamily dwelling: 1,200 square feet.
(4) Each dwelling unit in apartment: 600 square feet per unit with
minimum of 12,000 square feet for each apartment house.
B. Lot width at building line:
(1) One-family dwelling: 50 feet.
(2) Two-family dwelling: 50 feet.
(3) Each dwelling unit in multifamily dwelling: 20 feet.
(4) Apartment house: 100 feet plus 30 feet for each story over three.
For exceptions as to a lot on a cul-de-sac or curved street, see
Exhibits C and D.204
C. Front yard depth:
(1) One-family dwelling: 20 feet.
(2) Two-family dwelling: 20 feet.
(3) Multifamily dwelling: 20 feet.
(4) Apartment house: 20 feet plus seven feet for each story over three.
For exceptions as to a lot on a cul-de-sac or curved street, see
Exhibits C and D.205
D. Rear yard depth:
(1) One-family dwelling: 10 feet.
(2) Two-family dwelling: 20 feet.
(3) Multifamily dwelling: 30 feet.
(4) Apartment house: 30 feet plus 10 feet for each story over three.
(5) Accessory structure: same as main building.
(6) Utility building: three feet.
E. Side yard width, each side, not abutting street:
(1) One-family dwelling: 10 feet.
(2) Two-family dwelling: 10 feet.
(3) Multifamily dwelling: 15 feet.
204. Editor's Note: Exhibits C and D are located in "Street and Building Details" attached to
this chapter.
205. Editor's Note: Exhibits C and D are located in "Street and Building Details" attached to
this chapter.
§ 225-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-28
1:831
(4) Apartment house: 15 feet plus five feet for each story over three.
(5) Accessory structure: same as main building.
(6) Utility building: three feet. For exceptions as to a lot on a cul-de-sac
or curved street, see Exhibits C and D.206
F. Side yard width, abutting street:
(1) One-family dwelling: 20 feet.
(2) Two-family dwelling: 20 feet.
(3) Multifamily dwelling: 20 feet.
(4) Apartment house: 20 feet plus seven feet for each story over three.
(5) Accessory structure: 20 feet.
(6) Utility building: 50 feet.
G. Maximum height:
(1) One-family dwelling: 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet.
(2) Two-family dwelling: 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet.
(3) Multifamily dwelling: 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet.
(4) Apartment house: three stories or 40 feet. The Board of
Commissioners may allow as a conditional use applications to erect
or enlarge apartments houses proposed to be more than three
stories or 40 feet in height. In any case, the maximum allowable
height shall be nine stories or 70 feet.
(5) Accessory structure: 35 feet.
H. First floor area per dwelling unit.
(1) One-family dwelling:
(a) One story: 900 square feet.
(b) One and one-half stories: 875 square feet.
(c) Two or two and one-half stories: 645 square feet.
(2) Two-family dwelling:
(a) One story: 1,350 square feet.
(b) One and one-half stories: 1,300 square feet.
(c) Two or two and one-half stories: 645 square feet.
206. Editor's Note: Exhibits C and D are located in "Street and Building Details" attached to
this chapter.
§ 225-28 SHALER CODE § 225-29
1:832
§ 225-29. C Cemetery District.
Requirements for this district shall be as follows.
§ 225-30. NS Neighborhood Shopping District.
Requirements for this district shall be as follows.
§ 225-31. GC General Commercial District.
Requirements for this district shall be as follows.
A. Lot area: 20 acres.
B. Lot width at building line requirement: not applicable.
C. Front yard depth: 25 feet.
D. Rear yard depth: 30 feet.
E. Side yard width, each side, not abutting street: 10 feet.
F. Side yard width, abutting street: 25 feet.
G. Maximum height of structures: 35 feet.
A. Lot area: 10,000 square feet.
B. Lot width at building line: 75 feet.
C. Front yard depth: 25 feet.
D. Rear yard depth: 40 feet.
E. Side yard width, each side, not abutting street: 15 feet.
F. Side yard width, abutting street: 25 feet.
G. Maximum height of structures: 2 1/2 stories or 40 feet.
A. Lot area: 21,000 square feet.
B. Lot width at building line: 100 feet.
C. Front yard depth: 25 feet plus seven feet for each story over three.
D. Rear yard depth: 40 feet plus 13 feet for each story over three.
E. Side yard width, each side, not abutting street: 15 feet plus five feet for
each story over three.
F. Side yard width, abutting street: 25 feet plus seven feet for each story
over three.
G. Maximum height of structures: five stories or 70 feet.
§ 225-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-32
1:833
§ 225-32. I Industrial District.
Requirements for this district shall be as follows.
§ 225-33. P Professional District.
The height, area and yard requirements for a Professional District shall be
the same as those applicable to the most restrictive zoning district abutting
the Professional District.
§ 225-34. All other uses not authorized in any zoning district.
All other uses not authorized in any zoning district as a permitted use,
a conditional use, or a use by special exception shall be permitted as
a conditional use in the I Industrial District, subject to the remaining
provisions of this chapter, and provided the proposed use meets all lot,
building and structure requirements of the I Industrial District and the use
is in compliance with all applicable Township ordinances and any other
applicable laws, rules or regulations.
A. Lot area: 22,000 square feet.
B. Lot width at building line: 100 feet.
C. Front yard depth: 30 feet.
D. Rear yard depth: 40 feet.
E. Side yard width, each side, not abutting street: 15 feet.
F. Side yard width, abutting street: 30 feet.
G. Maximum height of structures: 70 feet.
§ 225-32 SHALER CODE § 225-34
1:834
ARTICLE VI
Off-Street Parking, Loading And Unloading Requirements
§ 225-35. Required space.
To encourage vehicular circulation and avoid congestion on public streets,
there shall be provided, at the time of the erection or increase by units or
dimensions of any building or structure or at the time of creation or change
of any use not involving a building or structure, minimum off-street motor
vehicle parking spaces, plus adequate space for ingress, egress and general
vehicular circulation. Minimum off-street spaces and other such provisions
shall be provided in all districts for the following listed uses:
A. For one- and two-family dwellings, two parking spaces for each family
dwelling unit. As to one- and two-family dwellings, no vehicle parking
shall be allowed in front yard areas or side yard areas except in an
improved driveway.
B. For multifamily dwellings and apartments, one parking space for each
family dwelling unit, plus one additional parking space for every two
dwelling units.
C. For bowling alleys, recreation centers, swimming pools, skating rinks,
outdoor commercial recreation enterprise and other recreation and
amusement facilities, one parking space for every four customers,
computed on a basis of maximum servicing capacity at any one time,
plus one additional space for every two persons regularly employed
during the peak shift on the premises.
D. For clubhouses and meeting places of veterans, business, civic,
fraternal, labor and similar organizations, one parking space for every
50 square feet of aggregate floor area in the auditorium, assembly hall
and dining room of such building, plus one additional space for every
two persons regularly employed during the peak shift on the premises.
E. For drive-in facilities, five parking spaces per 100 square feet of floor
space.
F. For funeral homes and undertaking establishments, parking or storage
space for all vehicles used directly in the conduct of the business, plus
one parking space for every two persons regularly employed on the
premises during peak shift and one space for every 100 square feet of
floor area used in the conduct of the business.
G. For hospitals, one parking space for each four beds intended for
patients, excluding bassinets, plus one per doctor, plus one per two
employees on the peak shift, plus one per hospital vehicle.
H. For indoor rental businesses, parking or storage space for all vehicles
used directly in the conduct of such business, plus one parking space
for each 250 square feet of total building area.
§ 225-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-35
1:835
I. For industrial plants and facilities, parking or storage space for all
vehicles used directly in the conduct of such industrial use, plus one
parking space for every three employees on the premises at maximum
employment on the peak shift.
J. For junior and senior high schools, one parking space for every six seats
available at maximum capacity in the assembly hall, auditorium,
stadium or gymnasium of greatest capacity on the school grounds or
campus. If the school has no assembly hall, auditorium, stadium or
gymnasium, one parking space shall be provided for each person
regularly employed at such school, plus two additional spaces for each
classroom.
K. For libraries, museums and post offices, parking or storage space for all
vehicles used directly in the operation of such establishment, plus one
parking space for each 250 square feet of total floor area.
L. For medical and dental clinics or offices, one parking space for each
doctor, plus one additional parking space for every two chairs in the
waiting room, plus one space for each examining room, plus one
additional space for every staff member.
M. For nursing homes, one parking space for every 500 square feet of floor
area, plus one parking space for every two employees on the peak shift.
N. For offices, professional or public buildings, one parking space for
every 200 square feet of office space.
O. For public, private or parochial elementary schools, one parking space
for each person regularly employed at such school, plus one additional
space for each classroom.
P. For public garages, indoor or outdoor parking or storage space for all
vehicles used directly in the conduct of such business, plus three
parking spaces for each person regularly employed on the premises.
Q. For repair shops, plumbing shops, electrical shops, roofing shops and
other service establishments, parking or storage space for all parking
vehicles used directly in the conduct of the business, plus two parking
spaces for each person regularly employed on the premises at
maximum employment on a single shift.
R. For restaurants, nightclubs and other eating and/or drinking
establishments, one parking space for every two seats at the bar or
counter, plus one parking space for every two employees on the peak
shift.
S. For service stations, parking or storage space for all vehicles used
directly in the conduct of the business, plus one parking space for each
gas pump, three spaces for each grease rack or similar facility and one
space for every two employees on the peak shift.
§ 225-35 SHALER CODE § 225-35
1:836
§ 225-36. Parking for multiple uses.
In cases involving more than one of the foregoing enumerated items, the
off-street parking facilities for individual uses shall be computed separately
in accordance with this article.
§ 225-37. Location of facilities.
Off-street parking facilities required in this article may be provided either
on the same lot or premises with the parking generator or on premises
abutting said parking generator, provided that the abutting lot or premises
is in an equally or less restricted zoning designation.
§ 225-38. Adequacy of facilities.
Every building or structure used for apartment houses, business, trade or
industry shall provide space for loading and unloading of vehicles sufficient
to avoid the use of any street or public alley for loading or unloading of
vehicles. Such space shall have access to a public alley or, if there is no
alley, to a street. Off-street loading and unloading space shall include space
for the vehicle to be loaded or unloaded and shall be in addition to and
not considered as meeting part of the requirements for off-street parking
space. Off-street loading and unloading space shall not be used or designed,
intended or constructed to be used in a manner to obstruct or interfere
with the free use of any street, alley or adjoining property. For the following
T. For theaters, auditoriums, churches, stadiums and other places of
public assembly, one parking space for every four seats available at
maximum capacity.
U. For motels, hotels, boardinghouses, rooming houses and group car
facilities, one parking space for each sleeping room offered for
occupancy, plus two spaces for each dwelling unit on the premises, plus
one additional space for every two persons regularly employed on the
premises during the peak shift.
V. For universities, colleges, academies and similar institutions of higher
learning, one parking space for every six seats occupied at maximum
capacity in the assembly hall, auditorium, stadium or gymnasium of
greatest capacity on the campus. If the institution has no assembly hall,
auditorium, stadium or gymnasium, one parking space shall be
provided for each person regularly employed at such institution, plus
five additional spaces for each classroom.
W. For warehouses, freight terminals and trucking terminals, parking or
storage space for all vehicles used directly in the conduct of the
business, plus one parking space for each two employees.
X. For any and all uses, buildings or structures not specifically provided
for in the foregoing enumeration, one parking space for every 200
square feet of floor area.
§ 225-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-38
1:837
specific uses, a minimum one off-street loading and unloading space of at
least 12 feet by 50 feet shall be provided for the square footage of total floor
area, as follows:
§ 225-39. Changes in requirements.
When an existing building, structure or use undergoes any change in
number of dwelling units, gross floor area, seating capacity or other unit
of measure specified hereinbefore for required off-street parking or loading
facilities and, further, when said change would result in a requirement for
different total off-street parking or loading spaces through application of the
provisions of this chapter, parking and loading facilities shall be increased
or may be decreased so that the facilities will at least equal or exceed
the off-street parking or loading requirements resulting from application
of the provisions of this chapter to the entire building, structure or use as
modified.
§ 225-40. Design standards.
A. For apartment houses containing five or more dwelling units, one space
for every 25,000 square feet of total floor area.
B. For retail businesses, retail or wholesale food markets, supply houses,
hospitals, laundries and dry-cleaning establishments, one space for
every 200 square feet of total floor area.
C. For industrial plants when parking bays directly abut a public street,
one space for every 10,000 square feet of total area.
D. For warehouses and wholesale storage facilities when parking bays
directly abut a public street, one space for every 7,500 square feet of
total area.
E. For freight terminals and trucking terminals when parking bays directly
abut a public street, one space for every 5,000 square feet of total area.
A. All off-street parking facilities shall be designed with appropriate
means for vehicular access to a street or alley in such manner as will
least interfere with the movement of traffic. No driveway or curb cut in
any district shall exceed 25 feet in width for one-way movement or 35
feet in width for two-way movement.
B. A required off-street space shall be an area of not less than 180 square
feet, not less than nine feet wide by 20 feet long measured
perpendicularly to the sides of the parking space. Aisles between
vehicular parking spaces shall be not less than 13 feet in width when
serving automobiles parking at a forty-five-degree angle in one
direction, not less than 25 feet in width when serving automobiles
parked perpendicularly for two-way aisle movement, and not less than
25 feet in width when serving automobiles parked perpendicularly for
one-way aisle movement. See Exhibit E, Parking Area Design
Standards, attached hereto.207
§ 225-38 SHALER CODE § 225-40
1:838
§ 225-41. Parking for physically handicapped persons.
C. A required off-street loading and unloading space shall be a hardsurfaced
area, open or enclosed, other than a street or public way, used
principally for the standing, loading or unloading of motor trucks,
tractors and trailers so as to avoid undue interference with the public
use of streets and alleys. A required loading space shall be not less than
12 feet in width, 14 feet in height and 50 feet in length.
D. No parking space or portion thereof shall be located within a street
right-of-way.
E. All open off-street parking areas and loading and unloading spaces,
except those accessory to single-family dwellings, shall be improved
with a compacted base and surfaced with all-weather dustless material
of adequate thickness to support the weight of full-loaded vehicles
anticipated for the proposed use.
F. Adequate storm sewers and drainage facilities shall be installed as
required by the stormwater management provisions of Chapter 190,
Stormwater Management, and related county and state requirements.
All off-street parking facilities shall be designed to provide drainage for
parking areas in accordance with the applicable stormwater
performance standards and approved stormwater management plan for
the development site.
G. Any lighting used to illuminate an off-street parking area shall be so
arranged as to direct the light away from all adjoining properties.
H. Wherever an off-street parking area abuts a public street, sidewalk or
alley, a structurally sound barrier, wall or planting strip, sufficient to
prevent entrance or exit except at designated places of entrance or exit,
shall be installed. Adequate retaining walls and other walls along
abutting property to provide proper retention and screening to abutting
properties shall also be constructed.
A. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, every parking lot
servicing each entrance described in Zoning Districts R-4, R-5, PRD, C,
P, NS, GC and I, including conditional uses in Zoning Districts R-1, R-2
and R-3, shall have the number of level parking spaces set forth in the
below table identified by an above-grade sign as reserved for physically
handicapped persons as required by and in accordance with Act 45 of
2012, the Uniform Construction Code (UCC), as currently adopted and
as from time to time amended. Each reserved parking space shall be not
less than 12 feet (3,658 millimeters) wide.
B. Accessible parking spaces. Accessible parking spaces shall be provided
as follows:
207. Editor's Note: Exhibit E is located in "Street and Building Details" attached to this
chapter.
§ 225-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-41
1:839
Total Parking in Lot
Required Minimum
Number of Accessible
Spaces
1 to 25 1
26 to 50 2
51 to 75 3
76 to 100 4
101 to 150 5
151 to 200 6
201 to 300 7
301 to 400 8
401 to 500 9
501 to 1,000 2% of total
1,001 and over 20, plus 1 for each 100 over
1,000
C. Parking spaces. Parking spaces for the physically handicapped shall be
located as close as possible to elevators, ramps, walkways and
entrances. Parking spaces should be located so that physically
handicapped persons are not compelled to wheel or walk behind parked
cars to reach entrances, ramps, walkways and elevators.
§ 225-41 SHALER CODE § 225-41
1:840
ARTICLE VII
Performance Standards
§ 225-42. Conformance required.
No use of land or structure shall hereafter be established or conducted in
any district in the Township in violation of the standards of performance
listed in this article.
§ 225-43. Sound.
Every use shall be so operated that sound levels or noise levels shall not
be in excess of those established by Chapter 158, Noise, as now existing or
hereafter amended or supplemented.
§ 225-44. Vibration.
Every use shall be operated so that the ground vibration inherently and
recurrently generated is not perceptible without instruments at property
boundaries.
§ 225-45. Air pollution.
With regard to smoke, fly ash, dust, fumes, vapors, offensive odors and
other forms of air pollution or fugitive air contaminants, no emission shall
be permitted which violates the Pennsylvania Air Pollution Control Act
of January 8, 1960, P.L. 2119,208 as now or hereafter amended, or the
regulations thereunder of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection.
§ 225-46. Odor.
No use shall emit any offensive odor detectable outside the property of the
person on whose land the source is being operated or any odor in violation
of the requirements of Pennsylvania state or federal agencies.
§ 225-47. Radioactivity.
There shall be no radioactive emission which would be unlawful pursuant
to the standards adopted by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection or other public agency designated by state or federal officials for
this purpose.
§ 225-48. Electrical or sonic interference.
No electronic product radiation (i.e., any ionizing or nonionizing electronic
or particulate radiation or any sonic, infrasonic or ultrasonic wave) shall be
emitted from any source within the Township if such radiation is objected
to by any resident of the Township affected thereby, unless the entity
208. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 4001 et seq.
§ 225-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-48
1:841
responsible for such emission shall demonstrate that such emission is
authorized under the regulations issued by the Secretary of the United
States Department of Health, Education and Welfare or other state or
federal authority authorized to regulate such emissions.
§ 225-49. Liquid or solid waste.
§ 225-50. Glare and light.
There shall be no glare from high-temperature processes, combustion or
welding so as to be visible outside the property on which such glare
originates, and there shall be no light source which emits light focused
directly onto any other property if such light is objected to by the occupant
of such property.
§ 225-51. Fire hazards.
Any activity involving the use or storage of flammable or explosive materials
shall be conducted in compliance with the BOCA National Fire Prevention
Code, as adopted by Chapter 125, Fire Prevention, or by any amendments
or supplements to said chapter.
§ 225-52. Floodplains.
No construction or development within a floodplain area shall be
undertaken without compliance with Chapter 130, Flood Damage
Prevention, Part 2, as amended or supplemented.
§ 225-53. Stormwater disposal.
No disposal or detention of any stormwater runoff shall be permitted if it
is in violation of an ordinance or regulation of Shaler Township or of a
Pennsylvania statute or a regulation of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
or of an agency or subagency of the County of Allegheny.
A. There shall be no discharge of any liquid or solid waste, except as
authorized by a public agency:
(1) Onto any property, either of the person responsible for such
discharge or any other property; or
(2) Into any stream or watercourse.
B. Waste, liquid or solid, shall include garbage, refuse and other discarded
materials, including, but not limited to, solid and liquid waste materials
resulting from municipal, industrial, commercial, agricultural or
residential activities.
§ 225-48 SHALER CODE § 225-53
1:842
ARTICLE VIII
Signs
§ 225-54. Signs prohibited in all districts.
All signs not expressly authorized under this article or exempt from
regulation hereunder in accordance with the subsequent sections are
prohibited in the Township. Prohibited signs shall include, but are not
limited to:
§ 225-55. Signs permitted in all districts.
The following types of signs are permitted in all districts:
A. All illegal signs and all signs not in compliance with this chapter or any
other ordinance or regulation of the Township.
B. Signs not in good repair.
C. Signs interfering with or impeding drivers' vision, including line of sight
or vehicular traffic or safety signs.
D. Any sign erected closer than five feet to any underground utility line.
E. Obsolete signs and abandoned signs. Each sign shall be promptly
removed when the circumstances leading to its erection no longer
apply.
F. Beacons.
G. Flashing signs.
H. Roof signs.
I. Pennants.
J. Banners.
K. Vehicular signs.
L. Portable signs.
A. "For sale" and "for rent" signs as hereinafter specially regulated in each
district.
B. Political posters and placards, which shall be removed by the person
erecting such sign, the person responsible for the land on which it is
erected or the candidate or party upon whose behalf the posters and
placards are erected, within seven days after the election.
C. Public service signs of such size and type and in such locations as
required to satisfy the public need in any district, including:
§ 225-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-55
1:843
§ 225-56. Signs permitted in residential districts.
The following types of signs are permitted in residential districts.
(1) Convenience signs identifying location of rest rooms, freight
entrances and parking areas.
(2) Government signs for the control of traffic and other regulatory
purposes.
(3) Public transit service signs.
(4) Public utility information signs and community special event signs.
(5) Safety signs.
(6) Signs erected by a public agency in the performance of a public
duty.
(7) Signs indicating scenic or historic points of interest.
(8) Street signs.
(9) "No trespassing" signs and "no hunting" signs.
(10) Directional signs without advertising, as may be deemed necessary
for the reservation of the public health or safety.
(11) Directional signs with advertising and having a maximum size of no
more than three square feet per entrance or exit.
A. Residential identification signs on residential structures:
(1) Maximum number of signs per building is one sign, or two if
building is on a corner lot.
(2) Maximum size per sign is 1 1/2 square feet.
B. "For sale" and "for rent" signs.
(1) Maximum number of signs per building is one sign, or two if
building is on a corner lot.
(2) Maximum size per sign is 10 square feet.
(3) Minimum distance of the sign from another lot is 15 feet.
C. Institutional identification signs on institutional or public buildings:
(1) Maximum number of identification signs per building is two signs.
(2) Maximum total area of signs is 32 square feet.
D. Institutional directional and informational signs on institutional or
public buildings:
§ 225-55 SHALER CODE § 225-56
1:844
§ 225-57. Mt. Royal Boulevard and Seavey Road Corridors
(primarily zoned NS Neighborhood Shopping).
(1) Unlimited number of signs.
(2) Maximum size of each sign is three square feet.
E. There shall be not more than two identification signs erected by
churches, schools or other similar institutions, each of which shall be
located on the premises and shall not exceed 32 square feet in area.
Additional directional and informational signs may be erected on such
premises as necessary, each of which shall not exceed three square feet
in area.
A. For all uses within nonresidential districts along these corridors, each
business establishment is permitted to have one of the following
combinations of signage:
(1) One ground sign and one projecting sign with a total area of 100
square feet.
(2) One ground sign and one awning sign with a total area of 100
square feet.
(3) One wall sign and one projecting sign with a total area of 100
square feet.
(4) One wall sign and one awning sign with a total area of 100 square
feet.
(5) One wall sign and one ground sign with a total area of 80 square
feet.
(6) If granted a special exception for an electronic sign, one electronic
sign and one wall sign with a total maximum area of 80 square feet
for all sign faces.
B. The maximum size of each sign is 50 square feet.
C. Including additional signs and electronic signs, but excluding
supplemental signs, the maximum total signage area of all signs for
each business establishment along these corridors is 100 square feet
for all sign faces.
D. Ground signs must comply with all bufferyard requirements.
E. The maximum height of any sign attached to a building is one foot
above the roofline of the building to which it is attached.
F. The maximum height of any permitted sign not attached to a building is
25 feet above the level of the ground.
G. Supplemental wall signs with a maximum size of six square feet are
permitted.
§ 225-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-57
1:845
§ 225-58. Babcock Boulevard and Evergreen Road Corridors
(primarily zoned GC General Commercial.)
H. Electronic signs are not permitted except by special exception.
I. For a contiguous group of more than five business establishments, one
additional ground sign is permitted for the group:
(1) The maximum size of the additional ground sign is 50 square feet.
(2) The maximum height of the sign is 25 feet from the level of the
ground.
J. Temporary signs.
(1) The maximum number of temporary signs permitted per business
establishment is one temporary sign within a calendar year.
(2) The maximum size of any temporary sign erected within any
calendar year is 12 square feet.
(3) The maximum length of time a temporary sign may be displayed
per business establishment is 30 days within any calendar year, and
the temporary sign shall be removed within two days following the
last day of the event.
(4) Window signs affixed to the inside of windows are not considered
temporary signs.
K. The minimum distance of any sign from a paved portion of the public
right-of-way, except for a wall sign, is 15 feet.
L. The minimum distance of any sign from a residential lot is 40 feet.
M. "For sale" and "for rent" signs:
(1) Maximum number of signs per lot is one sign, or two signs on a
corner lot.
(2) Maximum size is 50 square feet.
(3) Minimum distance from the paved portion of a public right-of-way
is 15 feet.
(4) The signs may not be illuminated.
(5) The sign shall be erected only upon the property for sale or being
rented.
A. For all uses within nonresidential districts along these corridors, each
business establishment is permitted to have one of the following
combinations of signage:
(1) One ground sign and one projecting sign with a maximum total
signage area of 125 square feet for all sign faces.
§ 225-57 SHALER CODE § 225-58
1:846
(2) One ground sign and one awning sign with a maximum total
signage area of 125 square feet for all sign faces.
(3) One wall sign and one projecting sign with a maximum total
signage area of 125 square feet for all sign faces.
(4) One wall sign and one ground sign with a maximum total signage
area of 125 square feet for all sign faces.
(5) One wall sign and one electronic sign with a maximum total
signage area of 125 square feet for all sign faces.
(6) The maximum size of each sign is 100 square feet.
B. Ground signs must comply with all bufferyard requirements.
C. The maximum height of any sign attached to a building is one foot
above the roofline of the building to which it is attached.
D. The maximum height of any permitted sign not attached to a building,
excluding billboards, is 25 feet above the level of the ground.
E. Additional sign. For a contiguous group of more than five business
establishments, one additional ground sign is permitted for the group:
(1) The maximum size of the additional ground sign is 50 square feet.
(2) The maximum height of the sign is 25 feet from the level of the
ground.
F. Including additional signs and electronic signs but excluding
supplemental signs, the maximum total signage area of all signs for
each business establishment along these corridors is 125 square feet
for all sign faces.
G. Supplemental wall signs with a maximum size of six square feet are
permitted.
H. Electronic signs complying with this chapter are permitted.
I. Temporary signs:
(1) The maximum number of temporary signs permitted per business
establishment is one temporary sign within a calendar year.
(2) The maximum size of any temporary sign erected within any
calendar year is 12 square feet.
(3) The maximum length of time a temporary sign may be displayed
per business establishment is 30 days within any calendar year, and
the temporary sign shall be removed within two days following the
last day of the event.
(4) Window signs affixed to the inside of windows are not considered
temporary signs.
§ 225-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-58
1:847
§ 225-59. Route 8 and East Ohio Street Corridors (primarily zoned I
Industrial and GC General Commercial).
J. The minimum distance of any sign from a paved portion of the public
right-of-way, except for a wall sign, is 15 feet.
K. The minimum distance of any sign from a residential lot is 40 feet.
L. "For sale" and "for rent" signs:
(1) Maximum number of signs per lot is one sign, or two signs on a
corner lot.
(2) Maximum size is 50 square feet.
(3) Minimum distance from the paved portion of a public right-of-way
is 15 feet.
(4) The signs may not be illuminated.
(5) The sign shall be erected only upon the property for sale or being
rented.
A. For all uses within nonresidential districts along this corridor, each
business establishment is permitted to have one of the following
combinations of signage:
(1) Wall signs.
(a) Maximum number of wall signs is two.
(b) Maximum distance a wall sign projects from the wall to which
it is attached is one foot.
(c) A wall sign may not exceed the width of the occupied premises
or building in length.
(2) Supplemental wall signs with a maximum size of six square feet are
permitted.
(3) One ground sign and one projecting sign with a total maximum
signage area of 150 square feet for all sign faces.
(4) One ground sign and one awning sign with a total maximum
signage area of 150 square feet for all sign faces.
(5) One wall sign and one projecting sign with a total maximum
signage area of 150 square feet for all sign faces.
(6) One wall sign and one ground sign with a total maximum signage
area of 150 square feet for all sign faces.
(7) One wall sign and one electronic sign with a maximum total area of
150 square feet for all sign faces.
§ 225-58 SHALER CODE § 225-59
1:848
(8) The maximum size of each sign is 100 square feet.
(9) For a building on a corner lot, either frontage may be used for
calculation, but the frontage selected will be the front where the
sign is erected.
B. Ground signs must comply with all bufferyard requirements.
C. The maximum height of any sign attached to a building is one foot
above the roofline of the building to which it is attached.
D. The maximum height of any permitted sign not attached to a building,
excluding billboards, is 25 feet above the level of the ground.
E. Additional sign. For a contiguous group of more than five business
establishments, one additional ground sign is permitted for the group:
(1) The maximum size of the additional ground sign is 50 square feet.
(2) The maximum height of the sign is 25 feet from the level of the
ground.
F. Including additional signs and electronic signs but excluding
supplemental signs, the maximum total signage area of all signs for
each business establishment along these corridors is 150 square feet
for all sign faces.
G. Lots without buildings are permitted one ground sign with a maximum
size of 50 square feet.
H. Ground signs must comply with all bufferyard requirements.
I. Temporary signs:
(1) The maximum number of temporary signs permitted per business
establishment is one temporary sign within a calendar year.
(2) The maximum size of any temporary sign erected within any
calendar year is 12 square feet.
(3) The maximum length of time a temporary sign may be displayed
per business establishment is 30 days within any calendar year, and
the temporary sign shall be removed within two days following the
last day of the event.
(4) Window signs affixed to the inside of windows are not considered
temporary signs.
J. Electronic signs complying with this chapter are permitted.
K. Billboards complying with this chapter are permitted.
(1) All billboards must be:
(a) The principal use on a lot.
§ 225-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-59
1:849
§ 225-60. All other areas zoned nonresidential.
§ 225-61. Illuminated signs.
(b) Mounted on a permanent structure but not on a motor vehicle,
fence or a retaining wall.
(2) The face of the sign shall not be visible within a ground-level sight
distance of 350 feet of property zoned residential, cemetery or
professional, a public park or playground of 1/4 acre or more, or a
cultural and/or recreation center.
(3) The billboard must be within the lot where the base is erected.
(4) Minimum distance from a public right-of-way is 15 feet.
(5) Maximum height of a billboard sign is 40 feet.
(6) Only one billboard is permitted per lot, but one sign may have a
maximum of two faces arranged back to back or deck style.
(7) Maximum size: 240 square feet.
L. Location requirements:
(1) Minimum distance from a ground sign to the paved area of a public
right-of-way is 15 feet.
(2) Projecting signs must be attached directly to the structural
framework of the building.
(3) Minimum distance from any sign to a residential lot is 100 feet.
M. "For sale" and "for rent" signs:
(1) Maximum number of signs per lot is one sign, or two signs on a
corner lot.
(2) Maximum size is 50 square feet.
(3) Minimum distance from the paved portion of a public right-of-way
is 15 feet.
(4) The signs may not be illuminated.
(5) The sign shall be erected only upon the property for sale or being
rented.
A. Uses within a Professional District outside of a signage corridor will use
the signage standards for nonresidential uses in the most restrictive
directly adjacent district or corridor.
B. All other nonresidential uses outside of a signage corridor, shall use the
standards for the Babcock Boulevard/Evergreen Road Corridors.
§ 225-59 SHALER CODE § 225-61
1:850
§ 225-62. Electronic signs.
A. Illuminated signs complying with this chapter are permitted in each
nonresidential zoning district.
B. All signs may be illuminated with back, internal or external lighting.
Each sign that is lit entirely by backlighting or external lighting is
permitted to increase the total permitted signage area by 5%.
Backlighting does not include internal lighting.
C. All illumination must be cutoff lighting. All lighting must be limited to a
maximum candlepower of 2 1/2% of the total lamp lumens at an angle of
90° above horizontal and a maximum candlepower of 10% at an angle of
80° above horizontal for any lateral angle around the light.
D. No illuminated off-premises advertising sign shall be illuminated
between 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m., prevailing time.
A. Electronic signs complying with the requirements of this chapter may
be approved by the Code Enforcement Officer in the Route 8 and East
Ohio Street Corridors and the Babcock Boulevard and Evergreen Road
Corridors in the Township.
B. Electronic signs complying with the requirements of this chapter are
permitted as a special exception in the Mount Royal Boulevard and
Seavey Road Corridors of the Township.
C. All electronic signs in the Township are subject to the following criteria:
(1) No electronic off-premises advertising sign shall be illuminated
between 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m., prevailing time.
(2) Electronic signs with large video display are permitted in the Route
8 and East Ohio Street Corridors and the Babcock Boulevard and
Evergreen Road Corridors in the Township.
(3) Dwell time. The text, image or display on an electronic sign may not
change more than once every 10 seconds. Twirl time between
subsequent text, images or display shall not exceed 0.25 of a
second.
(4) Brightness. During daylight hours between sunrise and sunset,
luminance shall be no greater than 5,000 nits. At all other times,
luminance shall be no greater than 500 nits.
(5) Location. No electronic sign may be erected except as authorized
herein.
(6) Interference. No electronic sign shall be erected or maintained in
such a manner as to obscure or otherwise physically interfere with
an official traffic sign, signal or device, or to obstruct or physically
interfere with the driver's view of approaching, merging or
intersecting traffic.
§ 225-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-62
1:851
§ 225-63. Permits.
§ 225-64. Nonconforming signs.
All nonconforming signs in existence prior to the effective date of this
chapter are permitted to continue, provided that no such sign shall be:
§ 225-65. Landscape and bufferyard requirements.
Where a ground sign is permitted and the width of the sign at its base would
extend beyond the bounds of an established or proposed bufferyard, the
bufferyard must be expanded in a "cut out" so that the entire base of the
(7) Controls/testing/annual certification.
(a) All electronic signs shall be equipped with an automatic
dimmer control or other mechanism that automatically
controls the sign's brightness as provided above.
(b) Prior to approval of any permit to operate an electronic sign,
the applicant shall certify that the sign has been tested and
complies with the motion, dwell time, brightness and other
requirements herein.
(c) The owner and/or operator of an electronic sign shall submit
an annual report to the Township certifying that the sign
complies with the motion, dwell time, brightness and other
requirements herein.
(8) Maintenance. Routine maintenance of electronic signs is
permitted, including the replacement of solid state electronic
components, subject to compliance with regulations set forth
herein relating to motion, brightness and dwell time.
A. No sign shall be erected until the owner, occupier or applicant has
received a permit for the erection of the sign and pays to the Township a
fee in such amount as the Board of Commissioners may from time to
time set by resolution.
B. A separate permit is required for the erection of each individual sign.
C. No permit is required for signs with an area of 12 square feet or less.
D. No permit is required for "for sale" or "for rent" signs.
A. Changed, altered or expanded in any way which increases the sign's
nonconformity or replaced by another nonconforming sign, except that
copy may be changed on an existing sign.
B. Relocated, except in conformance with the requirements of this
chapter.
C. Reestablished after it has been removed or is an abandoned sign.
§ 225-62 SHALER CODE § 225-65
1:852
sign is within a contiguous landscaped area with a minimum distance of two
feet from the edge of the base of the sign to the edge of the landscaped
bufferyard area. The "cut out" must be circular or semicircular in shape
unless the lot shape and/or public right-of-way does not allow for this shape;
in which case, the "cut out" should be rounded in shape.
§ 225-66. Signs exempt from regulations.
The following signs shall be exempt from regulation under this chapter:
§ 225-67. Posting or erecting of temporary political signs on public
property.
Temporary political signs posted or erected on public property located
within the Township are subject to the following general requirements:
A. Any public notice or warning required by a valid and applicable federal,
state or local law, regulation or ordinance.
B. Any sign inside a structure not attached to a window or door that is not
legible from a distance of more than three feet beyond the lot line of the
lot or site on which such sign is located.
C. Works of art that do not include a commercial message.
D. Holiday lights and decorations with no commercial message.
E. Memorial signs or tablets denoting the date of erection of a building.
F. Auctions, garage or yard sale signs, provided that they do not exceed
five square feet and are removed as soon as the event or activity has
occurred, and provided that they shall not be permitted to be erected
more than seven days prior to the event and only permitted at the site
at which the event will take place and removed within 48 hours of the
conclusion of the event.
G. Signs and banners erected by a governmental body or under the
direction of such body.
H. Community special event signs announcing a nonprofit event of a civic
organization for noncommercial purposes, where such sign does not
exceed four square feet in area and banners no more than 60 square
feet in area, for a period not to exceed 30 days prior to the start of the
event and removed within three days after the conclusion of the event.
A. Number of signs. No more than one temporary political sign shall be
placed on public property on each leg of the intersection of roads or
streets for any one candidate or issue.
B. Area. Temporary political signs on public property shall not exceed an
aggregate gross surface area of 12 square feet per sign.
§ 225-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-67
1:853
§ 225-68. Posting or erecting temporary political signs on private
property.
No temporary political sign shall be placed or erected on any private
property without first obtaining permission from such property owner.
§ 225-69. Removal as a public nuisance.
Every prohibited temporary political sign is declared to be a public
nuisance, and the person or persons having authority over the public or
private property may remove the same or cause it to be removed
immediately at the reasonable expense of the person placing, maintaining
or erecting the temporary political sign.
C. Height. Temporary political signs shall not project higher than four feet,
as measured from the base of the sign or grade of the nearest adjacent
roadway, whichever is higher.
D. Timing. Temporary political signs may be erected or maintained for a
period not to exceed 30 days prior to the date of the election to which
such signs are applicable and shall be removed within seven days
following the termination of the election.
E. Illumination. No temporary political sign shall be illuminated in any
manner.
F. Required consent. The Township reserves the right to deny a request to
post any temporary political sign on public property and to require the
removal of any temporary political sign at any time whatsoever
whenever such temporary political sign poses a threat to the public's
safety, health and welfare. Specific prohibitions include, but are not
limited to, the following:
(1) Temporary political signs shall be prohibited within five feet of the
edge of the paved surface of any road or street within the
Township.
(2) Temporary political signs shall be prohibited along any road or
street within the Township where it would obstruct the clear sight
distance of traffic, and no temporary political sign shall be placed
in such a position that it will cause danger to traffic on a street by
obstructing the view.
(3) No temporary political sign or sticker shall be posted, nailed,
wired, attached or affixed to any public property, including, but not
limited to, traffic signs, structures or devices, traffic control boxes,
guardrails, telephone poles, utility posts or Township street signs.
§ 225-67 SHALER CODE § 225-69
1:854
ARTICLE IX
Supplemental Regulations
A.
Wireless Communications Towers and Facilities
§ 225-70. Establishment and maintenance of Township Map.
The Township Manager shall establish and maintain an official Township
map showing the location of all existing conforming and nonconforming
communications towers in the Township, including Township property and
facilities, as well as the search rings of all Township antenna arrays, which
map shall be known as the "Township Communication Tower Map."
§ 225-71. Conditional use in certain zoning districts and on
Township property.
Communications towers, including but not limited to antennas, antenna
arrays, communications facilities, power-mounted/shared-use
communications facilities, co-location/shared-use communications facilities
or telecommunications equipment buildings as defined herein, and their
associated structures, may be located on Township property and on
Township facilities in any zoning district if authorized by the Board and
shall be permitted as a conditional use in C Cemetery Districts, GC General
Commercial Districts and I Industrial Districts of Shaler Township, provided
the applicant demonstrates by competent evidence that the
communications tower or communications facility cannot be reasonably colocated
on another communications tower in a C Cemetery, GC General
Commercial, I Industrial or other zoning district inside or outside the
Township.
§ 225-72. Co-location and sharing requirements and procedures.
Communications towers and communications facilities shall be permitted
as a conditional use in the Township, provided the Board finds that no
existing or planned communications tower can reasonably accommodate
the applicant's proposed antenna or other equipment as described herein.
As a prerequisite to such finding, the applicant shall comply with the
following co-location and sharing requirements and procedures:
A. Prior to submitting a conditional use application, the applicant shall
contact the owners of all existing or planned communications towers, as
well as suitable building-mounted sites in the Township of a height
approximately equal to or greater than the height of the
communications tower proposed by the applicant located in a C
Cemetery, GC General Commercial, I Industrial or other zoning district.
A list shall be provided by the applicant to the Township of all such
owners contacted, the date of such contact, as well as the form and
content of such contact in order to obtain tower sharing.
§ 225-70 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-72
1:855
B. Such contacts shall be made prior to the filing of the conditional use
approval so as to allow for inclusion of the responses into the
application when filed. Failure of a listed owner to respond shall not be
relevant to the filing of an application if a timely, good faith effort was
made to obtain co-location or tower sharing. However, where an
existing or planned communications tower is known to have capacity
for additional antennas of the type proposed, based upon a prior
decision regarding such communications tower, a response concerning
co-location is required as a condition for approval of the conditional
use. The Township shall maintain and provide, on request, records of
responses from each owner.
C. The applicant shall request the following information for co-location
from each owner contacted:
(1) Identification of the site by location, existing uses and
communications tower height.
(2) Whether the existing or planned communications tower can
structurally accommodate the antenna proposed by the applicant
without requiring that structural changes be made to the existing
or planned communications tower.
(3) Whether the existing or planned communications tower can
structurally accommodate the proposed antenna if structural
changes are made, not including totally rebuilding the existing or
planned communications tower. If so, the owner shall specify in
general terms what structural changes would be required.
(4) If structurally able, would shared-use by such existing or planned
communications tower be precluded for reasons related to RFI. If
so, the owner shall describe in general terms what changes in
either the existing or proposed antenna would be required to
accommodate the proposed communications tower, if at all.
(5) If shared-use is possible, based on Subsection C(3) and (4) above,
the fee an owner of any existing or planned communications tower
would charge for such shared-use.
D. Shared-use or co-location shall not be precluded simply because a
reasonable fee for shared-use is charged or because of reasonable cost
necessary to adapt the existing and proposed uses to a shared
communications tower. Expert testimony may be considered to
determine whether the fee and costs are reasonable. Costs exceeding
new communications tower construction and the cost of ground rental
or acquisition are presumed unreasonable.
E. Prior to granting a conditional use application for a communications
tower, the applicant shall agree:
(1) To lease any additional space on the communications tower to other
companies at the fair market rate.
§ 225-72 SHALER CODE § 225-72
1:856
§ 225-73. Conditional use application requirements.
All conditional use applications for communications towers and facilities
shall comply with the following requirements:
(2) To construct the communications tower to accommodate a certain
number of antennas or as many as reasonably feasible.
A. The applicant shall submit a copy of its FCC license with its conditional
use application. Any grant of conditional use hereunder shall cease
automatically if the applicant's FCC license expires, lapses or is
revoked.
B. The applicant shall submit certified documentation with its conditional
use application for a communications tower, verifying that the
communications tower or equipment cannot be co-located,
accommodated or installed on an existing or already approved
communications tower or communications facility or an existing
electric transmission tower, inside or outside the Township. The
documentation shall certify that there is no existing facility or structure
available which would reasonably accommodate the proposed
communications tower or communications needs of the applicant.
Structure availability shall be measured in terms of physical availability,
legal availability and economic availability. The applicant shall
demonstrate to the reasonable satisfaction of the Board what measures
were taken to identify existing facilities and structures as well as what
measures were taken to secure the right to use such facilities or
structures. The foregoing shall apply to property within and without the
Township which would reasonably accommodate the service area
requirements of the applicant.
C. The applicant shall submit with its conditional use application, a
communications tower site plan or survey of the property certified by
an engineer or architect.
D. The applicant shall submit with its conditional use application, a report
by a certified engineer documenting the following:
(1) A proposed search ring shown on the official Township
Communication Tower Map.
(2) Communications tower height and design, including technical,
engineering, economic and other pertinent factors governing
selection of the proposed design. A cross section of the
communications tower shall be included.
(3) Total anticipated capacity of the site, including number and types
of antennas which can be accommodated.
(4) Evidence of structural integrity of the communications tower
structure meeting the TIA/EIA-222-F standard.
§ 225-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-73
1:857
(5) Failure characteristics of the communications tower and
demonstration that the site and setbacks are of adequate size to
accommodate debris.
(6) All load hazards and mitigation measures which have been
employed, including but not limited to increased setbacks and/or
deicing equipment.
(7) Specific design and construction plans indicating the means by
which shared-use requirements shall be met.
(8) A geotechnical report by a certified soils engineer certifying the
subsurface soil conditions of the tower site.
(9) A verified report and/or statement by a radio frequency (RF)
engineer certifying that the proposed tower, facilities and antenna
transmissions have been reviewed and that the aggregate exposure
from all transmissions co-located on a single tower will not exceed
the maximum allowed under any federal or state law or regulation.
The report should identify the total of all current RF exposures, the
maximum permitted RF exposure in the aggregate, the exact extent
to which the applicant's transmission will add to the co-location if
permitted, and the amount of remaining exposure before the
maximum is exceeded.
E. Environmental impact statement. An environmental impact statement
shall be submitted with any conditional use application for a
communications tower, describing the effects the proposed
communications tower and related equipment will have on the
environment and surrounding area, including, but not limited to, the
effects on human health, views, air traffic, migrating birds and other
environmental impacts.
F. The applicant shall submit to the Township with its conditional use
application an independent site analysis and engineering report,
including studies, plans and calculations, prepared by a registered
engineer, documenting proper tower design, proper communications
tower site and corroborating that the communications tower or
equipment cannot be co-located, accommodated or installed on an
existing or already approved communications tower or other existing
facility such as an electric transmission tower, stadium light pole or
water tank in C Cemetery, GC General Commercial, I Industrial or other
zoning district, as well as documenting the proper location of
foundations and anchoring devices.
G. The applicant shall submit with its conditional use application written
documentation that there exists a sufficient easement or right-of-way to
allow vehicular access to the communications tower site. The access
shall be a minimum width of 20 feet and shall be adequate to permit
emergency vehicles access to the communications facility and shall be
constructed of dust-free all-weather surface. The right-of-way or
§ 225-73 SHALER CODE § 225-73
1:858
§ 225-74. Additional requirements prior to hearing.
All conditional use applications for communications towers and facilities
shall comply with the following requirements:
§ 225-75. Township Planning Commission review and
recommendations.
easement shall be maintained by the landowner, the owner of the rightof-
way or easement or the lessee.
H. The conditional use application shall demonstrate to the reasonable
satisfaction of the Board that such use is reasonably necessary at the
proposed communications tower site for the convenience of the people
at large or for the general welfare. The documentation submitted by the
applicant shall include a map of the area to be served by the
communications tower and the relationship of the proposed
communications tower site to other communications facilities.
I. All applicants for approval of a communications tower or
communications facility shall submit, in addition to the foregoing
requirements of this section, the following:
(1) A statement from the FAA that the application has not been found
to be a hazard to air navigation under Part 77, Federal Aviation
Regulations, or a statement that no compliance with Part 77 is
required.
(2) A statement from the FCC that the application complies with the
regulations of the Commission or a statement that no such
compliance is necessary.
(3) Applicant's letter of intent to lease excess space on the
communications tower in conformance with the provisions for
shared-use contained in this section.
J. Such conditional use application fee as set by resolution of the Board.
A. After submitting a conditional use application for a proposed
communications tower, every applicant shall fly an all-weather balloon
at the proposed communications tower site for at least 14 days prior to
the public hearing before the Board of Commissioners on the
application.
B. The balloon shall be red and at least 18 inches in diameter.
C. The top of the balloon shall be at the maximum proposed height of the
communications tower.
A. Prior to the public hearing before the Board of Commissioners, the
applicant shall submit all studies, documents and testimony which
applicant wishes to be considered in connection with the conditional
§ 225-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-75
1:859
§ 225-76. Conditional use hearings before Township Board of
Commissioners.
§ 225-77. Standards and criteria.
The erection and construction of all communications towers, antennas and
communications facilities in the Township shall comply with the following
requirements unless waived pursuant to § 225-77L:
use application for review and recommendation by the Township
Planning Commission.
B. The Township Planning Commission shall require expert review by the
Township's appointed electronic consultant of the technical data
submitted by the applicant, to be paid for by the applicant.
C. The Planning Commission expert review shall be a site-specific review
of the communications tower and communications facility. Such review
shall address the accuracy and completeness of the technical data, the
legitimacy of the analysis techniques and methodologies employed, and
the validity of the conclusions of any specific technical issues outlined
by the Planning Commission.
A. The regulation of the placement, construction and modification of
communications towers by the Township shall not unreasonably
discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent services. [47
U.S.C. § 332(c)(7)(B)(i)(I)]
B. The Board shall, as a condition of approval, require a schedule of
regular, periodic maintenance visits.
A. All communications towers shall be erected to comply with all
manufacturer requirements and accepted engineering standards,
including any applicable federal standards, and shall be designed and
constructed to all applicable standards of the American National
Standards Institute, ANSI/EIA-222-E Manual, as amended.
B. A fence or wall not less than eight feet in height from finished grade
shall be constructed around each communications tower and around
each guy anchor and peripheral support. All structures related to the
communications tower shall be equipped with a twenty-four-hour
security system. The fence or wall shall comply with the following
standards.
(1) Access to the tower shall be restricted and shall be through a
locked gate in the required fence or wall.
(2) The required fencing shall consist of a masonry wall or solid fence
with trees planted along the exterior of the wall or fence or an open
fence with an evergreen screen that consists of a continuous hedge
with a minimum height of five feet with trees planted along the
exterior of the screen. Tree plantings shall consist of three-inch-
§ 225-75 SHALER CODE § 225-77
1:860
minimum-caliper deciduous or evergreen trees planted 20 feet on
center maximum. Existing vegetation shall be preserved to the
maximum extent possible.
(3) When high voltage is necessary for the operation of the
communications facility, and it is present in a ground grid or in the
tower, signs located every 20 feet and attached to the fence or wall
shall display in large bold letters the following: "HIGH VOLTAGE -
DANGER."
C. The communications tower shall be securely anchored in a fixed
location on the ground or securely attached on another structure which
is in turn securely anchored on the ground. The applicant shall provide
qualified documentary evidence that the proposed structure and any
existing structure to which the antenna is attached shall withstand
wind gusts of at least 100 miles per hour, as well as snow, ice and other
natural forces, and shall be corroborated by the independent site
analysis and engineering report prepared by a registered engineer or
architect.
D. All lighting, other than that required by the FAA or the FCC, shall be
shielded and reflected away from adjoining properties.
E. Other principal uses. A communications tower or communications
facility may be located on a lot occupied by another principal use of
property zoned C Cemetery District, GC General Commercial District or
I Industrial District if and only if the communications tower site meets
the minimum lot size requirements for the zoning district and if all of
the other conditions of this chapter are satisfied. No more than one
communications tower shall be permitted per lot.
F. Township property. A communications tower or communications facility
may be located on Township property and on Township facilities in any
zoning district if authorized by the Board.
G. Co-location and sharing. All communications towers shall be designed
to structurally accommodate the maximum number of antennas
technically practicable, but in no case less than the following:
(1) At least one two-way radio antenna for every 10 feet of the tower, or
at least one two-way radio antenna for every 20 feet of the tower
and at least one microwave facility.
(2) Such other combination as found by the Board to provide the
maximum possible number of foreseeable users.
(3) Such requirements may be reduced if either:
(a) The FCC provides a written statement that no more licenses
for those broadcast frequencies that could use the tower will
be available in the foreseeable future; or
§ 225-77 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-77
1:861
(b) The size of the tower required significantly exceeds the size of
the existing towers in the area and would therefore create an
unusually onerous visual impact that would dominate and alter
the visual character of the area when compared to the impact
of other existing towers. This provision is only to be applied in
unusual circumstances not resulting from the applicant's
action or site selection, unless no other site is possible.
H. In addition to meeting the setback requirements of the zoning district,
no communications towers shall be located closer than the following
distances from any property line as measured from the base of the
communications tower:
(1) A distance of 100% of the tower height from any property line; or
(2) The maximum collapsible fall radius of the communications tower
as specified by a registered engineer. Any guy anchor shall be
located a minimum of 25 feet from any property line and
additionally must meet the minimum yard and building setback
requirements of the zoning district in which it is located.
I. The width of the base of the communications tower shall be no more
than 10 feet at ground level. At 30 feet (if not the top), the maximum
width shall be six feet. At the top, the maximum width shall be 18
inches. No signs or other structures, devices or other items shall be
placed on the communications tower except as specifically approved.
J. The communications tower may exceed the height limit of the zoning
district in which it is located, provided it is demonstrated to the Board
that such height is necessary and essential for the proper functioning of
the concerned communications tower and facilities.
K. All communications towers shall be camouflaged towers or
camouflaged antennas.
L. Waiver of certain requirements. All camouflaged towers and
camouflaged antennas shall comply with all requirements of this article.
However, the Board may waive the requirements of the foregoing
provisions of the foregoing subsections where the applicant can
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Board of Commissioners that the
requirement is not necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare:
(1) Relating to additional setbacks: § 225-77H.
(2) Relating to height: § 225-77J and M.
(3) Relating to fencing: § 225-77B.
(4) Relating to piggyback or co-location requirements: § 225-77G.
M. Height of communications tower. The applicant shall demonstrate to
the reasonable satisfaction of the Board that the height of the top of the
communications tower is the lesser of:
§ 225-77 SHALER CODE § 225-77
1:862
(1) One hundred twenty-five feet above ground level; or
(2) The minimum necessary to serve the service area requirements of
the applicant. If the applicant is applying for height in addition to
its own requirements, the applicant shall submit agreements
including reasonable details regarding the use of the additional
height and the facilities to be placed on the communications tower.
However, the maximum height of the communications tower shall
not at any time exceed 200 feet. No equipment mounted or
attached to the communications tower shall exceed this twohundred-
foot maximum height.
N. Adverse effects on property values. No communications tower shall
adversely affect property values in the neighborhood (and, in particular,
the value of any abutting property) by more than 10%.
O. Danger to health or safety. No communications tower or its operation
shall endanger the health, safety or welfare of the public, and
specifically, the applicant shall prove that the communications tower, its
operation and the expected output frequency, modulation, radiated
power, etc., shall not cause health problems or violate any applicable
federal regulation.
P. Encroachment. No communications tower shall encroach into or
through any established public or private airport approach path as
established by the FAA.
Q. Parking. A minimum of two off-street parking spaces shall be provided
at each communications tower site plus one additional off-street
parking space for each on-site employee.
R. Existing vegetation on the site shall be preserved to the maximum
extent possible.
S. Communications facilities shall be fully automated and unattended on a
daily basis and shall be required to be visited only for periodic
maintenance.
T. All utilities servicing the communications tower facility shall be
underground.
U. Any commercial communications antenna necessary for and clearly
used for emergency communications by a police department, fire
company, emergency medical service, and other similar public safety
organization is exempt from the requirements of this section.
V. The conditional use applicant shall demonstrate to the reasonable
satisfaction of the Board that such use is reasonably necessary at the
proposed communications tower site for the convenience of the people
at large or for the general welfare.
W. The conditional use applicant shall demonstrate to the reasonable
satisfaction of the Board that the communications tower or equipment
§ 225-77 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-77
1:863
§ 225-78. Bond to guarantee removal.
Prior to the erection or construction of a communications tower, the owner/
operator of the communications facility shall post a bond or other security
with the Township in an amount sufficient to guarantee that all obsolete or
unused communications towers and facilities shall be removed completely
within six months of cessation of use at the sole cost and expense of the
owner/operator.
§ 225-79. Annual inspection.
cannot be co-located, accommodated or installed on an existing or
already approved communications tower, communications facility,
electric transmission tower, stadium light pole or water tank, located
in a C Cemetery, GC General Commercial, I Industrial or other zoning
district, inside or outside the Township, as measured in terms of
physical availability, legal availability and economic availability.
X. The applicant shall demonstrate to the reasonable satisfaction of the
Board what measures were taken to identify existing facilities and
structures as well as what measures were taken to secure the right to
use such facilities or structures. The foregoing shall apply to property
within and without the Township which would reasonably accommodate
the service area requirements of the applicant.
Y. The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed tower of the facility
complies with all state and federal laws and regulations concerning
aviation safety.
Z. The applicant shall demonstrate that the operation of the
communications tower facility shall comply with all current FCC
standards for nonionizing electromagnetic radiation (NIER).
A. An annual inspection program performed by a professional engineer
and paid for by the owner of the communications tower shall be
required for all communications towers. An annual inspection report
shall be submitted to the Township by the owner of the communications
tower on June 1 of each calendar year, documenting that an inspection
has been performed on the communications tower within the previous
30 days and that the structure and surrounding site are in compliance
with the requirements of this article. Additionally, the annual inspection
report shall certify that the communications tower is securely anchored
in a fixed location on the ground and further certify that the structure
can withstand wind, storm, ice and other natural or artificial forces
required by this article. It shall further certify that the communications
tower is structurally capable of handling antennas, dishes and other
equipment mounted or attached to the communications tower.
B. The annual inspection shall include a photograph of the
communications tower facility, showing or depicting all appendant
structures, including all antennas and antenna arrays.
§ 225-77 SHALER CODE § 225-80
1:864
§ 225-80. Indemnification.
The Township shall be released, indemnified and held harmless through
a policy of insurance from any and all liability arising from the
communications tower or communications facility, including but not limited
to its placement, construction and maintenance on Township-owned
property.
§ 225-80 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-80
1:865

B.
Animals
§ 225-81. Large domestic animals.
§ 225-82. Small domestic animals.
§ 225-83. Small domestic pets.
A. Types. Large domestic animals include horses, cattle, sheep, alpaca,
goats, ponies, oxen and other similar size animals unless otherwise
specified.
B. Shelter. Large domestic animals shall be sheltered in clean structures.
Structures, confinement and feeding areas associated with large
domestic animals shall be located at least 30 feet away from any
property line.
C. Limitations. The minimum land area required to maintain any large
domestic animal shall be two acres, or the sum of the required land
areas for each animal as listed below, whichever is greater. On publicly
owned park properties, there shall be no limit on the number of large
domestic animals kept, provided animal structures and run
requirements are met.
(1) Cattle, pigs or oxen, one acre each;
(2) Horses, ponies or alpacas, 1/2 acre each;
(3) Sheep, goats or llamas, 1/4 acre each; provided that unweaned
young will not be counted.
A. Types. Small domestic animals (mammals and fowl) include ducks,
geese, swans, chickens and other similar animals unless otherwise
specified.
B. Limitations. No more than 10 small domestic animals may be kept on a
minimum lot size of 1/2 acre.
C. Shelter. Small domestic animals shall be sheltered in a clean structure
which shall be located at least 30 feet away from any property line.
A. Types. Household pets include animals such as dogs, cats, hamsters,
birds and rabbits.
B. Limitations. Each dwelling unit is limited to five household pets plus
one unweaned litter produced by any of the pets, provided that this
limitation shall not apply to gerbils, hamsters and birds. This limitation
shall not apply to household pets considered to be visiting the dwelling
unit for up to 14 days within a six-month period. This limitation shall not
apply to a dwelling unit keeping a fostered animal(s), so long as:
§ 225-81 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-83
1:867
(1) The resident(s) of the dwelling unit provides the Township with
written correspondence from the organization in charge of said
fostering, stating said resident(s) is responsible for such fostered
animals.
(2) The period of said fostering is a maximum of 90 days per animal.
C. Shelter. Household pets shall be sheltered in the dwelling unit or in a
clean structure located within the building setback lines of the
accompanying lot.
§ 225-83 SHALER CODE § 225-83
1:868
C.
Commercial and Recreational Vehicles
§ 225-84. Exemptions.
Exempt from the provisions of this chapter are commercial and industrial
equipment, trailers and vehicles of:
§ 225-85. Commercial vehicles and commercial equipment in
residential districts.
A. The Township or other governmental agency for the accomplishment of
a governmental purpose or a contractor or subcontractor under
agreement with the Township or other governmental agency to
accomplish a municipal purpose.
B. A public utility or a contractor or subcontractor under agreement with
such public utility, for the installation, maintenance, adjustment or
repair of or to a public utility facility, including utility trucks owned by a
public or quasi-public agency when the drivers are required by their
employment to respond to emergencies.
C. Commercial vehicles parked for the purpose of making deliveries or
improvements to a property or street location.
D. Commercial vehicles parked for up to 48 hours if the vehicle is
involuntarily parked because of mechanical failure or other emergency.
E. Trailers and recreational vehicles parked in the parking lots of
volunteer fire departments, but if and only if the Board of
Commissioners has granted an applicant a conditional use for such
trailer or recreational vehicle to do so.
A. Parking locations. Commercial equipment and commercial vehicles
shall not be parked or stored on a residential lot in a residential district
between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. Monday through Saturday
and all day Sunday, except as shown on Table 1, Chart of Prioritized
Parking and Storage Locations for Commercial Vehicles and
Equipment,209 and then only in those areas listed in the order of priority.
Only if a higher priority location does not exist or is inaccessible and
thus unavailable and if and only if the landowner complies fully with the
screening requirements of this chapter may the commercial equipment
or commercial vehicle be parked or stored on the residential lot in the
next lower priority. If none of the prioritized locations is feasible, the
commercial vehicle or equipment must be parked or stored off site. In
no event shall any person in a residential district keep, store or park, or
permit any other person to keep, store or park, any commercial vehicle
or commercial equipment, unless screened from neighboring properties
and the public right-of-way.
209. Editor's Note: Table 1, Chart of Prioritized Parking and Storage Locations for Commercial
Vehicles and Equipment, is attached to this chapter.
§ 225-84 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-85
1:869
B. Ownership of commercial vehicle or equipment. The owner and
operator of a commercial vehicle or commercial equipment parked on a
residential lot shall reside on the residential lot where the commercial
vehicle or commercial equipment is parked or stored.
C. Number of commercial vehicles or equipment permitted. Only two
commercial vehicles may be parked on a residential lot at any time.
D. Prior approval required for paper street parking or storage. If storage
of any commercial vehicle on a paper street is approved by the
Township, said storage shall be subject to in-field site review and
approval prior to parking or storage occurring.
E. Improved surface required. Parking or storage of any recreational
vehicle on any residential lot shall be on an improved surface to
minimize mud tracking onto roadways.
F. Screening. Commercial vehicles and commercial equipment within
prioritized parking locations identified in Table 1, columns (2), (4) and
(5),210 and shown in hatched or shaded boxes shall be screened with an
opaque barrier having at least 75% opacity unless such vehicle is stored
completely within a building or is otherwise screened so as not to be
visible at ground level from another property or from any public rightof-
way. The opaque barrier shall:
(1) Screen the entire length of the commercial vehicle or commercial
equipment; and
(2) Screen the entire height of the commercial vehicle or equipment
between the ground elevation upon which it is parked and its
highest point, but not exceeding the height standards set forth in
Chapter 118, Fences, Walls and Hedges, of the Code.
(3) If said commercial vehicle or commercial equipment is located on a
trailer, both the commercial vehicle and the commercial equipment
as well as the trailer shall be screened.
(4) An opaque barrier or screening may consist of vegetation, fencing,
walls or a combination of such materials and shall be located
between the commercial vehicle or commercial equipment and the
lot line. The use of a tarp(s) shall not be an acceptable form of
screening. If the screening is to be accomplished with a fence or
wall, screening must comply with Chapter 118, Fences, Walls and
Hedges.
G. Screening not required. The screening requirements of this section do
not apply to a commercial vehicle:
(1) Parked temporarily while actively engaged in loading or unloading
passengers, merchandise or materials.
210. Editor's Note: Table 1, Chart of Prioritized Parking and Storage Locations for Commercial
Vehicles and Equipment, is attached to this chapter.
§ 225-85 SHALER CODE § 225-85
1:870
§ 225-86. Commercial vehicles and commercial equipment in
nonresidential districts on site owned by business.
Commercial vehicles and commercial equipment parked or stored on
nonresidential lots on a site owned by the business shall comply with the
following requirements:
§ 225-87. Commercial vehicles and commercial equipment in
nonresidential districts on sites not owned by business.
Commercial vehicles and commercial equipment parked or stored on
nonresidential lots on a site not owned by the business shall comply with
the following requirements:
(2) Parked for up to 48 hours if the vehicle is involuntarily parked
because of mechanical failure or other emergency.
A. Commercial vehicles and commercial equipment may be parked on a
nonresidential lot between the facade line of the business
establishment and any public right-of-way, but if and only if the
commercial vehicles and commercial equipment are parked
perpendicular to the right-of-way and if and only if the commercial
vehicles and commercial equipment are parked at a point no closer than
15 feet to the closest pavement edge of a road.
B. Commercial vehicles and commercial equipment shall not be used as an
advertising sign or as a business sign and shall not be parked or stored
between the facade line of the business establishment and any public
right-of-way for more than 20 days in any three-month period.
C. Parking shall be on an improved surface to minimize mud tracking onto
roadways.
A. Commercial vehicles and commercial equipment shall not be parked
between the facade line of the business establishment and any public
right-of-way for an aggregate period of more than 72 hours in any
three-month period.
B. Any commercial vehicle or commercial equipment that is parked
between the facade line of the business establishment and any public
right-of-way for an aggregate period of more than 72 hours in any
three-month period shall be considered off-premises advertising signs
and subject to those provisions of this chapter relating to signs.
C. Parking shall be on an improved surface to minimize mud tracking onto
roadways.
D. The requirements set forth above shall not apply to:
(1) Commercial vehicles or commercial equipment parked for up to 21
days while the vehicle undergoes repairs, detailing or other
§ 225-85 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-87
1:871
§ 225-88. Parking restrictions for recreational vehicles.
services provided by a licensed business establishment providing
motor vehicle repairs, auto body work, detailing or similar services.
(2) Commercial vehicles or commercial equipment actively engaged in
a construction project and which are parked no longer than the
duration of the construction permit issued by the Township on the
private construction site.
(3) Commercial vehicles or commercial equipment parked within a
licensed salvage yard or junkyard.
A. Parking of recreational vehicles on residential streets and highways.
(1) No recreational vehicle in any residential district shall be parked or
stored upon any Township street or highway except as provided in
this chapter.
(2) No recreational vehicle in any residential district shall be parked
on a street or highway within 50 feet of any intersection or
crosswalk at any time.
(3) The foregoing restrictions for recreational vehicles on residential
streets and highways shall not apply to: a recreational vehicle
parked up to 72 hours for a planned trip, outing or vacation
commencing or ending on the same day of the departure or return;
or a recreational vehicle parked up to 72 hours for the loading and
unloading of persons and personal effects, cleaning and servicing;
or a recreational vehicle parked up to 72 hours preparing the
vehicle for such departure or return. A recreational vehicle may be
parked for a period of up to 48 hours if the recreational vehicle is
involuntarily parked because of mechanical failure or other
emergency. Recreational equipment and personal watercraft;
provided, however, that such parking on a street, highway or alley
shall not occur on more than two consecutive days or on more than
two days in any seven-day period and shall not be occupied while
parked on the street, highway or alley.
B. Parking of recreational vehicles on residential lots.
(1) No recreational vehicle shall be parked or stored on a residential
lot in any residential district except as provided in this chapter.
(2) Recreational vehicles, but excluding recreational equipment and
personal watercraft, shall not be parked or stored on a residential
lot in a residential district except as shown on Table 2, Chart of
Prioritized Parking and Storage Locations for Recreational
Vehicles,211 and then only in those areas listed in the order of
211. Editor's Note: Table 2, Chart of Prioritized Parking and Storage Locations for Recreational
Vehicles, is attached to this chapter.
§ 225-87 SHALER CODE § 225-88
1:872
priority. Only if a higher priority location does not exist or is
inaccessible and thus unavailable, and if and only if the landowner
complies fully with the screening requirements of this chapter, may
the recreational vehicle be parked or stored on the residential lot
in the next lower priority. If none of the prioritized locations is
feasible, the recreational vehicle must be parked or stored off site.
In no event shall any person in a residential district keep, store
or park, or permit any other person to keep, store or park, any
recreational vehicle unless screened from neighboring properties
and the public right-of-way.
(3) Ownership of recreational vehicle. The owner and operator of a
recreational vehicle shall reside on the residential lot where the
recreational vehicle is parked or stored.
(4) Number of recreational vehicles permitted. Only two recreational
vehicles may be parked on a residential lot at any time.
(5) Prior approval required for paper street parking or storage. If
storage of any recreational vehicle on a paper street is approved by
the Township, said storage shall be subject to in-field site review
and approval prior to parking or storage occurring.
(6) Improved surface required. Parking or storage of any recreational
vehicle on any residential lot shall be on an improved surface to
minimize mud tracking onto roadways.
(7) Screening. Recreational vehicles within prioritized parking
locations identified in Table 2, columns (2), (4) and (5),212 and
shown in hatched or shaded boxes shall be screened with an
opaque barrier having at least 75% opacity, unless such
recreational vehicle is stored completely within a building or is
otherwise screened so as not to be visible at ground level from
another property or from any public right-of-way. The opaque
barrier shall:
(a) Screen the entire length of the recreational vehicle; and
(b) Screen the entire height of the recreational vehicle or
equipment between ground elevation upon which it is parked
and its highest point, but not exceeding the height standards
set forth in those regulations of this chapter relating to fences,
walls and hedges.
(c) An opaque barrier or screening may consist of vegetation,
fencing, walls or a combination of such materials and shall be
located between the recreational vehicle and the lot line. The
use of a tarp(s) shall not be an acceptable form of screening. If
the screening is to be accomplished with a fence or wall, the
212. Editor's Note: Table 2, Chart of Prioritized Parking and Storage Locations for Recreational
Vehicles, is attached to this chapter.
§ 225-88 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-88
1:873
§ 225-89. Other recreational vehicle requirements.
§ 225-90. Exceptions.
A limit of two pieces of recreational equipment and personal watercraft
including jet skis and similar personal watercraft and all-terrain vehicles
shall be exempt from the screening requirements of this section.
§ 225-91. Nonconforming commercial and recreational vehicles;
effective date. [Amended 2-10-2015 by Ord. No. 1931]
The effective date of this article shall be 180 days after the date of
enactment by the Board of Commissioners, but all recreational vehicles
currently parked or stored on residential lots in the Township or bought
prior to the enactment of this article are exempt from the provisions of
this chapter until January 1, 2016, but only if such recreational vehicle
is registered and recorded with the Township Zoning Officer within 180
days of the enactment of this article. The exemption for nonconforming
commercial vehicles will be until February 15, 2015.
screening must comply with the requirements of this chapter
relating to fences and walls as well as the fence and wall
requirements set forth in the other ordinances of the Township.
(8) Screening not required. The screening requirements of this section
shall not apply to:
(a) A recreational vehicle parked up to 72 hours for a planned trip,
outing or vacation commencing or ending on the same day of
the departure or return; or a recreational vehicle parked up to
72 hours for the loading and unloading of persons and personal
effects, cleaning and servicing; or a recreational vehicle
parked up to 72 hours preparing the vehicle for such departure
or return.
(b) A recreational vehicle parked for a period of up to 48 hours if
the recreational vehicle is involuntarily parked because of
mechanical failure or other emergency.
(c) Recreational equipment and personal watercraft.
A. Recreational vehicles shall be operable and maintained. Recreational
vehicles shall be maintained and carry up-to-date registrations and
applicable safety inspections.
B. Recreational vehicles shall not be parked on slopes greater than 15%,
in designated open spaces or recreational areas, in sensitive natural
resource areas, or in floodways.
C. Unless the International Building Code or International Fire Code
dictate otherwise, there shall be no minimum building separation for
recreational vehicles.
§ 225-88 SHALER CODE § 225-91
1:874
D.
Dumpsters and PODS®
§ 225-92. Limitations and regulations for dumpsters and PODS®.213
Dumpsters and PODS® may be constructed or placed on private property
in a residential district in the Township under the following conditions:
A. A resident shall be allowed to have one dumpster for 30 days on private
property in a residential district in the Township without need of a
permit so long as its use is to assist with the moving into or out of the
dwelling or any other lawful use not dealing with construction or a
catastrophe as described below. The maximum period of 30 days shall
include the days of delivery and removal. After the thirty-day period,
the owner must submit an application and obtain a permit, not to
exceed 30 days in length, from the Township. In no event shall a
resident be allowed to have a dumpster for more than a total of 60 days
per annum, with or without a permit, except in cases of disaster or
catastrophe. All fees pertaining to dumpsters shall hereafter be
amended from time to time by resolution of the Board of
Commissioners. A resident may receive no more than one dumpster
permit in any twelve-month period under this subsection except in the
event of fire, flooding or other natural disaster causing substantial
damage to the structure. A resident shall also comply with the following
regulations concerning dumpsters:
(1) Debris must be placed inside the dumpster, not along a side or on
top of it.
(2) All dumpsters are required to be emptied when full. For the
purpose of this chapter, "full" is defined as when the contents of the
dumpster reach an average level of one foot below the top edge of
the dumpster sides. Any dumpster which has reached the full state
and is not emptied within seven calendar days shall be considered
in violation of this chapter.
B. A resident shall be allowed to have one PODS® for 30 days on private
property in a residential district in the Township without need of a
permit as long as its use is to assist with the moving into or out of the
dwelling or any other lawful use not dealing with construction or a
catastrophe as described below. After the thirty-day period, the owner
must submit an application and obtain a permit, not to exceed 30 days
in length, from the Township. In no event shall a resident be allowed to
have a PODS® for more than a total of 60 days per annum, with or
without a permit, except in cases of disaster or catastrophe. There is a
fee of $25 for a thirty-day permit. All fees pertaining to PODS® shall
hereafter be amended from time to time by resolution of the Board of
Commissioners. A resident may receive no more than one PODS®
213. Editor's Note: PODS® is a registered trademark; it is used generically to refer to "portable
on-demand storage."
§ 225-92 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-92
1:875
§ 225-93. Use following natural disaster.
§ 225-94. Storage of certain materials prohibited.
No PODS® shall be used to store solid waste, construction debris,
demolition debris, recyclable materials, business inventory, commercial
goods, goods or property other than at the residential property where the
PODS® is located (i.e., used for retail sales). No PODS® shall be used to
store any hazardous or combustible or toxic materials.
§ 225-95. Number and size of dumpsters and PODS®.
permit in any twelve-month period under this subsection, except in
the event of fire, flooding or other natural disaster causing substantial
damage to the structure.
C. No property owner or agent for the property owner shall be allowed to
apply for more than one dumpster permit and one PODS® permit per
year per property.
D. All dumpsters and PODS® shall be appropriately labeled as to the date
the permit was issued and the date of required removal, representing
the maximum time period for use under the permit.
E. A resident shall be allowed to have one dumpster in conjunction with an
active building permit issued for residential construction or renovation
at the site. A dumpster permit shall be required, which permit shall run
concurrent with the length of the building permit. A fee in the amount
of $25 shall be charged for the first 30 days and $10 for each additional
month, or such other fees as the Board of Commissioners may set from
time to time by resolution.
A. Notwithstanding the above limitations and regulations, when the
principal structure on the property has been made uninhabitable as a
result of a natural disaster for which a local or state of emergency
declaration has been issued or a fire or other damaging event beyond
the control of the owner, one or more dumpsters and one or more
PODS® may be used for on-site storage and repair.
B. Following a natural disaster or other similar occurrence, both
dumpsters and PODS® are allowed without a permit for 30 days on
private property in a residential district in the Township. After the
thirty-day period, a permit shall be required, and a dumpster will be
permitted only in connection with a building permit.
C. For good cause shown and to recognize extenuating circumstances, the
Code Enforcement Officer may extend the duration of authorization for
an additional period of 60 days following a natural disaster or other
damaging event.
§ 225-92 SHALER CODE § 225-95
1:876
§ 225-96. Condition of dumpsters and PODS®.
The applicant or resident, as well as the supplier of the dumpster or the
PODS®, shall be responsible for ensuring that the dumpster or PODS®
is maintained in good condition, free from evidence of deterioration,
weathering, discoloration, graffiti, rust, ripping, tearing or other holes or
breaks at all times.
§ 225-97. Locations.
Dumpsters and PODS® shall be placed in the driveway at a location furthest
from the street and any adjacent property as reasonably possible, and all
locations must be paved off-street surfaces. A resident shall obtain the
preapproval of the Township Code Enforcement Officer for placement of the
dumpster or PODS® in the following situations:
§ 225-98. Advertising.
Advertising is prohibited on either a dumpster or a PODS® with the
exception of the name and phone number of the unit's supplier, which is
required.
§ 225-99. Requirements for issuance of permit.
The Township Code Enforcement Officer may issue a permit authorizing a
resident to have a dumpster or a PODS® on private residential property
in the Township after an initial thirty-day permit-free period, subject to the
following conditions:
A. Absent a catastrophe, a natural disaster or a building permit justifying
the need, only one PODS® or only one dumpster shall be permitted on a
residential lot at a time.
B. A dumpster may not exceed eight feet six inches in height, 10 feet in
width or 20 feet in length.
C. A PODS® may not exceed eight feet in height, eight feet in width or 16
feet in length.
A. If the property does not have a driveway.
B. If the property is a corner lot.
A. The applicant applies for a permit prior to the expiration of the initial
thirty-day period that the dumpster or POD® has been located on such
property;
B. The applicant has proceeded expeditiously in the usage of the dumpster
or PODS® that has been located on such property;
C. That any unnecessary hardship has not been created by the applicant;
and
§ 225-95 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-99
1:877
§ 225-100. Removal.
Any dumpster or PODS® which is not removed at the end of the time
for which it may lawfully remain in any place, or immediately upon the
direction of the Township Code Enforcement Officer for removal of such
dumpster or PODS® for safety reasons, may be removed by the Township
immediately, without notice, and the cost of such removal, together with the
cost of administration of its removal, may be assessed against the property
on which the dumpster or PODS® was located and may be filed as a lien
against such property.
D. Extensions beyond 60 days cannot be granted by the Code Enforcement
Officer unless a site plan is approved by the Township Board of
Commissioners.
§ 225-99 SHALER CODE § 225-100
1:878
E.
Fences, Walls and Hedges
§ 225-101. Applicability.
All new and existing fences, walls and hedges that are installed, planted,
placed, constructed, erected or maintained shall be installed, placed,
constructed, erected or maintained in accordance with the requirements of
this article.
§ 225-102. Exemptions.
§ 225-103. Special exceptions.
All fences and walls that are constructed with generally accepted building
materials and which comply otherwise with the permit requirements of this
section and the performance standards of this article shall be permitted in
all residential districts, with the exception of fences and walls constructed
with jumbo concrete block, precast or poured concrete, or of the gabion
basket type, none of which shall be permitted without approval by the
Zoning Hearing Board for use as a special exception in those residential
districts.
§ 225-104. Nonconforming fences and walls.
All legal nonconforming fences and walls in existence prior to the effective
date of this article are permitted to continue, subject to the following
provisions:
§ 225-105. Permit required for certain retaining walls.
A. This article shall not apply to any fence or wall constructed on a
governmental, municipal or public utility facility for public safety
purposes or as a requirement of a state or federal agency.
B. This article shall not apply to any pet containment fence, unless the
fence is located within a public right-of-way or public property that the
Township owns or has an easement over, under, around or through.
A. No such nonconforming fence or wall may be enlarged or altered in a
way which increases its nonconformity.
B. Should such nonconforming fence or wall be destroyed by any means to
an extent of more than 50% of its replacement cost at time of
destruction, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the
provisions of this article.
C. No such nonconforming fence or wall may be structurally altered so as
to change the shape, size, type or design of the fence or wall.
A. No retaining wall measured from the lowest level of grade to the top of
the wall which is over four feet in height, and no retaining wall under
§ 225-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-105
1:879
§ 225-106. Permit application.
§ 225-107. Location of fences, walls and hedges.
four feet in height which is supporting a surcharge, shall be
constructed, erected or installed without first obtaining a permit from
the Township.
B. All retaining walls requiring a permit shall be professionally engineered
and structural calculations for the retaining wall shall be provided by a
licensed Pennsylvania engineer and submitted with the permit
application.
C. No permit or permit application is required for:
(1) Retaining walls that are not over four feet (1219 mm) in height
measured from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall,
unless supporting a surcharge.
(2) Fences not over six feet (1829 mm) high.
(3) Repairs to an existing fence or wall with no structural changes.
(4) The installation of gates up to eight feet in width in an existing
fence or wall with no structural change.
(5) Planting of continuous hedgerows, living fences or similar
landscape features.
A. Applications for permits shall be made upon forms provided by the
Building Department.
B. The following information and materials shall be provided with the
application:
(1) A current lot survey sealed by a professional engineer or licensed
and registered land surveyor shall be submitted for Township
review and record with each permit application for any lot on which
a wall requiring a permit is to be erected.
(2) The sealed lot survey shall include the location of all existing and
proposed walls, structures, easements and setback dimensions.
(3) Structural calculations prepared by a licensed Pennsylvania
engineer shall be submitted with the permit application for all
retaining walls measured from the lowest level of grade to the top
of the wall which are over four feet in height, and all retaining walls
under four feet in height which are supporting a surcharge.
(4) A fee in such amount as set from time to time by resolution of the
Board of Commissioners shall be paid.
A. From the effective date of this article, it shall be illegal for any person to
place or allow to be placed any fence, posts, lampposts, basketball
§ 225-105 SHALER CODE § 225-107
1:880
§ 225-108. Height of fences and walls.
hoops or any other obstruction or structure within 10 feet of the edge
of the paved portion of any public street or highway in the Township.
B. Any fence, post, lamppost, mailbox, sign, basketball hoop or wall
located in a public right-of-way or other recorded easement is placed at
the owner's risk and may be ordered removed at any time by the
Township for any reason including for expansion or maintenance of
public services.
C. All fences, walls and hedges, including but not limited to posts,
foundations and overhang elements, shall be wholly contained on the
applicant's property, and all fences and walls shall comply with the
setback requirements of this article.
D. All fences, walls and hedges shall not be placed in any manner to hinder
access to an easement.
E. All fences, walls and hedges shall not be erected in a manner that
obstructs the free flow of surface water within or across the lot to which
it is associated or the adjacent lots.
F. Where residential uses are abutting or where nonresidential uses are
abutting, fences, retaining walls and enclosure walls do not need to
follow setback requirements in the respective zoning districts, and
fences, retaining walls and enclosure walls may be located at the
property line as set forth in this article.
G. Where a nonresidential use abuts a residential use, a fence, retaining
wall or enclosure wall on the nonresidential lot shall be set back a
minimum of 10 feet from the residential property line.
H. Fences or walls over two feet in height which are abutting a public
sidewalk or public right-of-way shall be set back a minimum of two feet
from the public sidewalk or public right-of-way.
A. Fences.
(1) Except as provided herein, the maximum height of a fence in all
zoning districts in the Township is six feet in height.
(2) The maximum height of a fence in a residential district, erected
between the front building line and the front property line, is four
feet in height.
(3) Where a fence is erected on a retaining wall, the maximum height
of the fence is six feet in height, separate and distinct from the
height of the retaining wall.
(4) The Code Enforcement Officer may require that any fence be a
lesser height when a higher fence creates a traffic hazard or
obstructs visibility at an intersection.
§ 225-107 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-108
1:881
(5) The Code Enforcement Officer may authorize fences on certain
properties to exceed the above height limitations for public safety
reasons, including but not limited to fences around tennis courts,
golf driving ranges, utility substations, baseball fields, athletic
fields and public swimming pools, or if a requirement of a state or
federal agency.
B. Walls.
(1) Enclosure walls.
(a) Except as provided herein, the maximum height of an
enclosure wall in a residential district in the Township is six
feet in height.
(b) The maximum height of an enclosure wall in a residential
district erected between the front building line and the front
property line is four feet in height.
(c) The Code Enforcement Officer may require that an enclosure
wall be a lesser height when a higher enclosure creates a
traffic hazard or obstructs visibility at an intersection.
(d) The Code Enforcement Officer may authorize enclosure walls
on certain properties to exceed the above height limitations for
public safety reasons, including but not limited to enclosure
walls around tennis courts, golf driving ranges, utility
substations, baseball fields, athletic fields and public
swimming pools, or if a requirement of a state or federal
agency.
(2) Retaining walls.
(a) The maximum height of a retaining wall in a residential district
in the Township, erected on a property line, is four feet in
height.
(b) The maximum height of a retaining wall in a nonresidential
district abutting a residential district in the Township, erected
on a property line, is four feet in height.
(c) Retaining walls more than four feet in high shall be set back as
required by those sections relating to setbacks of this article,
unless the abutting property owner's verified signature also
appears on the application form consenting to a higher height
on the property line or unless the applicant is the owner of both
abutting lots.
(d) Retaining walls in residential districts and in nonresidential
districts of the Township may be any height, but if and only if
the retaining wall complies fully with § 225-110E (relating to
setbacks), and if and only if the retaining wall is a
professionally engineered retaining wall, designed and sealed
§ 225-108 SHALER CODE § 225-108
1:882
§ 225-109. Measurement of fences and walls.
§ 225-110. Setbacks of fences and walls.
by a licensed Pennsylvania engineer to retain the earth on one
side at a higher elevation than the earth on the other side in
such a way that resists the lateral displacement of soil or other
materials in order to stabilize slopes and provide usable areas
of land at different elevations and conform to all requirements
of the Uniform Construction Code.
(e) Where a fence is erected on a retaining wall, the maximum
height of the retaining wall is the maximum height for
retaining walls as set forth herein, separate and distinct from
the height of the fence.
C. Hedges. None of the height limits established in this article shall apply
to hedges, including any closely planted trees or vegetation. However,
hedges located in the clear vision area are subject to required
maintenance, including trimming and/or removal. Hedges shall be
sufficiently set back at time of planting so that mature vegetation
remains within private property and does not encroach into the public
street right-of-way.
A. Fences and enclosure walls shall be measured from the mean level of
the ground surrounding the fence or the enclosure wall to the highest
point of such fence or enclosure wall.
B. Retaining walls shall be measured from the bottom of the footing to the
top of the wall.
A. The setbacks and other restrictions specified by this section are
minimal and may be increased by the Township or by the
recommendation of the civil engineer, soils engineer or engineering
geologist, if necessary for safety and stability or to prevent damage of
adjacent properties from deposition or erosion or to provide access for
slope maintenance and drainage.
B. Where residential uses are abutting or nonresidential uses are abutting,
fences, retaining walls and enclosure walls do not need to follow
setbacks in the respective zoning districts, and fences, retaining walls
and enclosure walls may be located at the property line as set forth in
this article.
C. Where a nonresidential use abuts a residential use, a fence, retaining
wall or enclosure wall on the nonresidential lot shall be set back a
minimum of 10 feet from the residential property line unless the
abutting residential property owner's verified signature also appears on
the nonresidential lot application form consenting to a higher height on
the property line or unless the applicant is the owner of both abutting
lots.
§ 225-108 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-110
1:883
§ 225-111. Materials, construction and drainage.
D. Fences or walls over two feet in height which are abutting a public
sidewalk or public right-of-way should be set back a minimum of two
feet from the public sidewalk or public right-of-way.
E. Setbacks for retaining walls (see Exhibit I214).
(1) A retaining wall which is not over four feet in height may be placed
on a property line, provided the retaining wall is not in a public
right-of-way area.
(2) Retaining walls more than four feet in height shall be set back as
required in this section unless the abutting property owner's
verified signature also appears on the application form consenting
to a higher height on the property line or unless the applicant is the
owner of both abutting lots.
(3) A retaining wall which is over four feet in height shall be set back a
minimum of five feet from all property lines for each additional four
feet in height over four feet. For example, a retaining wall or a
terraced retaining wall over four feet in height but not over eight
feet in height shall be set back a minimum of five feet from all
property lines, and a retaining wall or a terraced retaining wall
over eight feet in height but less than 12 feet in height shall be set
back a minimum of 10 feet from all property lines.
(4) Terraced retaining walls. The height of a terraced retaining wall is
cumulative and is equal to the combined height of each wall. There
shall be a minimum of five feet between the exposed faces of each
wall.
(5) Where the difference in elevation to be retained is more than eight
feet, the retaining wall shall be stepped back in segments of
approximately equal height.
(6) A variance to the requirements of this section may be granted by
the Zoning Hearing Board when a proposed retaining wall is
necessary to insure the normal use of the property, i.e., for a
sideline driveway.
(7) The maximum setback required for an engineered retaining wall of
any height is 10 feet from all property lines.
(8) The maximum height of any retaining wall shall be determined in
accordance with the attached Exhibit A which illustrates how
maximum height is to be measured.215
214. Editor's Note: Exhibit I, Retaining Wall Layout, is attached to this chapter.
215. Editor's Note: Exhibit A is located in "Street and Building Details" attached to this
chapter.
§ 225-110 SHALER CODE § 225-111
1:884
§ 225-112. Maintenance.
The owner of a property where a fence or wall is located is responsible for
maintenance of both sides of the fence or enclosure wall.
§ 225-113. Inspections.
A fence or wall permit applicant shall make all construction or work for
which a permit is required accessible and exposed for inspection until
approved by the Code Enforcement Officer. Approval as a result of an
inspection is not an approval of a violation of the provisions of this article.
Inspections presuming to give authority to violate the provisions of this
article are not valid. The permit applicant shall ensure the work remains
accessible and exposed for inspection purposes. Neither the Code
Enforcement Officer nor the Township is liable for expense entailed in
removing or replacing of any material to allow inspection.
A. All walls shall comply with all requirements of the Uniform
Construction Code.
B. All fences and walls shall be constructed and located in strict
compliance with all Township grading and stormwater standards and
shall not cause additional runoff from the property on which they are
sited.
C. Decorative/finished side of fences and walls:
(1) Fences that have one finished or decorative side shall be oriented
with the finished or decorative side facing outward toward adjacent
parcels and away from the interior of the lot to which the fence is
associated.
(2) Masonry enclosure walls shall be finished in a similar manner on all
sides.
(3) Except where provided as a special exception, where retaining
walls or high foundation walls are required and would be visible
from a public right-of-way or residentially zoned property, the
following shall apply to retaining walls more than four feet in
height:
(a) The retaining wall shall be constructed of or faced with brick,
stone, split-face or fluted concrete block, textured poured-inplace
concrete, or other materials with texture to reduce the
apparent mass of the wall; or
(b) In order to soften the appearance of the wall, hanging and/or
climbing vegetation shall be planted on the retaining wall.
§ 225-111 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-113
1:885

F.
Junk and Nuisance Vehicles
§ 225-114. Prohibited acts.
A. Except where permitted or otherwise authorized by special exception
or conditional use in a district of the Township, after enactment of this
article:
(1) No person shall store, maintain, accumulate or keep any
dismantled or partially dismantled vehicle, or a vehicle valueless
except for salvage, or parts thereof, except in compliance with this
article or upon open private grounds in the Township.
(2) No person shall engage in the business of buying and selling junk
or to accumulate, salvage, collect, store or dispose of junk in the
Township without first obtaining a license to do so.
(3) No person shall operate or maintain a junkyard in the Township
without first obtaining a license to do so.
(4) No person shall operate upon any of the streets, roads, alleys and
ways of the Township of Shaler, whether from a vehicle or upon
foot, as a scavenger or an itinerant buyer or seller of junk.
(5) No person shall engage in business as a junk dealer in any place
other than the place designated upon his license.
(6) No person shall have, keep, store or maintain any motor vehicle,
construction equipment, farm machinery or equipment, or
motorcycles on any public land in the Township of Shaler.
(7) No person shall place, cause to be placed or suffer to remain on any
private or public property within the Township of Shaler any
accumulation of ashes, garbage, rubbish, tires and rims and other
refuse materials, including but not limited to abandoned
refrigerators, hot-water heaters and tanks, furnaces, appliances
and other scrap metal and lumber. Nothing herein shall be
construed to prohibit the filling of land areas with earth, rocks and
masonry.
B. From and after the enactment of this article, in all residential zoning
districts:
(1) No person shall accumulate or store junk in any residential area
unless stored within a lawful, enclosed building or structure or
screened by a lawful fence or within a trash receptacle in such a
manner as to not be visible from beyond the lot boundaries.
(2) No person shall park, store or keep, or permit any person to park,
store or keep, any vehicle in which junk is being transported,
conveyed or hauled on any residential lot or on any street adjacent
to said lot in the Township between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00
§ 225-114 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-114
1:887
§ 225-115. License required.
On and after the effective date of this article, no person shall engage in or
continue to engage in business as a junk dealer or operate a junkyard in
the Township except as authorized by this article and without first having
obtained a license therefor from the Township.
§ 225-116. Application for license.
a.m. unless the vehicle is parked, stored or kept within a lawful,
enclosed building or structure or unless excavation, construction or
demolition operations covered by an active building or demolition
permit are in progress on the lot.
(3) No person shall accumulate or store any junked, abandoned or
discarded vehicle, trailer, boat, appliance or house furnishings on
private or public property within any residential zoning district in
the Township.
A. Application for a license to engage in business as a junk dealer or to
establish or operate a junkyard in the Township shall be made in writing
by the applicant under oath and in the form prescribed by the Township
and shall contain the name and address of the applicant. The
application shall also contain the address and description of the
premises upon which the junkyard is to be operated, the names and
addresses of any owner or owners of said property if other than the
applicant, any structures erected on the premises and a description of
the operation plan for said junkyard. If the applicant is a partnership or
association, the application shall furnish the names and addresses of all
partners. If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall furnish
the names and addresses of each officer and director thereof. The
application shall be signed by the applicant, if the applicant is an
individual; by all members of the association or partnership, if the
applicant is an association or partnership; or by the president and
attested by the secretary, if the applicant is a corporation. In addition,
any license application for the creation, expansion or modification of a
junkyard shall include a plan detailing the proposed junkyard and shall
include:
(1) Property setbacks;
(2) Location of public rights-of-way;
(3) All structures within 300 feet of the junkyard;
(4) Driveways;
(5) Entrances;
(6) Current and proposed structures;
(7) Screening;
§ 225-114 SHALER CODE § 225-116
1:888
§ 225-117. Bond required.
A bond in the penal sum as set from time to time by resolution of the
Board of Commissioners shall accompany every application for license.
The bond shall be executed by a surety company authorized by the laws
of Pennsylvania to transact business within the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania. The Township may, in lieu of such surety bond, accept a
bond executed by the applicant for license if such bond is secured by the
deposit with the Township Secretary of a cashier's check, treasurer's check
or certificate of deposit of a banking institution in the total sum as set from
time to time by resolution of the Board of Commissioners. The bond shall
be renewed and refiled annually, not later than January 1 of each year. The
bond shall be executed in favor of the Township of Shaler and shall be
for the use of the Township. The term of the bond shall be for one year.
A condition of the bond shall be that the applicant shall comply fully with
the Comprehensive Emergency Response Compensation and Liability Act of
2000 (42 U.S.C. §§ 9601 to 9675), the Pennsylvania Sites Cleanup Act (35
P.S. §§ 6020.101 to 6020.1305), and all other federal or state brownfields
acts so that the property, the expansion, redevelopment or reuse of which
is not complicated by the presence or potential presence of hazardous
substances, pollutants or contaminants and to further guarantee that any
obsolete or unused junkyard, junkyard facility and hazardous substance,
pollutant and contaminant shall be removed completely within six months
of cessation of use at the sole cost and expense of the applicant. It shall
be a further condition of the bond that if, upon and after the issuance of
such license, said licensee shall fully and faithfully observe and comply with
all of the provisions of this article, all state and federal environmental and
pollution statutes and any rules or regulations promulgated by virtue hereof
by the Township Board of Commissioners, then the obligation of said bond
shall be void; otherwise, it shall remain in full force, virtue and effect.
§ 225-118. Issuance and display of license.
The license provided for in this article shall be issued by the Township
after application shall have been made therefor by the person desiring
to be licensed. Such license shall state the name of the person to whom
(8) Buffers;
(9) Gross acreage of the site;
(10) Owner's name and address;
(11) The applicant's name and address; and
(12) The preparer of the plan's name and address.
B. The Township Board of Commissioners may require additional
information regarding the plans, depending on site-specific concerns
such as topography or neighboring properties. All permits and
applications shall include payment of the applicable permit fee.
§ 225-116 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-118
1:889
such license is issued and the premises from which such business is to be
conducted. Such license shall be posted conspicuously upon the premises
licensed thereunder. The name of the licensed junk dealer and the number
of the license under which he operates shall be placed conspicuously on the
outside of every vehicle used for business purposes by such dealer.
§ 225-119. License denial.
The Township shall not issue a license to an applicant to operate or maintain
a junkyard in the Township unless the junkyard meets the following
conditions:
A. Junkyards shall be set back at least 500 feet from any preexisting
single-family residential district, multifamily residential district, school,
church, public building, public recreation facility, hospital, nursing
home or day-care facility. On-site residences of the owner or operator
are exempted from this provision.
B. Junkyards shall have a minimum setback from the front property line to
the fence of 20 feet. There shall be a minimum setback from the side
and rear property lines to the fence of 15 feet.
C. The junkyard shall comply with all state and federal statutes and shall
not be visible from a state or federally funded or maintained
thoroughfare at any time of year.
D. Junkyards shall be surrounded by an opaque wood or masonry fence at
least six feet in height.
E. In addition to the fence, junkyards shall be completely surrounded by
vegetation that provides a year-round opaque screen that may
reasonably be expected to be at least six feet tall within two years of
planting. Plants shall be placed at regular intervals so as to provide a
continuous hedgerow without gaps or open spaces. The vegetation shall
be maintained as a continuous unbroken hedgerow for the entire period
the property is used as a junkyard and shall be planted not more than
four feet outside of the required fence. Dead or diseased foliage shall be
replaced at the next appropriate planting time. Each owner, operator or
person who maintains a junkyard shall use good husbandry techniques,
such as pruning and fertilizing, to maintain maximum density and
foliage.
F. The required fence shall enclose all operations, equipment, junk and
inoperable motor vehicles at all times unless the junk, equipment or
inoperable motor vehicles are in transport to or from the site.
G. All junkyards shall be maintained to protect the public from health and
safety nuisances and hazards.
H. Types of maintenance actions may include upkeep of the vegetative
screen, maintenance of the fence so that there are no holes, keeping all
§ 225-118 SHALER CODE § 225-119
1:890
§ 225-120. Transfer of license or sale of junkyard.
§ 225-121. License fee.
Every junk dealer or person operating or maintaining or intending to
establish or maintain a junkyard shall pay an annual license fee as set forth
from time to time by resolution of the Board of Commissioners for every
license or renewal thereof issued hereunder. All licenses shall be issued
for a term of one year, beginning January 1 and ending December 31 of
such year, provided that, in any case where a junk dealer's business shall
be established in the Township on or after the first day of July in any year,
the license fee payable by such junk dealer for the remainder of such year
shall be at half the yearly rate. All licenses must be renewed annually on
or before January 1 of each year. Such license shall be issued upon the
condition that the same may be summarily revoked in the event the licensee
is found to have given any false information or in any way misrepresented
any material fact upon which the Township has relied in granting such
license. No refunds will be given in such case.
§ 225-122. License limitation.
No person licensed under this shall, by virtue of one license, keep more
than one place of business within the Township or maintain more than one
junkyard for the purpose of buying, selling and dealing in junk. No person
shall engage in business as a junk dealer in any place other than the place
designated upon his license or maintain a junkyard in any place other than
the place designated upon his license.
§ 225-123. Keeping of records.
Every junk dealer shall provide and shall at all times keep and maintain a
book, in which shall be recorded, in the English language, at the time of
purchase or receipt of any junk, a description of every article or material
purchased, acquired or received by him, the date and hour of such
purchase, acquisition or receipt, and the name and address of the person
from whom such article or material was purchased or received and a full
and complete description, including trade names, serial or manufacturer's
numbers, if any, of every article or item of junk purchased, acquired or
received by him. Such book and all junk purchased, received or handled by
junk and operations within the confines of the fence and keeping
machinery in good working order.
A. No license issued under this article shall be transferable or assigned or
used by any person other than the person to whom it was issued, and no
junk dealer's license issued shall be used at any location other than the
location prescribed in the application upon which it is issued.
B. When a junkyard is sold, the new owner shall promptly notify the
Township of any change in ownership and shall apply for a transfer of
license prior to operating or maintaining said junkyard.
§ 225-119 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-123
1:891
any junk dealer shall at all times be subject to inspection by the Chief of
Police or any other official of the Township. Such records shall be retained
for a period of five years.
§ 225-124. Required holding period.
Every licensee hereunder shall keep and retain upon the licensed premises,
for a period of 24 hours after the purchase, acquisition or receipt thereof,
every item or article of junk so purchased, acquired or received by him
and placed, kept or stored on the licensed premises. The licensee shall not
disturb or reduce or alter the original form, shape or condition of the same
until such period of 24 hours has elapsed, except as otherwise provided.
§ 225-125. Maintenance and operation.
Every license hereunder shall constantly maintain the licensed premises in
the manner hereinafter prescribed.
§ 225-126. Inspections.
A. Such premises shall at all times be maintained so as not to constitute a
nuisance or a menace to the health and welfare of the community or to
residents nearby or a place for the breeding of rodents and vermin.
B. Such premises shall at all times be maintained in strict conformity with
all applicable provisions of the Property Maintenance Code of the
Township.
C. No garbage or other organic waste shall be stored in such premises,
and the area used by the junkyard shall not be used as a dump area for
trash or garbage.
D. The manner of storage and arrangement of junk and the drainage
facilities of the premises shall be such as to prevent the accumulation of
stagnant water upon the premises and to facilitate access for
firefighting purposes.
E. Fire lanes with a minimum of 20 feet shall be maintained so that no area
of junk shall span a distance of more than 50 feet.
F. All batteries, coolants, gasoline, diesel fuel, engine oil, any other
petroleum product and any other noxious or potentially contaminating
materials shall be removed from all junk within 24 hours of arrival to
the premises and shall be disposed of in a manner strictly complying
with all local, state and federal requirements.
G. Any activity or operation within the junkyard generating or likely to
generate significant noise or vibration, including but not limited to the
crushing of vehicles or other material, shall be limited to the hours of
7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
§ 225-123 SHALER CODE § 225-126
1:892
§ 225-127. Burning junk.
All burning of junk, rubbish or other material in any junkyard is prohibited
except in full compliance with Chapter 95 of the Township Code (relating to
outdoor burning).
§ 225-128. Storage near watercourse prohibited.
No junk, scrap or automobile bodies, motors or any other item of junk
as defined in this article shall be stored, maintained, situated, placed or
otherwise located within 200 feet of any river, stream, run, creek, irrigation
ditch or any other natural watercourse within the boundary lines of Shaler
Township.
§ 225-129. Zoning provisions prevail.
Nothing herein shall authorize or permit the conduct of any business
anywhere in the Township where the same shall not be a permitted use
under the terms of this chapter or where the same shall be a prohibited
use under this Chapter 225, Zoning, and under no conditions may a person
operate or maintain a junkyard in any Residential, Cemetery, Neighborhood
Shopping or General Commercial District in the Township.
A. Every junkyard in the Township shall at all times be subject to
inspection during reasonable hours of the day by the Code Enforcement
Officer, who is hereby empowered to inspect private property on which
motor vehicles and/or junk are stored and who shall from time to time
regularly inspect the premises of every licensee hereunder for the
purpose of determining whether said licensee has established and
maintained his premises in full compliance with the provisions of this
article and such rules and regulations which may hereafter be adopted
by the Township of Shaler regulating and licensing junk dealers and the
establishment and maintenance of junkyards.
B. The Code Enforcement Officer shall not less than twice yearly furnish to
the Township Board of Commissioners a report of such inspections, in
writing, and in the form prescribed by the Board of Commissioners.
§ 225-126 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-129
1:893

G.
Landscape and Bufferyards
§ 225-130. Applicability.
§ 225-131. Submission of conceptual landscape plan.
A. The bufferyard requirements established in this subchapter shall apply
to all new and expanded R-4 Multifamily, R-5 Apartment, PRD Planned
Residential Developments, as well as to all Neighborhood Shopping,
Commercial, Industrial and Institutional land uses in the Township
approved after this subchapter is adopted.
B. Screening of all dumpsters, refuse containers and trash containers is
required in all R-4 Multifamily, R-5 Apartment, PRD Planned Residential
Developments, as well as in all P Professional, NS Neighborhood
Shopping, GC General Commercial and I Industrial Zoning Districts.
C. Screening of all private recyclable containers on private premises not
open to the public is required in all R-4 Multifamily, R-5 Apartment,
PRD Planned Residential Developments, as well as in all P Professional,
NS Neighborhood Shopping, GC General Commercial and I Industrial
Zoning Districts.
D. Bufferyards shall not be required except in R-1 Limited One-Family
Districts, R-2 One-Family Districts, or R-3 Two-Family Districts or along
those areas where there are 200 feet or more separating adjoining
property lines or street right-of-way lines from any improved area,
accessory structure, storage area or use of land.
A. When an application or improvement on a lot necessitates a zoning or
building permit in an R-4 Multifamily, R-5 Apartment, PRD Planned
Residential Development, or in an NS Neighborhood Shopping, GC
General Commercial and I Industrial Zoning District, a conceptual
landscape plan shall also be submitted and shall include, illustrated at
scale, the locations of trees, shrubs and ground covers for the following:
(1) All required bufferyards with proposed plantings;
(2) All required planting independent of any bufferyard requirements;
(3) Any planting in excess of the requirements of this subchapter;
(4) Any existing trees or vegetation which are to be preserved;
(5) Any existing trees or vegetation which will be removed;
(6) The location and species of all existing trees six inches in diameter
at breast height (DBH). Applicants are encouraged to maximize the
retention of all healthy existing trees six inches or more DBH;
(7) The location and description of other landscape improvements,
such as earth berms, walls, fences, screens and paved areas; and
§ 225-130 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-131
1:895
§ 225-132. General landscaping requirements in R-4, R-5 - and PRD
Districts.
In all R-4 Multifamily Dwelling Districts, R-5 Apartment Zoning Districts,
and PRD Planned Residential Developments:
§ 225-133. Landscaping requirements for off-street parking and
service areas in R-4, R-5 and PRD Districts.
In all R-4 Multifamily Dwelling Districts, R-5 Apartment Zoning Districts,
and PRD Planned Residential Developments:
(8) Planting and installation details as necessary to insure compliance
with all required standards.
B. The conceptual landscape plan shall also be required in addition to any
stormwater management plan. Landscaping associated with any
stormwater management solution and applicable to the criteria
outlined in § 225-131A above shall be illustrated.
A. At least one deciduous tree shall be planted for each dwelling unit.
(1) Tree requirement may be met with a minimum of one deciduous
tree per 40 feet of linear street frontage planted in the front yard
no closer than 10 feet from the front lot line.
(2) Minimum size for new trees is two-inch DBH.
(3) All yard areas not utilized for off-street parking, driveways,
gardens, trees or shrubs or similar uses shall be seeded, sodded,
landscaped or paved with a permeable paving material within a
reasonable period of time and in no event later than 365 days after
the issuance of a building permit.
B. All dumpsters, refuse containers, trash containers and private
recyclable containers in all R-4 Multifamily Dwelling Districts, R-5
Apartment Zoning Districts, and PRD Planned Residential
Developments shall be screened completely and stored out of public
view in all cases except on collection day.
A. A five-foot-wide strip of ground cover, shrubbery, trees or other
landscape materials shall be provided between the right-of-way and all
open, off-street parking areas.
(1) With the exception of ingress and egress points, said strip shall be
landscaped and maintained to prohibit vehicular and pedestrian
access.
(2) Landscaping species at their mature heights shall not obstruct
visibility for traffic entering or leaving the lot or traveling on the
public street/alley.
§ 225-131 SHALER CODE § 225-133
1:896
§ 225-134. Landscaping requirements in NS, GC and I Zoning
Districts.
All yard areas in all NS Neighborhood Shopping, GC General Commercial
and I Industrial nonresidential zoning districts not utilized for off-street
parking, driveways, gardens, trees or shrubs or similar uses must be
seeded, sodded, landscaped or paved with a permeable paving material
within a reasonable period of time and in no event later than 180 days after
the issuance of a building permit.
§ 225-135. Nonresidential landscaping for off-street parking and
service areas.
In all NS Neighborhood Shopping, GC General Commercial and I Industrial
nonresidential zoning districts:
(3) Trees shall be placed an average of one tree per 40 feet of right-ofway
frontage.
B. All open, off-street parking areas of five or more spaces shall be
landscaped. The perimeter of parking areas shall be planted with
deciduous canopy trees at a number equal to one tree per 10 perimeter
parking spaces and spaced to provide maximum shading of the parking
area.
(1) At least one canopy tree per 10 parking spaces shall be provided.
This calculation can include perimeter trees and trees within the
parking area, depending on the size of the lot and number of
spaces.
(2) No parking space can be greater than 60 feet from the trunk of a
tree. A minimum of 160 square feet of planting area is required per
tree when the tree is within the parking lot.
(3) Where overhead utilities are present, ornamental trees may be
substituted at a ratio of three ornamental trees per required
canopy tree.
(4) The requirements of this section may be used to satisfy the
standards of Township buffer requirements.
C. Landscape islands and planting strips adjacent to off-street parking
areas shall be designed to capture stormwater runoff.
D. Landscape islands containing trees or other vegetation should be
designed with curbing that will allow water to pass into the island for
maximum reduction of stormwater runoff. Landscape islands may be
enclosed with curbing or a similar device in accordance with Township
standards if the paving material of the parking lot is constructed with
an approved permeable paving material.
§ 225-133 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-135
1:897
§ 225-136. Screening and bufferyards for R-4, R-5, PRD, P, NS, GC
and I Zoning Districts.
A. A five-foot-wide strip of ground cover, shrubbery, trees or other
landscape materials shall be provided between the right-of-way and all
open, off-street parking areas.
(1) With the exception of ingress and egress points, said strip shall be
landscaped and maintained to prohibit vehicular and pedestrian
access.
(2) Landscaping species at their mature heights shall not obstruct
visibility for traffic entering or leaving the lot or traveling on the
public street/alley.
(3) Trees shall be placed an average of one tree per 40 feet of right-ofway
frontage.
B. All open, off-street parking areas of five or more spaces shall be
landscaped.
(1) The perimeter of parking areas shall be planted with deciduous
canopy trees at a number equal to one tree per 10 perimeter
parking spaces and spaced to provide maximum shading of the
parking area.
(2) At least one canopy tree per 10 parking spaces shall be provided.
This calculation can include perimeter trees and trees within the
parking area, depending on the size of the lot and number of
spaces.
(3) No parking space can be greater than 60 feet from the trunk of a
tree. A minimum of 160 square feet of planting area is required per
tree when the tree is within the parking lot.
(4) Where overhead utilities are present, ornamental trees may be
substituted at a ratio of three ornamental trees per required
canopy tree.
(5) The requirements of this section may be used to satisfy the
standards of Township buffer requirements.
C. Landscape islands and planting strips adjacent to off-street parking
areas shall be designed to capture stormwater runoff.
(1) Landscape islands containing trees or other vegetation should be
designed with curbing that will allow water to pass into the island
for maximum reduction of stormwater runoff.
(2) Landscape islands may be enclosed with curbing or a similar device
in accordance with Township standards, if the paving material of
the parking lot is constructed with an approved permeable paving
material.
§ 225-135 SHALER CODE § 225-136
1:898
A. Applicability. The screening requirements of this section shall apply to
all dumpsters, trash containers and private recyclable containers in all
R-4 Multifamily, R-5 Apartment, PRD Planned Residential Development,
P Professional, NS Neighborhood Shopping, GC General Commercial
and I Industrial Zoning Districts.
B. Screening requirement.
(1) All dumpsters on all public and private premises in all R-4
Multifamily, R-5 Apartment, PRD Planned Residential
Development, P Professional, NS Neighborhood Shopping, GC
General Commercial and I Industrial Zoning Districts shall be
screened completely and stored out of public view in all cases:
(a) The screening shall be of sufficient height and density to
completely hide the dumpster from public view.
(b) This provision shall apply to all dumpsters, whether public or
private.
(2) Refuse containers, trash containers and private recyclable
containers on all private premises in all R-4 Multifamily, R-5
Apartment, PRD Planned Residential Development, P Professional,
NS Neighborhood Shopping, GC General Commercial and I
Industrial Zoning Districts that are not stored inside a garage shall
be screened to hide the entire trash container or private recyclable
container from public view except on collection day:
(a) The screening shall be of sufficient height and density to
completely hide the refuse, trash and private recyclable
containers from public view.
(b) All screening corrals shall be permanently affixed to the
ground and shall consist of either fencing or vegetation.
(3) Placement for collection:
(a) Trash containers and private recyclable containers may be
placed in the front yard or at the curbline commencing at 4:00
p.m. on the day preceding the day designated for the pickup of
trash and recyclable materials.
(b) The resident, owner, person or occupant in charge of the
property from where the trash or private recyclable materials
has been picked up shall remove or cause to be removed from
the curbline or front yard and shall cause to be placed out of
view from the street the emptied trash, garbage, rubbish,
recyclable materials or other refuse container or private
recyclable containers no later than 12:00 midnight on the day
of pickup.
§ 225-136 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-136
1:899
(c) Trash containers and private recyclable containers in the
above zoning districts must not be visible to public view on
noncollection days.
C. Public recycling containers situated on premises open to the public are
exempt from the screening requirement of this subchapter.
D. Bufferyards in the R-4 Multifamily Dwelling District, the R-5 Apartment
Zoning District, in PRD Planned Residential Developments, as well as in
all nonresidential zoning districts, shall comply with the buffering and
screening requirements on the attached chart.
E. Buffers shall be of such nature and density so as to screen activities,
structures and uses on the property from view from the normal level of
a first-story window on an abutting lot at 75% opacity and shall provide
a year-round effective visual screen.
F. Buffers required along lot lines shall extend to the street right-of-way
line unless the buffer would encroach on a line-of-sight triangle.
G. In situations where the required buffer width is partially or completely
contained within an existing easement (e.g., power or natural gas
transmission, etc.), the screening requirements shall be met outside of
the easement area.
H. Buffers where vegetation is nonexistent or is inadequate to meet the
screening requirements shall be planted so as to provide a year-round
screen.
I. Plantings shall consist of evergreen and deciduous trees native to the
region. Deciduous trees shall be two inches in diameter and evergreen
trees shall be at least six feet in height. Evergreen trees planted shall
be a minimum of six feet in height at time of planting and shall be a
species which will achieve a height of at least 20 feet at maturity. All
shrubs planted shall be a minimum of three feet in height at time of
planting and shall be a species which will achieve a height of at least six
feet at maturity.
J. All plantings in buffers shall be limited to 34% of one genus of tree or
shrub.
K. Nonvegetative materials utilized to satisfy screening requirements, in
addition to the use of existing vegetation and/or supplemental
plantings, may consist of buffer walls, fences, earthen berms or any
combination thereof. If walls or fences are to be utilized, their
placement and installation shall be such so as to have minimal
disturbance of existing vegetation and located to provide an effective
visual screen.
L. A buffering wall must be a maximum of 12 inches wide, a maximum of
four feet high and placed a minimum of three feet from the lot line.
§ 225-136 SHALER CODE § 225-136
1:900
§ 225-137. Replacement requirements.
Vegetation that is required to be planted or preserved by this subchapter
shall be replaced with equivalent vegetation if it is not living within one
year of issuance of a certificate of occupancy. Preserved trees which
subsequently die shall be replaced by the requisite number of living trees in
according with the standards set forth in this subchapter.
§ 225-138. Storage requirements of refuse, trash and private
recyclable containers in R-1, R-2 or R-3 District.
Buffering walls over four feet in height must be designed and sealed by
a professional engineer.
M. A fence six feet in height may be placed as a buffer, and said fence may
be placed at the lot line. Fencing shall meet minimum opacity
requirements.
N. Service/utility areas:
(1) Service areas and equipment/structures related to garbage
collection, utilities, communications and the like shall be screened
from public rights-of-way and adjoining property through the use of
landscaping, berming and/or fencing or a combination thereof that
creates 75% opacity so as to block any view of the service areas and
equipment/structures from all points from the public right-of-way
and adjoining property when viewed from ground level.
(2) Landscaping three to four feet in height with at least 75% opacity
shall be provided in order to screen the portion of the parking
exposed.
A. In all R-1 Limited One-Family, R-2 One-Family, or R-3 Two-Family
Districts, all refuse containers, trash containers and private recyclable
containers on noncollection days shall be stored either inside a garage
or shall be located or placed behind the front facade line of the
dwelling.
B. Where a lot has more than one frontage on a street or trafficway, all
refuse containers, trash containers and private recyclable containers on
noncollection days shall be stored either inside a garage or shall not be
situated or placed beyond the front facade line on any side of the
dwelling adjacent to any street or trafficway.
C. Placement for collection:
(1) Trash containers and private recyclable containers may be placed
in the front yard or at the curbline commencing at 4:00 p.m. on the
day preceding the day designated for the pickup of trash and
recyclable materials.
§ 225-136 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-138
1:901
§ 225-139. Enforcement and maintenance.
§ 225-140. Coordination with other Township ordinances.
A landowner and/or developer shall be responsible for all other landscape
and bufferyard requirements related to property maintenance as identified
in the Township Code.
§ 225-141. Conflict.
(2) The resident, owner, person or occupant in charge of the property
from where the trash or private recyclable materials has been
picked up shall remove or cause the emptied containers to be
removed from the curbline or front yard and shall cause the
emptied containers to be placed or stored either inside a garage or
behind the front facade line of the dwelling no later than 12:00
midnight on the day of pickup.
A. The Township Code Enforcement Officer shall enforce the requirements
of this subchapter. Occupancy permits shall not be issued until an
applicant completes the landscaping requirements of this subchapter.
An approved applicant shall guarantee the plants for one year or the
owner will replace them. The property owner shall maintain all trees
and vegetation.
B. The Township Code Enforcement Officer may issue a temporary
occupancy permit to those applicants from November 1 to March 1 if
inclement weather delays a project. Requests for a temporary
occupancy shall also be approved by the Township Manager.
A. If the provisions of this subchapter conflict with other ordinances or
regulations, the more stringent limitation or requirement shall govern
or prevail to the extent of the conflict.
B. Where a discrepancy exists between any chart attached to this
subchapter and that which is described in the text of this subchapter,
the text of the subchapter controls and shall be the final authority.216
216. Editor's Note: See Chart of Screening and Buffering Requirements attached to this
chapter.
§ 225-138 SHALER CODE § 225-141
1:902
H.
Swimming Pools
§ 225-142. Location on the property.
A. Non-corner lots. On non-corner lots, a swimming pool shall be located
directly behind the applicant's dwelling and shall be set back a
minimum of 10 feet from all property lines.
B. Corner lots abutting two streets. On corner lots abutting two streets, a
swimming pool shall be located behind the rear facade line of the
applicant's dwelling and shall be set back a minimum of 10 feet from
any non-street-abutting property line.
C. No swimming pool or appurtenances, including decks and shelters,
shall be erected nearer to any property line than a building could be
erected in the same use district as set forth in this chapter.
D. No swimming pool shall be so located as to interfere with the operation
of a well or on-site septic system or to be located where there is a
potential danger of a septic system discharging into the pool or onto the
adjacent area around the pool.
E. No swimming pool or appurtenances shall be erected within a public
right-of-way or municipal easement unless the applicant has first
entered into a license agreement allowing the structure to be located
within the public right-of-way under terms and conditions agreed to by
Shaler Township and its Municipal Solicitor.
§ 225-142 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-142
1:903

I.
Fireworks
§ 225-143. Possession, sale and use of ground and handheld
sparkling devices, novelties and toy caps.
A. The sale of ground and handheld sparkling devices, novelties and toy
caps shall be a permitted use in all NS Neighborhood Shopping
Districts, in all GC General Commercial Districts and in all I Industrial
Zoning Districts in the Township.
B. The possession and use of ground and handheld sparkling devices,
novelties and toy caps shall be permitted in all zoning districts in the
Township.
§ 225-143 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-143
1:905

ARTICLE X
Sexually Oriented Businesses
§ 225-144. Classification of businesses.
Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows:
§ 225-145. Permit required.
A. Adult arcades;
B. Adult bookstores or adult video stores;
C. Adult mini motion-picture theaters;
D. Adult motels;
E. Adult motion-picture theaters;
F. Escort agencies;
G. Nude model studios;
H. Sexual encounter centers; and
I. Any other adult-oriented establishment.
A. No person shall operate a sexually oriented business without a valid
permit.
B. An application for a permit to operate a sexually oriented business must
be made on a form provided by the Township. The application must be
accompanied by a sketch or diagram showing the floor plan and plot
plan configuration of the premises, including a statement of the total
floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not
be professionally prepared but must be drawn to a designated scale or
drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an
accuracy of plus or minus six inches. Parking facilities must be
specifically identified and shall meet all Zoning Ordinance
requirements. Nonconforming structures and those structures not
having the required parking sites shall not be issued permits unless the
sexually oriented business was in existence as a lawful use prior to the
date of this article.
C. The applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of this
article, and the premises must be inspected and found to be in
compliance with the law by the Zoning Officer/Building Inspector and
the Fire Marshal.
D. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an
individual, he must sign the application for a permit as applicant. If a
person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is other than
an individual, each individual who has a ten-percent or greater interest
§ 225-144 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-145
1:907
§ 225-146. Special exception and issuance of permit.
in the business must sign the application for a permit as applicant. If a
corporation is listed as owner of a sexually oriented business or as the
entity which wishes to operate such a business, each individual having
a direct or indirect interest of ten-percent or greater in the corporation
must sign the application for a permit as applicant.
E. The fact that a person possesses other types of Township permits does
not exempt the person from the requirement of obtaining a sexually
oriented business permit.
A. The Zoning Hearing Board of the Township of Shaler shall hear and
decide requests for a special exception to operate a sexually oriented
business and shall approve the issuance of a permit to an applicant
within 30 days after receipt of an application and permit fee, unless it
finds one or more of the following to be true:
(1) An applicant is under 18 years of age.
(2) An applicant or an applicant's spouse is overdue in his payment to
the Township of taxes, fees, fines or penalties assessed against him
or imposed upon him in relation to a sexually oriented business.
(3) An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably
necessary for issuance of the special exception and permit or has
falsely answered a question or request for information on the
application form.
(4) An applicant is residing with a person who has been denied a
permit by the Township to operate a sexually oriented business
within the preceding 12 months or residing with a person whose
license to operate a sexually oriented business has been revoked
within the preceding 12 months.
(5) The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business have
been reviewed and have been disapproved by either the Zoning
Officer/Building Inspector or the Fire Marshal as not being in
compliance with applicable laws and ordinances and the Zoning
Hearing Board affirms such determination.
(6) The permit fee required by this article has not been paid.
(7) An applicant of the proposed establishment is in violation of, or is
not in compliance with, any of the provisions of this article.
(8) An individual applicant, or any individual holding a direct or
indirect interest of more than 10% of a corporate applicant, or any
of the officers and directors of a corporate applicant, if the
applicant is a corporation, or any of the partners, including limited
partners, if the applicant is a partnership, or the manager or other
person in charge of the operation of the applicant's business has or
§ 225-145 SHALER CODE § 225-146
1:908
§ 225-147. Fees.
The Township will establish an annual fee for an occupancy permit for a
sexually oriented business.
§ 225-148. Inspection of premises.
§ 225-149. Expiration of permit.
Each permit shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be
renewed only by making application to the Zoning Officer. Applications for
renewal should be made at least 30 days before the expiration date and,
when made fewer than 30 days before the expiration date, the pendency of
the application will not prevent the expiration of the permit.
§ 225-150. Suspension of permit.
The Zoning Officer/Building Inspector or an inspector shall suspend a
permit for a period not to exceed 30 days if he determines that a permittee
or an employee of a permittee has:
have been convicted of an offense involving sexual misconduct
within the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, including, but not
limited to, prostitution, obscenity and possession of child
pornography, or convicted of any offense in any jurisdiction other
than the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania that would have
constituted an offense involving sexual misconduct if committed
within the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. In order for approval
to be denied pursuant to this subsection, the person or persons'
conviction or release in connection with the sexual misconduct
offense must have occurred within two years of the date of
application in the event of a misdemeanor and within five years of
the date of application in the event of a felony.
B. If the special exception is granted, the permit shall state on its face the
name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration
date, and the address of the sexually oriented business. The permit
shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the
sexually oriented business so that it may be easily read at any time.
A. An applicant or permittee shall permit representatives of the Police
Department, Fire Marshal, the Zoning Officer/Building Inspector, or
other Township departments or agencies to inspect the premises of a
sexually oriented business for the purpose of ensuring compliance with
the law at any time that the sexually oriented business is occupied or
open for business.
B. A person who operates a sexually oriented business or his agent or
employee violates this Zoning Chapter of the Township if he refuses to
permit such lawful inspection of the premises at any time it is occupied
or open for business.
§ 225-146 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-150
1:909
§ 225-151. Revocation of permit.
A. Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this article;
B. Engaged in excessive use of alcoholic beverages while on the sexually
oriented business premises;
C. Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business
premises as authorized by this article;
D. Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the sexually oriented
business premises; or
E. Failed to man managers' stations and/or maintain viewing rooms.
A. The Zoning Officer or Building Inspector shall revoke a permit if a cause
of suspension set forth in this section occurs and the permit has been
suspended within the preceding 12 months.
B. The Zoning Officer or Building Inspector shall revoke a permit if he
determines that:
(1) A permittee, or any of the persons specified in § 225-146A(8), is or
has been convicted of the offenses specified in § 225-146A(8);
(2) A permittee gave false or misleading information in the material
submitted to the Township or the Zoning Hearing Board during the
application process;
(3) A permittee or an employee of a permittee has knowingly allowed
possession, use or sale of controlled substances on the premises;
(4) A permittee or an employee of a permittee has knowingly allowed
prostitution on the premises;
(5) A permittee or an employee of a permittee knowingly operated the
sexually oriented business during a period of time when the
permittee's permit was suspended;
(6) A permittee or an employee of a permittee has knowingly allowed
any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation,
masturbation or other explicit sexual conduct to occur in or on the
permitted premises; or
(7) A permittee is delinquent in payment to the Township or state of
any taxes or fees relating to sexually oriented businesses.
C. When the Zoning Officer or Building Inspector revokes a permit, the
revocation shall continue for one year, and the permittee shall not be
issued a sexually oriented business permit for one year from the date
revocation became effective, except that, if the revocation is pursuant
to Subsection B(1) above, the revocation shall be effective for two years
in the event of a misdemeanor or five years in the case of a felony.
§ 225-150 SHALER CODE § 225-151
1:910
§ 225-152. Transfer of permit.
A permittee shall not transfer his permit to another person. A permittee
shall not operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a
permit at any place other than the address designated in the application.
§ 225-153. Location.
D. After denial of an application, or denial of a renewal of an application,
or suspension or revocation of a permit, the applicant or licensee or
permittee shall have the right to appeal said action and to seek prompt
judicial review of such administrative action in any court of competent
jurisdiction.
A. A person is guilty of a violation of this chapter if he operates or causes
to be operated a sexually oriented business in any location in which a
sexually oriented business is not a permitted use. No sexually oriented
businesses shall be located outside a location in which a sexually
oriented business is a permitted use. Sexually oriented businesses, as
defined herein, shall be permitted only as a special exception in an I
Industrial District.
B. A person is guilty of a violation of this chapter if he operates or causes
to be operated a sexually oriented business within the below-listed
distances of the following institutions or residences, and a special
exception shall not be granted and no permit will be issued for any such
sexually oriented business which intends to be located within the
below-listed distances of such institutions or residences:
(1) A church: 500 feet.
(2) A public or private pre-elementary, elementary, or secondary
school: 1,000 feet.
(3) A public library: 500 feet.
(4) A child-care facility or nursery school: 500 feet.
(5) A public park adjacent to any residential district: 1,000 feet.
(6) A child-oriented business: 500 feet.
(7) A residence: 200 feet.
C. A person is guilty of a violation of the chapter if he causes or permits
the operation, establishment, substantial enlargement, or transfer of
ownership of control of a sexually oriented business, and no special
exception shall be granted and no permit shall be issued for any such
sexually oriented business intended to be located within 750 feet of
another sexually oriented business.
D. A person is guilty of a violation of the chapter if he causes or permits
the operation, establishment or maintenance of more than one sexually
§ 225-151 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-153
1:911
§ 225-154. Exhibition of sexually explicit films or videos.
oriented business in the same building, structure or portion thereof;
or the increase of floor areas of any sexually oriented business in
any building, structure or portion thereof containing another sexually
oriented business.
E. For the purpose of this article, measurement shall be made in a straight
line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the
nearest portion of the building or structure used as a part of the
premises where a sexually oriented business is conducted to the
nearest property line of the premises of a church, public or private preelementary,
elementary or secondary school, public library, child-care
facility or nursery school, or to the nearest boundary of an affected
public park or residence.
F. For purposes of Subsection C of this section, the distance between any
two sexually oriented businesses shall be measured in a straight line,
without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest
exterior wall of the structure in which each business is located.
G. Any sexually oriented business lawfully operating on date of enactment
of this article that is in violation of Subsections A through F of this
section shall be deemed a nonconforming use. Such nonconforming
uses shall not be increased, enlarged, extended or altered, except that
the use may be changed to a conforming use. In the event that two or
more sexually oriented businesses are within 750 feet of one another
and otherwise in a permissible location, the sexually oriented business
which was first established and continually operating at a particular
location is the conforming use and the later-established business is
nonconforming.
H. A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use is
not rendered a nonconforming use by the location, subsequent to the
grant or renewal of the sexually oriented business permit, of a church,
public or private pre-elementary, elementary or secondary school,
public library, child-care facility, nursery school, public park or
residence within those distances set forth in this section of the sexually
oriented business. This provision applies only to the renewal of a valid
permit and does not apply when an application for a special exception
and a permit is submitted after a permit has expired or has been
revoked.
A. A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented
business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises in a
viewing room of less than 150 square feet of floor space a film or
videocassette or other video or other image-production or reproduction
which depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas
shall comply with the following requirements:
§ 225-153 SHALER CODE § 225-154
1:912
(1) The application for a permit to operate a sexually oriented business
shall be accompanied by a floor plan and plot plan diagram of the
premises showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one or
more manager's stations, the location of all viewing rooms,
partitions and doors and the location of all overhead lighting
fixtures and designating any portion of the premises in which
patrons will not be permitted. A manager's station may not exceed
32 square feet of floor area. The diagram shall also designate the
place at which the permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted.
A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or
architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram
should be oriented to the north or to some designated street or
object and should be drawn to a designated scale or with marked
dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all
areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus
six inches. The Zoning Officer may waive the foregoing diagram for
renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was
previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the
premises has not been altered since it was prepared.
(2) The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the
applicant.
(3) No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station
may be made without the prior approval of the Zoning Officer.
(4) It is the duty of the owners and operators of the premises to ensure
that at least one employee is on duty and situated in each
manager's station at all times that any patron is present inside the
premises.
(5) The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner
that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of
every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access
for any purpose, excluding rest rooms. Rest rooms may not contain
video reproduction or viewing equipment. If the premises has two
or more manager's stations designated, then the interior of the
premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an
unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron
is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the
manager's stations. The view required in this subsection must be by
direct line of sight from the manager's station.
(6) It shall be the duty of the owners and operators, and it shall also be
the duty of any agents and employees present on the premises, to
ensure that the view area specified in Subsection A(5) remains
unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or
other materials at all times and to ensure that no patron is
permitted access to any area of the premises which has been
designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the
application filed pursuant to Subsection A(1) of this section.
§ 225-154 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-154
1:913
§ 225-155. Exemptions.
It is a defense to prosecution under this section that a person appearing in
a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated:
(7) No viewing room may be occupied by more than one person at any
time. No connections or openings to an adjoining viewing room
shall be permitted.
(8) The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of
sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are
permitted access at an illumination of not less than one footcandle
as measured at the floor level.
(9) It shall be the duty of the owners and operators, and it shall also be
the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises, to
ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at all
times that any patron is present in the premises.
B. No sexually oriented business, other than an adult motel, shall open to
do business before 10:00 a.m., Monday through Saturday, prevailing
time; and no sexually oriented business, other than an adult motel, shall
remain open after 10:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday, prevailing
time. No sexually oriented business, other than an adult motel, shall be
open for business on any Sunday or on a legal holiday as set forth in the
Act of May 31, 1893, P.L. 188, § 1, as amended, 44 P.S. § 11.
C. A person having a duty under Subsection A(1) through (9) or a duty
under Subsection B is guilty of a violation of the chapter if he knowingly
fails to fulfill that duty.
A. By a proprietary school, licensed by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, or a college, junior college or university supported
entirely or partly by taxation;
B. By a private college or university which maintains and operates
educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college,
junior college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or
C. In a structure:
(1) Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no
other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for
viewing; and
(2) Where, in order to participate in a class, a student must enroll at
least three days in advance of the class; and
(3) Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any one
time.
§ 225-154 SHALER CODE § 225-156
1:914
§ 225-156. Injunction.
A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented
business without a valid permit or in violation of this article is subject to an
action in equity or a suit for injunction as well as citations for violations of
the Zoning Ordinance.
§ 225-157. Conflict and repealer of other ordinances.
Township of Shaler Ordinance No. 1714 and all other ordinances or parts of
ordinances are repealed insofar as they conflict with the provisions of this
article; however, such repeal shall not affect any act done or any liability
accrued under any such prior ordinance herein repealed or superseded, and
all such liabilities or violations shall continue and may be enforced in the
same manner as if such repeal or supersession had not been made; and any
offense or violation committed and any penalty or forfeiture incurred under
any such ordinance herein repealed or superseded may be prosecuted in
the same manner as if this article had not been approved.
§ 225-156 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-157
1:915

ARTICLE XI
Nonconforming Uses, Structures And Signs
§ 225-158. General rules.
§ 225-159. Nonconforming signs.
§ 225-160. Nonconforming structures and buildings.
A nonconforming structure or nonconforming building may be enlarged,
increased, extended or reconstructed to occupy a floor area not more than
25% greater than was occupied at the time when it became nonconforming.
A structure which does not have a floor area may be enlarged, increased,
extended or reconstructed to occupy an area of land not more than 25%
greater than was occupied at the time when it became nonconforming.
§ 225-161. Nonconforming use within structure or building.
A nonconforming use within a structure or building may be enlarged,
increased or extended to occupy a floor area within such building not
more than 50% greater than was occupied at the time when it became
nonconforming.
§ 225-162. Nonconforming use of land.
A nonconforming use of land which does not involve a structure or building
may be enlarged, increased or extended to occupy an area of land on the
A. Nonconforming signs, nonconforming structures, nonconforming
buildings and nonconforming uses may continue until they are removed
or discontinued, subject to the limitations provided in this chapter.
B. No nonconforming sign, structure, building or use shall be changed to
another nonconforming sign, structure, building or use.
C. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as authorization for or
approval of the continuance of any sign, structure, building or use in
violation of the zoning regulations or other ordinances in effect as of the
effective date of this chapter. Any sign, structure, building or use which
is enlarged, increased, extended or reconstructed pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter to occupy a floor area or land area greater
than existed at the time when it became nonconforming shall comply
with the height, area and yard requirements applicable at the time of
such change to the district in which it is located.
A. A nonconforming sign may be repaired or reconstructed, provided that
no structural alterations may be made which increase the gross surface
area of the sign or of the land occupied by the sign by more than 25%.
B. The substitution of poster panels and painted boards on nonconforming
signs shall be permitted.
§ 225-158 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-162
1:917
same lot not more than 25% greater than was occupied at the time when it
became nonconforming.
§ 225-163. Change of boundaries.
Whenever the boundaries of a district shall be changed so as to transfer an
area from one zoning district to another zoning district, the provisions of
this chapter shall thereafter apply to any uses, structures, buildings or signs
made nonconforming by such change.
§ 225-164. Damage or destruction by casualty.
A nonconforming sign, structure or building which is damaged or destroyed
by casualty may be restored, provided that:
§ 225-165. Abandonment or discontinuance.
When a nonconforming sign, structure, building or use is abandoned or
discontinued for a continuous period of two years or more, any future use,
structure, building or sign shall be in conformity with the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 225-166. Existing nonconforming lots of record.
Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the erection of a structure in a district
where permitted, upon a lot whose lot area or lot width does not meet the
requirements for the district in which the lot is located, if:
§ 225-167. Nonconforming home occupations.
A. The restored structure, building or sign may not be enlarged, increased
or extended to occupy a floor area or land area more than 25% greater
than was occupied at the time when it became nonconforming; and
B. Such restoration is started within six months of the occurrence of the
casualty and diligently prosecuted to completion within 24 months.
A. Such lot was held under separate ownership at the effective date of this
chapter; and
B. A variance from the minimum applicable front yard depth, side yard
width or rear yard depth requirements shall be obtained through the
action of the Zoning Hearing Board.
A. All home occupations in existence prior to the adoption date of this
section are in violation of this chapter unless the home occupation was
granted a special exception by the Shaler Township Zoning Hearing
Board or unless the home occupation predates the original adoption of
the Township Zoning Ordinance.
B. Any home occupation which is operating without having been granted
previously a special exception from the Township Zoning Hearing Board
§ 225-162 SHALER CODE § 225-167
1:918
§ 225-168. Nonconforming communications towers.
All lawfully existing nonconforming communications towers shall be subject
to the following requirements:
or which does not predate the Township Zoning Ordinance is hereby
required to obtain a no-impact home-based business permit from the
Township Code Enforcement Officer.
C. Any home occupation which has been granted previously a special
exception by the Township Zoning Hearing Board prior to the adoption
of this chapter and operating in compliance with a previously granted
special exception shall be entitled to continue to operate under those
terms (at that address). However, any home occupation approved
previously by the Zoning Hearing Board that has acquired any feature
not approved by the Board shall not be entitled to continue, and such
business or commercial activity must obtain a no-impact home-based
permit from the Code Enforcement Officer.
A. A nonconforming communications tower or a communications facility
may be utilized for co-location.
B. A nonconforming communications tower may not be increased in
height.
C. If a nonconforming communications tower or communications facility
ceases to be utilized or becomes obsolete, the obsolete or unused
communications tower or facility shall be removed completely within
six months of cessation of use.
§ 225-167 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-168
1:919

ARTICLE XII
Applications For Permits
§ 225-169. Building permits.
A. Requirements for permits. No building or other structure shall be
erected, moved, extended, structurally altered or demolished without a
building permit therefor having been issued by the Building Inspector
or a building code official.
B. Effect of application. Every application for a building permit shall be
deemed to be an application for a zoning certificate and occupancy
permit.
C. Form and content of applications. All applications for building permits
shall be made on forms furnished by the Zoning Officer or a building
code official and shall be completed in full with accurate information
and submitted in duplicate, with a plot plan prepared and sealed by a
land surveyor or architect registered to do business in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. Each plot plan shall show the following
information and data with a narrative statement and detail building
plans attached:
(1) Owner's name.
(2) Bearings and distances along all property lines.
(3) Public streets abutting property with right-of-way width.
(4) Area of property.
(5) Lot and block number.
(6) Lot number, plan name and where the plan is recorded if property
is in a recorded plan.
(7) All existing dwellings, buildings and accessory structures,
indicating descriptions and height of each, with floor and basement
elevations.
(8) All proposed dwellings, buildings and accessory structures,
indicating dimensions, descriptions and height of each, with
proposed floor and basement elevations.
(9) Front yard, side yard and rear yard dimensions.
(10)Off-street parking and loading areas and driveways indicating the
dimensions and number of parking spaces as required by this
chapter.
(11) Location of signs, with size and details.
(12) Location and size of all existing utilities abutting or crossing
property.
§ 225-169 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-169
1:921
(13) Topography with two-foot contours and/or elevations, showing
existing and finished grades, except property used for the
construction of a single-family or two-family dwelling requiring no
greater than five feet of fill or cut.
(14) Stormwater management facilities to collect and control surface
water runoff from property, with calculations of predevelopment
and post-development surface water runoff and the method of
detaining increased runoff, except in cases in which an exemption
or exception is provided in the applicable stormwater management
regulations adopted by the Township.
(15) Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and facilities
conforming to the requirements and specifications of Pennsylvania
DEP's Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Manual, latest
edition.
(16) Compliance with the requirements and specifications of Chapter
130, Flood Damage Prevention, Article II, Floodplain Management,
and any amendments thereto, if applicable.
(17) Compliance with the requirements and specifications of Chapter
140, Grading, Excavating and Filling, and any amendments thereto,
if applicable.
(18) Detailed building plans conforming to the requirements and
specifications of the Uniform Construction Code (UCC), as adopted
by the Township, and as from time to time amended. If the building
is commercial or industrial in nature, the plans must be approved
and sealed by the State Department of Labor and Industry.
(19) A narrative statement describing in detail the work to be done and
indicating the proposed use for each building or structure to be
constructed on the property, the number and nature of businesses
proposed in each building and if commercial or industrial, with the
number of employees anticipated for each. If the application is
made by someone other than the owner of the property, the
application shall be accompanied by a duly verified affidavit from
the owner authorizing such application to be made.
(20)No zoning (or building) permit shall be issued pursuant to this
chapter until the stormwater management plan for the property or
lot has been approved in accordance with Chapter 195, Subdivision
of Land. Further, the municipality shall not issue the permit until
any required floodplain, dam safety or obstructions or erosion/
sedimentation approvals/permits have been received from the
applicable local, county or state agencies. Copies of the approval/
permit must be filed with the municipality.
D. Procedure. The Building Inspector or building code official shall render
a decision either approving or disapproving the application for a
building permit within 30 days after the application is filed, provided
§ 225-169 SHALER CODE § 225-169
1:922
§ 225-170. Zoning certificates and occupancy permits; fee.
that any disapproval of the application shall contain a brief explanation
setting forth the reasons for said disapproval and the manner in which
the application can be corrected and/or modified to obtain the required
approval. If no decision is rendered on the application within 30 days,
the application shall be deemed to be approved, and the permit shall
be deemed to have been granted immediately unless the applicant has
agreed in writing to an extension of time. No agreement to extension of
time for action may be made a part of an application form, nor may any
such agreement be required of any applicant under threat of denial of
the application.
A. It shall be a violation of this chapter to use or occupy or permit the use
or occupancy of any building, structure, land or premises or part
thereof hereafter created, erected, changed or converted or enlarged in
its use or structure until a zoning certificate and occupancy permit have
been issued therefor by the Zoning Officer, stating that the proposed
use of the building, structure or land conforms to the requirements of
this chapter.
B. All applications for a zoning certificate and occupancy permit shall be
made on forms furnished by the Zoning Officer and shall be completed
in full with accurate information and submitted in duplicate with the
following information and data, together with a narrative statement:
(1) Owner's name.
(2) Area of property.
(3) Lot and block number.
(4) Lot number, plan name and where recorded if property is in a
recorded plan.
(5) Location of existing parking, off-street loading areas and
driveways, indicating number and size of parking spaces, if
applicable.
(6) Location of any existing or proposed signs with details, if
applicable.
(7) A narrative statement, indicating the present and proposed use of
the property and of each building or structure on the property, the
number of dwelling units in each building or the number of retail or
services in each building, with the number of employees
anticipated for each. If the application is made by someone other
than the owner of the property, the application shall be
accompanied by a duly verified affidavit from the owner,
authorizing such application to be made.
§ 225-169 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-170
1:923
§ 225-171. Use registration permits for sale of property.
(8) A statement showing compliance with all stormwater management
requirements as set forth in this chapter.217
C. No zoning certificate and occupancy permit shall be issued until all
erection, construction or alteration has been completed and the use
established, inspected and approved by the Zoning Officer. No such
certificate shall be issued for a proposed change in use until such
change has been established and has been inspected and approved by
the Zoning Officer. The certificate shall be issued or written notice shall
be given to the applicant, stating why a certificate cannot be issued, no
later than five days after the Zoning Officer is notified in writing that
the building or premises is ready for occupancy.
D. A temporary zoning certificate and occupancy permit may be issued by
the Zoning Officer for a period not to exceed six months during
alterations or partial occupancy of a building pending its completion,
provided that such temporary certificate may require such conditions
and safeguards as will protect the safety of the occupants and the
public.
E. In all cases under this section, a fee shall be charged for a zoning
certificate and occupancy permit with respect to single-family
residential zoning use, and a fee shall be charged for each certificate
and occupancy permit with respect to each zoning use. The Board of
Commissioners may, from time to time by resolution, either increase or
decrease said fee.
F. A zoning certificate and occupancy permit may be revoked or
suspended by the Zoning Officer if he finds that the holder of the
certificate has failed to comply with conditions attached to the issuance
of the certificate or if he finds that the building or use does not comply
with the requirements of this chapter.
G. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, a zoning certificate and
occupancy permit shall not be required for the following:
(1) Residential swimming pools.
(2) Utility sheds.
(3) Chimneys.
(4) Interior or exterior alterations to an existing structure if such does
not involve enlargement of the structure or a change in its use.
A. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any owner to sell any building
or structure or interest therein situated in the Township of Shaler,
217. Editor's Note: See now Ch. 190, Stormwater Management.
§ 225-170 SHALER CODE § 225-171
1:924
§ 225-172. Special exceptions and variances; fees.
§ 225-173. Conditional uses; fees.
unless the owner shall first deliver to the purchaser at or prior to the
time for settlement a use registration permit:
(1) Indicating the zoning classification and legality of the existing use
of the building or structure (except one- or two-family residences
and places of religious worship) to be sold; and
(2) Also disclosing whether there exists any notice of an uncorrected
violation of the housing, building, safety or fire ordinances and
regulations as to any building or structure. A certificate from the
Zoning Officer certifying that the property has been approved or
designated as a nonconforming use shall be deemed compliance
with this section.
B. All applications for a zoning certificate shall be on forms furnished by
the Zoning Officer, shall be completed in full and in duplicate, and shall
contain a description and location of the building or structure and its
present and proposed use.
A. Any application for a special exception or variance shall be filed with
the Zoning Officer by any landowner or any tenant with the permission
of such landowner. It shall contain a statement of the grounds on which
the application is based, together with all maps, plans and text which
shall be necessary to show compliance with this chapter. It shall be filed
in duplicate and accompanied by a fee as set by the Board of
Commissioners and revised from time to time.
B. The Zoning Officer shall promptly transmit one copy of the application,
together with all documentation, to the Zoning Hearing Board, which
shall schedule a public hearing.
C. If the application for a special exception or variance is coupled with an
application for a building permit or certificate of use and occupancy, the
application shall contain all data required for such application for
building permit or certificate of use and occupancy. The Zoning Officer
shall first follow the procedure applicable to the application for special
exception or variance. The application for a building permit or
certificate of use and occupancy shall be deemed denied for lack of
basis until the special exception or variance is granted. If such
application for special exception or variance is approved by the Zoning
Hearing Board, the appropriate officer shall then approve or disapprove
the application for a building permit or certificate of use and occupancy.
A. Any application for a conditional use or a building permit for a
conditional use shall be filed with the Zoning Officer. It shall contain a
statement of the grounds on which the application is based, together
with all maps, plans and text which shall be necessary to show
§ 225-171 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-173
1:925
§ 225-174. Sign permits.
As to applications for sign permits, see § 225-63 of this chapter.
compliance with this chapter. It shall be filed in duplicate and
accompanied by a fee as set by the Board of Commissioners, as revised
from time to time.
B. The Zoning Officer shall promptly transmit one copy of the application,
together with all documentation, to the Planning Commission for its
recommendation.
C. The Zoning Officer shall promptly transmit the application, with all
documentation, to the Township Manager for the attention of the Board
of Commissioners and for appropriate action.
D. If the application for a conditional use is coupled with an application for
a building permit or certificate of use and occupancy, the application
shall contain all data required for such application for building permit
or certificate of use and occupancy. The Zoning Officer shall first follow
the procedure applicable to the application for conditional use. The
application for a building permit or certificate of use and occupancy
shall be deemed denied for lack of basis until the application for
conditional use is granted. If such application for conditional use is
approved by the Board of Commissioners, the Zoning Officer shall then
approve or disapprove the application for a building permit or
certificate of use and occupancy.
§ 225-173 SHALER CODE § 225-174
1:926
ARTICLE XIII
Zoning Officer And Building Inspector
§ 225-175. Powers and duties of Zoning Officer.
The Zoning Officer shall:
§ 225-176. Appeals.
Appeals from actions of the Zoning Officer shall be taken not later than
30 days after the decision and shall be taken to the Zoning Hearing Board
A. Administer this chapter in accordance with its literal terms and shall
not have the power to permit any construction or any use or change of
use which does not conform to this chapter. The Zoning Officer is
authorized to institute civil enforcement proceedings as a means of
enforcement of this chapter when acting in the scope of his
employment. The Zoning Officer shall administer and enforce the
provisions of this chapter in accordance with the provisions of the
chapter and the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.218
B. Issue all certificates of zoning compliance and use registration
certificates and make and maintain records thereof.
C. Conduct inspections of buildings, structures and uses of land to
determine compliance with the terms of this chapter and make and
maintain records thereof.
D. Identify and register nonconforming uses and nonconforming
structures.
E. Maintain permanent and current records of this chapter and
amendments thereto, including, but not limited to, the Zoning Map,
conditional uses, special exceptions, variances and records of hearings.
F. Provide and maintain public information relative to all matters arising
out of this chapter.
G. Receive, file and forward to the Board of Commissioners and the
Planning Commission all applications for conditional uses, requests for
amendments to this chapter and other matters requiring action by the
Board of Commissioners and the Planning Commission.
H. Receive, file and forward to the Zoning Hearing Board appeals,
challenges, applications for special exceptions and variances and all
other matters requiring action by the Zoning Hearing Board.
I. Perform any duties with respect to this chapter and the enforcement or
interpretation thereof which may be required by the Board of
Commissioners, the Zoning Hearing Board or the Planning Commission.
218. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 225-175 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-176
1:927
in accordance with the procedures authorized by the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.
§ 225-177. (Reserved)
§ 225-178. Building Inspector.
A. The Building Inspector shall:
(1) Receive applications and issue permits for the erection, addition,
alteration, repair, removal, demolition of all buildings and
structures and maintain records thereof.
(2) Inspect the premises for which such permits have been issued and
enforce compliance with the Building Code of the Township of
Shaler and in accordance with this chapter.219
B. The Building Inspector and/or authorized assistant shall carry proper
credentials of his respective office for the purpose of inspecting any and
all buildings and premises in the performance of duties under the
Township of Shaler Building Code.
219. Editor's Note: See Ch. 90, Building Construction as amended by the UCC.
§ 225-176 SHALER CODE § 225-178
1:928
ARTICLE XIV
Zoning Hearing Board
§ 225-179. Appointment; organization.
The Zoning Hearing Board as now constituted is hereby continued. Each
member shall serve until the expiration of his or her present term. Said
Board shall consist of three residents of the Township of Shaler appointed
by resolution by the Board of Commissioners. Members of the Hearing
Board shall hold no other elected or appointed office in the Township
nor shall any member be an employee of the Township. The members
of the Board and their successors shall serve for a term of three years,
and their terms shall be so fixed that the term of office of one member
shall expire each year. The Board shall promptly notify the Commissioners
of any vacancy which may occur. Any vacancies shall be filled for the
unexpired term only. The members of the Hearing Board may be removed
for malfeasance, misfeasance or nonfeasance in office by a majority vote
of the Board of Commissioners, taken after the member has received 15
days' advance notice of the intention to take such a vote. A hearing shall
be held in connection with the vote if the member shall request it in
writing. The Board shall elect its officers from its own membership, who
shall serve annual terms as such and may succeed themselves. For the
conduct of any hearing and the taking of any action, a quorum shall be
not less than a majority of all members of the Board, but the Board may
appoint a hearing officer from its own membership to conduct any hearing
on its behalf. The Board may make, alter and rescind rules and forms for its
procedure, consistent with ordinances of the municipality, the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, and laws of the commonwealth. The Board
shall keep full public records of its business and shall submit a report of its
activities to the governing body once a year.
§ 225-180. Powers, duties and jurisdiction.
A. The Zoning Hearing Board shall have exclusive jurisdiction to hear and
render final adjudications in the following matters:
(1) Substantive challenges to the validity of any land use ordinance,
except those brought before the Board of Commissioners pursuant
to Sections 609.1 and 916.1(a)(2) of the Municipalities Planning
Code.220
(2) Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer, including but
not limited to the granting or denial of any permit or failure to act
on the application therefor, the issuance of any cease and desist
order, or the registration or refusal to register any nonconforming
use, structure or lot.
220. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 10609.1 and 10916.1(a)(2), respectively.
§ 225-179 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-180
1:929
(3) Appeals from a determination by a Municipal Engineer or the
Zoning Officer with reference to the administration of any
floodplain or flood hazard ordinance221 or such provisions within a
land use ordinance.
(4) Applications for variances from the terms of this chapter, flood
hazard ordinance or such provisions within a land use ordinance
pursuant to Section 910.2 of the Municipalities Planning Code.222
In considering requests for variances where it is alleged that the
provisions of this chapter inflict unnecessary hardship upon the
applicant, the Board may grant a variance, provided that the
following findings are made where relevant in a given case:
(a) That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions,
including irregularity, narrowness or shallowness of lot size or
shape, or exceptional topographical or other physical
conditions peculiar to the particular property, and that the
unnecessary hardship is due to such conditions and to the
circumstances or conditions generally created by the
provisions of this chapter in the neighborhood or district in
which the property is located.
(b) That because of such physical circumstances or conditions
there is no possibility that the property can be developed in
strict conformity with the provisions of this chapter and that
the authorization of a variance is therefore necessary to enable
the reasonable use of the property.
(c) That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the
applicant.
(d) That the requested variance, if authorized, will not alter the
essential character of the neighborhood or district in which the
property is located nor substantially or permanently impair the
appropriate use or development of adjacent property nor be
detrimental to the public welfare.
(e) That the variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum
variance that will afford relief and will represent the least
modification possible of the regulation in issue. In granting any
variance, the Board may attach such reasonable conditions and
safeguards as it may deem necessary to implement the
purposes of the Municipalities Planning Code and this chapter.
(5) Applications for special exceptions under this chapter, floodplain or
flood hazard ordinance or such provisions within a land use
ordinance pursuant to Section 912.1 of the Municipalities Planning
Code.223 In granting a special exception, the Zoning Hearing Board
221. Editor's Note: See Ch. 130, Flood Damage Prevention.
222. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10910.2.
223. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10912.1.
§ 225-180 SHALER CODE § 225-180
1:930
§ 225-181. Appeals and challenges.
Appeals and challenges under this article of this chapter may be filed
with the Zoning Hearing Board in writing by the landowner affected, any
officer or agency of the Township or any person aggrieved. Requests for a
variance and for special exception may be filed with the Zoning Hearing
Board by any landowner or any tenant with the permission of the landowner.
Such appeals may be filed by presentation to the Zoning Officer, who shall
promptly forward them to the Zoning Hearing Board, together with all
the documentary material constituting the record upon which the matter
appealed was based.
§ 225-182. Time limitations for filing proceedings.
may attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards, in addition
to those expressed in this chapter, as it may deem necessary to
implement the purposes of this chapter and the Municipalities
Planning Code.
(6) Appeals from the determination of any officer or agency charged
with the administration of any transfers of development rights or
performance density provisions of this Zoning Chapter.
(7) Appeals from the Zoning Officer's determination under Section
916.2 of the Municipalities Planning Code.224
(8) Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer or Municipal
Engineer in the administration of any land use ordinance or
provision thereof with reference to sedimentation and erosion
control and stormwater management insofar as the same relate to
development not involving subdivision and land development or
planned residential developments applications of the
Municipalities Planning Code.225
B. The Zoning Hearing Board, in the performance of its duties hereunder,
may from time to time refer appeals and requests for special exceptions
and variances to the Planning Commission for recommendations and
advice.
C. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to deny the appellant the
right to proceed directly to court, where appropriate, pursuant to the
Pennsylvania Rules of Civil Procedure 1091 (relating to action in
mandamus).
A. No person shall be allowed to file any proceeding with the Zoning
Hearing Board later than 30 days after an application for development,
preliminary or final, has been approved by an appropriate Township
officer, agency or body if such proceeding is designed to secure reversal
224. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10916.2.
225. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 10501 et seq. and 10701 et seq., respectively.
§ 225-180 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-182
1:931
§ 225-183. Procedure; fees.
The Zoning Hearing Board shall conduct hearings and make decisions in
accordance with the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code and the
following requirements:
or to limit the approval in any manner, unless such person alleges
and proves that he had no notice, knowledge or reason to believe
that such approval had been given. If such person has succeeded to
his interest after such approval, he shall be bound by the knowledge
of his predecessor in interest. The failure of anyone other than the
landowner to appeal from an adverse decision on a tentative plan
pursuant to Section 709 of the Municipalities Planning Code226 or from
an adverse decision by a Zoning Officer on a challenge to the validity
of an ordinance or map pursuant to Section 916.2 of the Municipalities
Planning Code227 shall preclude an appeal from a final approval, except
in the case where the final submission substantially deviates from the
approved tentative approval.
B. All appeals from determinations adverse to the landowners shall be
filed by the landowner within 30 days after notice of the determination
is issued.
A. Public notice shall be given and written notice shall be sent or handed
to the applicant, the Zoning Officer, the Planning Commission and to
such other persons as the Board of Commissioners shall designate by
ordinance and to any person who has made a timely request for the
same. In addition to the written notice provided herein, written notice
of said hearing shall be conspicuously posted on the affected tract of
land at least one week prior to the hearing. In the case of a request for a
special exception or variance, such notice shall also be sent by certified
mail to the registered owner of each property located within 200 feet of
the boundaries of the property which is the subject of the requested
special exception or variance.
B. The Board of Commissioners may prescribe reasonable fees with
respect to hearings before the Zoning Hearing Board. Fees for said
hearings may include compensation for the secretary and members of
the Zoning Hearing Board, notice and advertising costs and necessary
administrative overhead connected with the hearing. The costs,
however, shall not include legal expenses of the Zoning Hearing Board,
expenses for engineering, architectural or other technical consultants
or expert witness costs.
C. The first hearing before the Board or hearing officer shall be
commenced within 60 days from the date of receipt of the applicant's
application, unless the applicant has agreed in writing to an extension
of time. Each subsequent hearing before the Board or hearing officer
226. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10709.
227. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10916.2.
§ 225-182 SHALER CODE § 225-183
1:932
shall be held within 45 days of the prior hearing, unless otherwise
agreed to by the applicant in writing or on the record. An applicant
shall complete the presentation of his case-in-chief within 100 days
of the first hearing. Upon the request of the applicant, the Board or
hearing officer shall assure that the applicant receives at least seven
hours of hearings within the 100 days, including the first hearing.
Persons opposed to the application shall complete the presentation of
their opposition to the application within 100 days of the first hearing
held after the completion of the applicant's case-in-chief. An applicant
may, upon request, be granted additional hearings to complete his casein-
chief, provided the persons opposed to the application are granted
an equal number of additional hearings. Persons opposed to the
application may, upon written consent or consent on the record by the
applicant and municipality, be granted additional hearings to complete
their opposition to the application, provided the applicant is granted an
equal number of additional hearings for rebuttal.
D. The hearings shall be conducted by the Board or the Board may appoint
any member or an independent attorney as a hearing officer. The
decision or, where no decision is called for, the findings shall be made
by the Board; however, the appellant or the applicant, as the case may
be, in addition to the Township, may, prior to the decision of the
hearing, waive decision or findings by the Board and accept the
decision or findings of the hearing officer as final.
E. The parties to the hearing shall be the municipality, any person affected
by the application who has made timely request for appearance of
record before the Board and any other person, including civic or
community organizations, permitted to appear by the Board. The Board
shall have power to require that all persons who wish to be considered
parties enter appearances in writing on forms provided by the Board for
that purpose.
F. The Chairman or Acting Chairman of the Board or the hearing officer
presiding shall have the power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas
to compel the attendance of witnesses and documents requested by the
parties.
G. The parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel and shall
be afforded the opportunity to respond and present evidence and
argument and cross-examine adverse witnesses on all relevant issues.
H. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but irrelevant, immaterial or
unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded.
I. The Board or the hearing officer, as the case may be, shall keep a
stenographic record of the proceedings. The appearance fee for a
stenographer shall be shared equally by the applicant and the Board.
The cost of the original transcript shall be paid by the Board if the
transcript is ordered by the Board or hearing officer or shall be paid by
the person appealing from the decision of the Board if such appeal is
§ 225-183 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-183
1:933
made; and in either event, the cost of additional copies shall be paid
by the person requesting such copy or copies. In other cases, the party
requesting the original transcript shall bear the cost thereof.
J. The Board or the hearing officer shall not communicate, directly or
indirectly, with any party or his representatives in connection with any
issue involved, except upon notice and opportunity for all parties to
participate; shall not take notice of any communication, reports, staff
memoranda or other materials, except advice from the Board's solicitor,
unless the parties are afforded an opportunity to contest the material so
noticed; and shall not inspect the site or its surroundings after the
commencement of hearings with any party or his representative unless
all parties are given an opportunity to be present.
K. The Board or the hearing officer, as the case may be, shall render a
written decision or, when no decision is called for, make written
findings on the application within 45 days after the last hearing before
the Board or hearing officer. Where the application is contested or
denied, each decision shall be accompanied by findings of fact and
conclusions based thereon, together with the reasons therefor.
Conclusions based on any provisions of the Municipalities Planning
Code228 or of any chapter, rule or regulation shall contain a reference to
the provision relied on and the reasons why the conclusion is deemed
appropriate in light of the facts found. If the hearing is conducted by a
hearing officer and there has been no stipulation that his decision or
findings are final, the Board shall make his report and
recommendations available to the parties within 45 days, and the
parties shall be entitled to make written presentations thereon to the
Board prior to the final decision or entry of findings, and the Board's
decision shall be entered no later than 30 days after the report of the
hearing officer. Except for challenges filed under Section 916.1,229
where the Board fails to render the decision within the period required
by the subsection or fails to commence, conduct or complete the
required hearing as provided in Subsection C, the decision shall be
deemed to have been rendered in favor of the applicant unless the
applicant has agreed in writing or on the record to an extension of time.
When a decision has been rendered in favor of the applicant because of
the failure of the Board to meet or render a decision as hereinabove
provided, the Board shall give public notice of said decision within 10
days from the last day it could have met to render a decision in the same
manner as provided in Subsection A of this section. If the Board shall
fail to provide such notice, the applicant may do so. Nothing in this
subsection shall prejudice the right of any party opposing the
application to appeal the decision to a court of competent jurisdiction.
L. A copy of the final decision or, where no decision is called for, of the
findings shall be announced at a public meeting, which shall also be
228. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
229. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10916.1.
§ 225-183 SHALER CODE § 225-183
1:934
§ 225-184. Appeals.
Any landowner or person aggrieved by any decision of the Zoning Hearing
Board may appeal therefrom as provided by law.
§ 225-185. Stay of proceedings.
delivered to the applicant personally or mailed to him no later than the
day following its date. To all other persons who have filed their names
and addresses with the Board, no later than the last day of the hearing
the Board shall provide by mail or otherwise a brief notice of decision
or findings and a statement of the place at which the full decision or
findings may be examined.
M. The Planning Commission, at the request of the Zoning Hearing Board,
shall furnish all pertinent narrative material, maps, charts and other
data relative to the proceedings involved for reference by all
concerned. The Zoning Hearing Board may adjourn any hearing for the
purpose of reviewing such data as may be pertinent to the problem
involved and to request interpretations of said data by a representative
of the Planning Commission.
A. Upon filing of any proceeding referred to in Section 913.3 in the
Municipalities Planning Code230 and during its pendency before the
Board, all land development pursuant to any challenged ordinance,
order or approval of the Zoning Officer or of any agency or body and all
official action thereunder shall be stayed unless the Zoning Officer or
any other appropriate agency or body certifies to the Board facts
indicating that such stay would cause imminent peril to life or property,
in which case the development or official action shall not be stayed
otherwise than by a restraining order, which may be granted by the
Board or by the court having jurisdiction of zoning appeals, on petition,
after notice to the Zoning Officer or other appropriate agency or body.
When an application for development, preliminary or final, has been
duly approved and proceedings designed to reverse or limit the
approval are filed with the Board by persons other than the applicant,
the applicant may petition the court having jurisdiction of zoning
appeals to order such persons to post bond as a condition to continuing
the proceedings before the Board.
B. After the petition is presented, the court shall hold a hearing to
determine if the filing of the appeal is frivolous. At the hearing,
evidence may be presented on the merits of the case. It shall be the
burden of the applicant for a bond to prove the appeal is frivolous. After
consideration of all evidence presented, if the court determines that the
appeal is frivolous, it shall grant the petition for a bond. The right to
petition the court to order the appellants to post bond may be waived by
the appellee, but such waiver may be revoked by him if an appeal is
taken from a final decision of the court.
230. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10913.3.
§ 225-183 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-185
1:935
C. The question whether or not such petition should be granted and the
amount of the bond shall be within the sound discretion of the court. An
order denying a petition for bond shall be interlocutory. An order
directing the responding party to post a bond shall be interlocutory.
D. If an appeal is taken by a respondent to the petition for a bond from an
order of the court dismissing a zoning appeal for refusal to post a bond,
and the appellate court sustains the order of the court below to post a
bond, the respondent to the petition for a bond, upon motion of the
petitioner and after hearing in the court having jurisdiction of zoning
appeals, shall be liable for all reasonable costs, expenses and attorneys'
fees incurred by the petitioner.
§ 225-185 SHALER CODE § 225-185
1:936
ARTICLE XV
Board Of Commissioners
§ 225-186. Jurisdiction.
The Board of Commissioners or, except as to Subsections C, D and E of
this section, the Planning Commission, if designated, shall have exclusive
jurisdiction to hear and render final adjudications in the following matters:
A. All applications for approvals of planned residential developments
under this chapter and pursuant to the provisions of Section 702 of the
Municipalities Planning Code.231
B. All applications pursuant to Section 508 of the Municipalities Planning
Code232 for approval of subdivisions or land developments under Article
V of the Municipalities Planning Code. Any provision in a subdivision
and land development ordinance requiring that final action concerning
subdivision and land development applications be taken by the Planning
Commission rather than the Board of Commissioners shall vest
exclusive jurisdiction in the Planning Commission in lieu of the Board of
Commissioners for purposes of the provisions of this subsection.
C. Applications for conditional use under the express provisions of this
Zoning Chapter pursuant to Section 603(c)(2) of the Municipalities
Planning Code.233
D. Applications for curative amendment to this Zoning Chapter pursuant
to Sections 609.1 and 916.1(a)(2) of the Municipalities Planning
Code.234
E. All petitions for amendments to land use ordinances pursuant to the
procedures set forth in Section 609 of the Municipalities Planning
Code.235 Any action on such petitions shall be deemed legislative acts,
provided that nothing contained in this subsection shall be deemed to
enlarge or diminish existing law with reference to appeals to court.
F. Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer or the Municipal
Engineer in the administration of any land use ordinance or provisions
thereof with reference to sedimentation and erosion control and
stormwater management insofar as the same relate to application for
land development under Articles V and VII of the Municipalities
Planning Code. Where such determination relates only to development
not involving Article V or VII of the Municipalities Planning Code
application, the appeal from such determination of the Zoning Officer
or the Municipal Engineer shall be to the Zoning Hearing Board
231. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10702.
232. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10508.
233. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10603(c)(2).
234. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 10609.1 and 10916.1(a)(2), respectively.
235. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10609.
§ 225-186 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-186
1:937
§ 225-187. Amendments.
The Board of Commissioners may amend this chapter as hereinafter
provided.
§ 225-188. Conditional uses.
pursuant to subdivision (a)(9) of Section 909.1 of the Municipalities
Planning Code.236 Where the applicable land use ordinance vests
jurisdiction for final administration of subdivision and land
development applications in the Planning Commission, all appeals from
determinations under this subsection shall be to the Planning
Commission and all appeals from the decision of the Planning
Commission shall be to court.
G. Applications for a special encroachment permit pursuant to Section 405
of the Municipalities Planning Code and applications for a permit
pursuant to Section 406 under the Municipalities Planning Code.237
A. The landowner shall file with the Zoning Officer a request for the
granting of a conditional use along with all maps, plans and text which
may be necessary to explain the proposed development and its
compliance with the standards and criteria of this chapter. Said request
shall be filed in duplicate.
B. The Zoning Officer shall, promptly after its filing, send copies of the
application and supporting data to the Board of Commissioners for
decisions and to the Planning Commission for its recommendations to
the Board. The number of such copies shall be established by the
Planning Commission.
C. The Board of Commissioners shall schedule a public hearing, pursuant
to public notice. Such notice shall state the time and place of the
hearing and the particular nature of the matter to be considered at the
hearing. The first publication shall not be more than 30 days and the
second publication shall not be less than seven days from the date of
the hearing. The text of the notice shall also be conspicuously posted on
the property at least one week prior to the hearing and shall be sent by
certified mail to the registered owner of each property which is the
subject of the proposed conditional use or which is located within 200
feet of the boundaries of the property which is the subject of the
proposed conditional use.
D. The Board of Commissioners shall hold a public hearing at the time
specified in the notice. The time for the hearing shall be sufficiently
early to permit the Board of Commissioners to reach its decision and
communicate it to the applicant within the time requirements
established by Subsections C and E of this section.
236. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10909.1(a)(9).
237. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 10405 and 10406, respectively.
§ 225-186 SHALER CODE § 225-188
1:938
E. Unless the applicant shall have agreed to a later time for decision, the
Board of Commissioners shall render its decision not later than 90 days
following the date of its regular meeting next following the date the
application is filed, provided that, if said meeting should occur more
than 30 days following the filing of the application, said ninety-day
period shall be measured from the 30th day following the day the
application has been filed.
F. The decision of the Board of Commissioners shall be announced at a
public meeting, which shall also be in writing and shall be
communicated to the applicant personally or mailed to him at his last
known address not later than 15 days following the decision.
G. When the application is not approved in the terms as filed, the decision
shall specify the defects found in the application and describe the
requirements which have not been met and shall, in each case, cite the
provisions of the statute or ordinance relied on.
H. Where the Board of Commissioners in this Zoning Chapter has stated
conditional uses are to be granted or denied by the Board of
Commissioners pursuant to express standards and criteria, the Board of
Commissioners shall hold hearings on and decide requests for such
conditional uses in accordance with such standards and criteria. In
granting a conditional use, the Board of Commissioners may attach
such reasonable conditions and safeguards, in addition to those
expressed in this chapter, as it may deem necessary to implement the
purposes of the Municipalities Planning Code in this chapter.238
238. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 225-188 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-188
1:939

ARTICLE XVI
Planning Commission
§ 225-189. Appointment; organization.
The Planning Commission, consisting of seven members as presently
constituted, is hereby continued, with its members to serve the unexpired
portions of their present terms. All members shall be residents of Shaler
Township and not officers or employees of the municipality. The
appointment and tenure of members of the Commission shall be governed
by the Municipalities Planning Code239 and laws of the commonwealth.
§ 225-190. Conduct of business.
The Planning Commission shall elect its own Chairman and Vice Chairman
and create and fill such other offices as it may determine. Officers shall
serve annual terms and may succeed themselves. The Planning Commission
may make and alter bylaws and rules and regulations to govern its
procedures consistent with the ordinances of Shaler Township and the laws
of the commonwealth. The Planning Commission shall keep a full record of
its business and shall annually make a written report by March 1 of each
year of its activities to the Board of Commissioners. Interim reports may
be made as often as may be necessary or as requested by the Board of
Commissioners.
§ 225-191. Powers and duties.
A. The Planning Commission shall, at the request of the Board of
Commissioners, have the power and shall be required to:
(1) Prepare the Comprehensive Plan for the development of the
Township as set forth in the Municipalities Planning Code and
present it for the consideration of the Board of Commissioners.
(2) Maintain and keep on file records of its action. All records and files
of the Planning Commission shall be in the possession of the Board
of Commissioners.
B. The Planning Commission, at the request of the Board of
Commissioners, may:
(1) Make recommendations to the Board of Commissioners concerning
the adoption or amendment of an Official Map.
(2) Prepare and present to the Board of Commissioners of the
Township a zoning ordinance and make recommendations to the
Board of Commissioners on proposed amendments to it, as set forth
in the Municipalities Planning Code.
239. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 225-189 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-191
1:941
(3) Prepare, recommend and administer subdivision and land
development and planned residential development regulations, as
set forth in the Municipalities Planning Code.
(4) Prepare and present to the Board of Commissioners of the
Township a property maintenance code and make
recommendations concerning proposed amendments thereto.
(5) Do such other acts or make such studies as may be necessary to
fulfill the duties and obligations imposed by the Municipalities
Planning Code.
(6) Prepare and present to the Board of Commissioners of the
Township an environmental study.
(7) Submit to the Board of Commissioners of the Township a
recommended capital improvements program.
(8) Prepare and present to the Board of Commissioners of the
Township a water survey, which shall be consistent with the State
Water Plan and any applicable water resources plan adopted by a
river basin commission. The water survey shall be conducted in
consultation with any public water supplier in the area to be
surveyed.
(9) Promote public interest in and understanding of the
Comprehensive Plan and planning.
(10) Make recommendations to governmental, civic and private
agencies and individuals as to the effectiveness of the proposals of
such agencies and individuals.
(11) Hold public hearings and meetings.
(12) Present testimony before any board.
(13) Require from other departments and agencies of the Township
such available information as relates to the work of the Planning
Commission.
(14) In the performance of its functions, enter upon any land to make
examinations and surveys with the consent of the owner.
(15) Prepare and present to the Board of Commissioners of the
Township a study regarding the feasibility and practicability of
using renewable energy sources in specific areas within the
Township.
(16) Review this chapter, subdivision and land development ordinances,
the Official Map, provisions for planned residential development
and such other ordinances and regulations governing the
development of land no less frequently than it reviews the
Comprehensive Plan.
§ 225-191 SHALER CODE § 225-192
1:942
§ 225-192. Amendments to Zoning Ordinance.
The Planning Commission shall receive copies of all applications for
amendment to this chapter other than those prepared by the Planning
Commission, shall make recommendations thereon and shall forward such
recommendations to the Board of Commissioners.
§ 225-193. Review of zoning provisions.
The Planning Commission shall initiate, direct and review, from time to
time, a study of the provisions of this chapter and shall make reports of its
findings to the Board of Commissioners at least annually.
§ 225-194. Applications for conditional uses.
The Planning Commission shall also receive copies of all applications for
building permits for conditional uses and other applications for conditional
uses which have been received, shall make recommendations thereon and
shall forward such recommendations to the Board of Commissioners at least
10 days prior to the date of the hearing by the Board of Commissioners
on such applications. The Planning Commission may, from time to time,
make and amend its bylaws and regulations to provide for and change
it procedures governing applications for conditional uses, including its
procedures for holding or not holding public hearings thereon, for notices
of its hearings and for the timing of its actions.
§ 225-195. Cooperation with Zoning Hearing Board.
The Planning Commission shall, when requested by the Zoning Hearing
Board, review and make recommendations and supply factual data with
reference to any matter before the Zoning Hearing Board.
§ 225-196. Review by Township Engineer.
In the performance of its powers and duties, any act or recommendation of
the Planning Commission which involves engineering considerations shall
be subject to review and comments of the Township Engineer.
§ 225-197. Advisory recommendations.
Any recommendation made by the Planning Commission to the Board of
Commissioners shall be advisory only.
§ 225-198. Township Solicitor.
The Solicitor of Shaler Township shall serve as the legal advisor to the
Planning Commission.
§ 225-192 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-198
1:943

ARTICLE XVII
Amendments
§ 225-199. Power of Commissioners.
Whenever the public necessity, convenience or general welfare indicates,
the Board of Commissioners may, by ordinance in accordance with the
Municipalities Planning Code240 and the applicable laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, amend, supplement or change this chapter
or the regulations, restrictions, boundaries or classifications of buildings,
structures and land, as the same are established by this chapter or may
hereafter be made a part hereof. The rezoning of any district or portion of
any district can be accomplished only by amendment to this chapter and the
Zoning Map.
§ 225-200. Applications for amendments; fees.
Applications and petitions by interested parties or entities for any changes
or amendments to an existing zoning district in the Township of Shaler or
for a change in the Zoning Map or for a curative amendment shall be made
to the Manager of the Township of Shaler and shall be accompanied with
a fee as set by the Board of Commissioners and revised from time to time
and with a guaranty that the applicant shall reimburse the Township for all
reasonable expenditures associated with the application. This fee is for the
purpose of defraying the costs of preparing the necessary data, ordinance
and notices and is not refundable, except to the extent hereinafter set forth,
even though the application is disapproved by the Board of Commissioners.
Any portion of said fee which is in excess of the actual direct and indirect
costs incurred by the Township of Shaler in processing said applications
and petitions shall be refundable to the applicant or petitioner. In the
case where a curative amendment or challenge is successfully upheld by
a court, the entire fee shall be refunded to the applicant. The Board of
Commissioners may, from time to time by resolution, either increase or
decrease said fee.
§ 225-201. Amendment procedure.
A. Before voting on the enactment of an amendment, the Board of
Commissioners shall hold a public hearing thereon, pursuant to public
notice and pursuant to mailed notice and electronic notice to an owner
of a tract or parcel of land located within the Township, or an owner of
the mineral rights in a tract or parcel of land within the Township who
has made a timely request in accordance with Section 109 of the MPC.
In addition, if the proposed amendment involves a Zoning Map change,
notice of said public hearing shall be conspicuously posted by the
Township at points deemed sufficient by the Board of Commissioners
along the perimeter of the tract to notify potentially interested citizens.
240. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 225-199 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-201
1:945
§ 225-202. Curative amendments.
The procedure for landowner curative amendments or municipal curative
amendments shall be as provided in the Municipalities Planning Code.242
§ 225-203. Publication, advertisement and availability of
ordinances.
The affected tract or area shall be posted at least one week prior to the
date of the hearing.
B. In the case of an amendment other than that prepared by the Planning
Commission, the Board of Commissioners shall submit each such
amendment to the Planning Commission at least 30 days prior to the
hearing on such proposed amendment to provide the Planning
Commission an opportunity to submit recommendations.
C. If after any public hearing held upon an amendment the proposed
amendment is changed substantially or is revised to include land
previously not affected by it, the Board of Commissioners shall hold
another public hearing, pursuant to public notice, mailed notice and
electronic notice, before proceeding to vote on the amendment.
D. At least 45 days prior to the public hearing on the amendment by the
Board of Commissioners, the Township shall submit the proposed
amendment to the County Planning Agency for recommendations.
E. The Township may offer a mediation option as an aid in completing
proceedings authorized by this section. In exercising such an option,
the Township and mediating parties shall meet the stipulations and
follow the procedures set forth in Article IX of the Municipalities
Planning Code.241
F. Within 30 days after enactment, a copy of the amendment to this
chapter shall be forwarded to the county planning agency.
A. Proposed zoning ordinances and amendments shall not be enacted
unless notice of proposed enactment is given in the manner set forth in
this section and shall include the time and place of the meeting at which
passage will be considered, a reference to a place within the Township
where copies of the proposed ordinance or amendment may be
examined without charge or obtained for a charge not greater than the
cost thereof. The Board of Commissioners shall publish the proposed
ordinance or amendment once in one newspaper of general circulation
in the municipality not more than 60 days nor less than seven days prior
to passage. Publication of the proposed ordinance or amendment shall
include either the full text thereof or the title and a brief summary,
241. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10901 et seq.
242. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 225-201 SHALER CODE § 225-203
1:946
prepared by the Municipal Solicitor and setting forth all the provisions
in reasonable detail. If the full text is not included:
(1) A copy thereof shall be supplied to a newspaper of general
circulation in the Township at the time the public notice is
published.
(2) An attested copy of the proposed ordinance shall be filed in the
County Law Library or other county office designated by the
County Commissioners, who may impose a fee no greater than that
necessary to cover the actual costs of storing said ordinances.
B. In the event that substantial amendments are made in the proposed
ordinance or amendment, before voting upon enactment the Board of
Commissioners shall, at least 10 days prior to enactment, readvertise in
one newspaper of general circulation in the Township a brief summary
setting forth all the provisions in reasonable detail, together with a
summary of the amendments.
C. Zoning ordinances and amendments may be incorporated into official
ordinance books by reference with the same force and effect as if duly
recorded therein.
§ 225-203 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-203
1:947

ARTICLE XVIII
Standards For Review Of Conditional Uses Or Special Exceptions
§ 225-204. List of express standards.
In any instance of a request for a conditional use or special exception, the
appropriate authorities of the Township must determine that the following
express standards and specific criteria are met before granting the request:
A. Traffic congestion. The proposal is suitable with respect to traffic and
highways in the area and provides for adequate access and off-street
parking arrangements in order to protect existing or proposed streets
and highways from undue congestion and hazard.
B. Fire and safety. The proposal will not increase the danger of fire or
otherwise endanger the public safety.
C. Overcrowding. The nature of the proposed activity will be suitably
related to the population served, the numbers of participating
population, the frequency of use, adequacy of space, potential
generation and impact of congestion and will not cause overcrowding
or concentration of population.
D. Light and air. The proposal will not substantially impair light and air to
adjacent property, injure or detract from the use of neighboring
property or from the character of the neighborhood, and the use of
property adjacent to the area included in the proposed change or plan
will be adequately safeguarded.
E. Public facilities. The proposal will not adversely affect transportation or
unduly burden water, sewer or other public facilities.
F. General. The proposal shall not impair the best interests of the
Township, the convenience of the community and the public health,
safety, morals and welfare.
G. Health or comfort. The proposal must not be harmful to the health or
comfort of the public or to the neighborhood because of odor, dust,
noise, vibration, glare, presence of vermin or rodents, or any other
feature and shall comply with the requirements of this chapter as to
such matters.
H. Objectives of Zoning Ordinance. The proposal is not in conflict with the
purpose and objectives of this chapter.
I. Other conditions. The proposal complies with all other conditions
imposed by provisions of this chapter applicable to the particular
proposal, including the performance standards provided in this chapter.
J. Applicable regulations. The proposal complies with any other
applicable regulations, including environmental regulations, whether in
this chapter or any other Shaler Township ordinance.
§ 225-204 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-204
1:949
K. Violations of laws or regulations. The proposal is not in violation of any
applicable county, state or federal laws or regulations.
§ 225-204 SHALER CODE § 225-204
1:950
ARTICLE XIX
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 225-205. Validity challenge; substantive questions.
A. A landowner who, on substantive grounds, desires to challenge the
validity of this chapter or map or any provision hereof which prohibits
or restricts the use or development of land in which he has an interest
shall submit the challenge either:
(1) To the Zoning Hearing Board under Section 909.1(a) of the
Municipalities Planning Code243; or
(2) To the Board of Commissioners under Section 909.1(b)(4), together
with a request for a curative amendment under Section 609.1 of the
Municipalities Planning Code.244
B. Persons aggrieved by a use or development permitted on the land of
another by this chapter or map or any provision hereof, who desires to
challenge its validity on substantive grounds, shall first submit their
challenge to the Zoning Hearing Board for a decision thereon under
Section 909.1(a)(1) of the Municipalities Planning Code.245
C. The submissions referred to in Subsections A and B shall be governed
by the following:
(1) In challenges before the Zoning Hearing Board, the challenging
party shall make a written request to the Board that it hold a
hearing on its challenge. The request shall contain the reasons for
the challenge. Where the landowner desires to challenge the
validity of this chapter and elects to proceed by curative
amendment under Section 609.1 of the Municipalities Planning
Code,246 his application to the Board of Commissioners shall
contain, in addition to the requirements of the written request
hereof, the plans and explanatory materials describing the use or
development proposed by the landowner in lieu of the use or
development permitted by the challenged ordinance or map. Such
plans or other explanatory materials shall not be required to meet
the standards prescribed for preliminary, tentative or final approval
or for the issuance of a permit, so long as they provide reasonable
notice of the proposed use or development and a sufficient basis for
evaluating the challenged ordinance or map in light thereof.
Nothing herein contained shall preclude the landowner from first
seeking a final approval before submitting his challenge.
243. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10909.1(a).
244. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10909.1(b)(4) and 53 P.S. § 10609.1, respectively.
245. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10909.1(a)(1).
246. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10609.1.
§ 225-205 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-205
1:951
(2) If the submission is made by the landowner to the Board of
Commissioners under Subsection A(2), the request also shall be
accompanied by an amendment or amendments to the ordinance
proposed by the landowner to cure the alleged defects therein.
(3) If the submission is made to the Board of Commissioners, the
Municipal Solicitor shall represent and advise it at the hearing or
hearings referred to in Section 909.1(b)(4) of the Municipalities
Planning Code.247
(4) The Board of Commissioners may retain an independent attorney to
present the defense of the challenged ordinance or map on its
behalf and to present witnesses on its behalf.
(5) Based upon the testimony presented at the hearing or hearings, the
Board of Commissioners or the Zoning Hearing Board, as the case
may be, shall determine whether the challenged ordinance or map
is defective, as alleged by the landowner. If a challenge heard by
the Board of Commissioners is found to have merit, the Board of
Commissioners shall proceed as provided in Section 609.1 of the
Municipalities Planning Code.248 If a challenge heard by the Zoning
Hearing Board is found to have merit, the decision of the Zoning
Hearing Board shall include recommended amendments to the
challenged ordinance which will cure the defects found. In
reaching its decision, the Zoning Hearing Board shall consider the
amendments, plans and explanatory material submitted by the
landowner and shall also consider:
(a) The impact of the proposal upon roads, sewer facilities, water
supplies, schools and other public service facilities;
(b) If the proposal is for a residential use, the impact of the
proposal upon regional housing needs and the effectiveness of
the proposal in providing housing units of a type actually
available to and affordable by classes of persons otherwise
unlawfully excluded by the challenged provisions of the
ordinance or map;
(c) The suitability of the site for the intensity of use proposed by
the site's soils, slopes, woodlands, wetlands, floodplains,
aquifers, natural resources and other natural features;
(d) The impact of the proposed use on the site's soils, slopes,
woodlands, wetlands, floodplains, natural resources and
natural features; the degree to which these are protected or
destroyed; the tolerance of the resources to development and
any adverse environmental impacts; and
247. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10909.1(b)(4).
248. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10609.1.
§ 225-205 SHALER CODE § 225-205
1:952
(e) The impact of the proposal on the preservation of agriculture
and other land uses which are essential to public health and
welfare.
(6) The Board of Commissioners or the Zoning Hearing Board, as the
case may be, shall render its decision within 45 days after the
conclusion of the last hearing.
(7) If the Board of Commissioners or the Zoning Hearing Board, as the
case may be, fails to act on the landowner's request within the time
limits referred to in Subsection C(6), a denial of the request is
deemed to have occurred on the 46th day after the close of the last
hearing.
D. The Zoning Hearing Board or Board of Commissioners, as the case may
be, shall commence its hearings within 60 days after the request is filed
unless the landowner requests or consents to an extension of time.
E. Public notice of the hearing shall include notice that the validity of the
ordinance or map is in question and shall give the place where and the
times when a copy of the request, including any plans, explanatory
material or proposed amendments, may be examined by the public.
F. The challenge shall be deemed denied when:
(1) The Zoning Hearing Board or Board of Commissioners, as the case
may be, fails to commence the hearing within the time limits set
forth in Subsection D;
(2) The Board of Commissioners notifies the landowner that it will not
adopt the curative amendment;
(3) The Board of Commissioners adopts another curative amendment
which is unacceptable to the landowner; or
(4) The Zoning Hearing Board or Board of Commissioners, as the case
may be, fails to act on the request 45 days after the close of the last
hearing on the request, unless the time is extended by mutual
consent by the landowner and Township.
G. Where after the effective date of the Municipalities Planning Code a
curative amendment proposal is approved by the grant of a curative
amendment application by the Board of Commissioners pursuant to
Section 909.1(b)(4) of the Municipalities Planning Code249 or a validity
challenge is sustained by the Zoning Hearing Board pursuant to Section
909.1(a)(1) of the Municipalities Planning Code250 or the court acts
finally on appeal from denial of a curative amendment proposal or a
validity challenge, and the proposal or challenge so approved requires a
further application for subdivision or land development, the developer
249. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10909.1(b)(4).
250. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10909.1(a)(1).
§ 225-205 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-205
1:953
§ 225-206. Procedure to obtain preliminary opinion.
In order not to unreasonably delay the time when a landowner may secure
assurance that the ordinance or map under which he proposed to build
is free from challenge and recognizing that the procedure for preliminary
approval of his development may be too cumbersome or may be unavailable,
the landowner may advance the date from which time for any challenge to
the ordinance or map will run under Section 914.1 of the Municipalities
Planning Code252 by the following procedure:
shall have two years from the date of such approval to file an
application for preliminary or tentative approval pursuant to Article V
or VII of the Municipalities Planning Code. Within the two-year period,
no subsequent change or amendment in the zoning, subdivision or
other governing ordinance or plan shall be applied in any manner
which adversely affects the rights of the applicant as granted in the
curative amendment or the sustained validity challenge. Upon the filing
of the preliminary or tentative plan, the provisions of Section 508(4)
of the Municipalities Planning Code251 shall apply. Where the proposal
appended to the curative amendment application or the validity
challenge is approved but does not require further application under
any subdivision or land development ordinance, the developer shall
have one year within which to file for a building permit. Within the
one-year period, no subsequent change or amendment in the zoning,
subdivision or other governing ordinance or plan shall be applied in
any manner which adversely affects the rights of the applicants granted
in the curative amendment or the sustained validity challenge. During
these protected periods, the court shall retain or assume jurisdiction for
the purpose of awarding such supplemental relief as may be necessary.
A. The landowner may submit plans and other materials describing his
proposed use or development to the Zoning Officer for a preliminary
opinion as to their compliance with the applicable ordinances and
maps. Such plans and other materials shall not be required to meet the
standards prescribed for preliminary, tentative or final approval or for
the issuance of a building permit so long as they provide reasonable
notice of the proposed use or development and a sufficient basis for a
preliminary opinion as to its compliance.
B. If the Zoning Officer's preliminary opinion is that the use or
development complies with the ordinance or map, notice thereof shall
be published once each week for two successive weeks in a newspaper
of general circulation in the Township. Such notice shall include a
general description of the proposed use or development and its
location, by some readily identifiable directive, and the place and times
where the plans and other materials may be examined by the public.
The favorable preliminary approval under Section 914.1 of the
251. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10508(4).
252. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10914.1.
§ 225-205 SHALER CODE § 225-206
1:954
§ 225-207. Mediation option.
Municipalities Planning Code253 and the time therein specified for
commencing a proceeding with the Board shall run from the time when
the second notice thereof has been published.
A. Parties to proceedings authorized in Articles IX and X-A of the
Municipalities Planning Code may utilize mediation as an aid in
completing such proceedings. In proceedings before the Zoning
Hearing Board, in no case shall the Zoning Hearing Board initiate
mediation or participate as a mediating party. Mediation shall
supplement not replace those procedures in Articles IX and X-A once
they have been formally initiated. Nothing in this section shall be
interpreted as expanding or limiting municipal police powers or as
modifying any principles of substantive law.
B. Participation in mediation shall be wholly voluntary. The
appropriateness of mediation shall be determined by the particulars of
each case and the willingness of the parties to negotiate. The Township
shall assure that, in each case, the mediating parties, assisted by the
mediator as appropriate, develop terms and conditions for:
(1) Funding mediation.
(2) Selecting a mediator who, at a minimum, shall have a working
knowledge of municipal zoning and subdivision procedures and
demonstrated skills in mediation.
(3) Completing mediation, including time limits for such completion.
(4) Suspending time limits otherwise authorized in the Municipalities
Planning Code, provided that there is written consent by the
mediating parties and by an applicant or municipal decisionmaking
body if either is not a party to the mediation.
(5) Identifying all parties and affording them the opportunity to
participate.
(6) Subject to legal restraints, determining whether some or all of the
mediation sessions shall be open or closed to the public.
(7) Assuring that mediated solutions are in writing and signed by the
parties and become subject to review and approval by the
appropriate decisionmaking body pursuant to the authorized
procedures set forth in the Municipalities Planning Code.
C. No offers or statements made in the mediation sessions, excluding the
final written mediated agreement, shall be admissible as evidence in
any subsequent judicial or administrative proceedings.
253. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10914.1.
§ 225-206 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-207
1:955

ARTICLE XX
Planned Residential Development
§ 225-208. Purpose.
The purposes of this article are to:
§ 225-209. Eligibility.
No application for tentative approval of a planned residential development
shall be considered or approved unless the following conditions are met:
A. Ensure that the provisions of the Shaler Township Zoning Chapter
which are concerned with the uniform treatment of dwelling type, bulk,
density and open space within each zoning district shall not be applied
to the improvement of land by other than lot-by-lot development in a
manner which would distort the objectives of this chapter.
B. Encourage innovations in residential development and renewal so that
the growing demand for housing may be met by greater variety in type,
design and layout of dwellings and by the conservation and more
efficient use of open space ancillary to said dwellings.
C. Provide greater opportunities for better housing and recreation for all
who are or will be residents of the Township.
D. Encourage a more efficient use of land and public services and to reflect
changes in the technology of land development so that the economies so
secured may enure to the benefit of those who need homes.
E. Encourage more flexible land development which will respect and
conserve natural resources, such as streams, lakes, floodplains,
groundwater, wooded areas, steeply sloped areas and areas of unusual
beauty or importance to the natural ecosystem.
F. Encourage innovations in residential developments that are designed to
minimize energy consumption and maximize recycling of materials in
their layout, transportation, climate control, energy sources and solid
and liquid waste treatment systems.
G. In aid of these purposes, provide a procedure which can relate the type,
design and layout of residential development to the particular site and
the particular demand for housing existing at the time of development
in a manner consistent with the preservation of the property values
within existing residential areas and to assure that the increased
flexibility of regulations over land development established hereby is
carried out pursuant to sound, expeditious and fair administrative
standards and procedures.
A. The tract proposed for a planned residential development consists of a
contiguous area of at least five acres.
§ 225-208 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-209
1:957
§ 225-210. Permitted uses.
A planned residential development may include the following uses:
§ 225-211. Development standards.
B. The development will be served by all utilities, including sanitary
sewers, storm sewers, waterlines, gas, electricity and stormwater
management, which shall be in place and capable of functioning prior to
the construction of any principal buildings within the planned
residential development or any stage thereof.
C. The proposed development is found to be generally consistent with the
Comprehensive Plan for Shaler Township.
D. The planned residential development shall be permitted as a
conditional use in all zoning districts of the Township meeting the
requirements of this article.
E. The tract of land to be developed shall be in one ownership or, if in
multiple ownership, shall be developed according to a single plan with
common authority and responsibility.
A. Residential uses, including detached, semidetached, attached (e.g.,
townhouse, multifamily) or multistoried (e.g., garden apartment,
apartment) structures or any combination thereof.
B. Commercial and institutional uses, to the extent that they are designed
and intended primarily to serve the residents of the planned residential
development.
C. Recreational uses deemed appropriate by the Board of Commissioners
for incorporation into the design of the development.
D. No-impact home-based businesses as an accessory use, subject to the
use restrictions and requirements of an R-1 Limited One-Family
District.
A. General site design and natural features analysis. A well-designed
planned residential development, integrated with existing social and
natural processes and making efficient use of common services, should
be an asset to the community. The site designer and architect, working
together, must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Township Planning
Commission and Board of Commissioners that they have considered
both the opportunities provided and the constraints imposed by the
existing natural and social features, both on and off the site of the
proposed development, in determining site layout (including the
selection of areas for open space) and design of structures. In order to
determine which specific areas of the total planned residential
development site are best suited for high-density development, which
areas are best suited for lower-density development and which areas
should be preserved in their natural state or utilized as active open
§ 225-209 SHALER CODE § 225-211
1:958
space areas, a thorough analysis of the natural features of the site will
be required.
(1) The following subject categories must be included in this analysis:
(a) Hydrology. Analysis of natural drainage patterns and water
resources, including an analysis of streams, natural drainage
swales, ponds or lakes, marsh areas, floodplain areas,
wetlands, permanent high-water table areas and seasonal
high-water table areas throughout the site.
(b) Geology. Analysis of characteristics of rock formations
underlying the site, including delineation of aquifers
(particularly those locally subject to pollution), shallow
bedrock areas and areas in which rock formations are
unstable.
(c) Soils. Analysis of types of soils present in the site area,
including delineation of prime agricultural soil areas, aquifer
recharge soil areas, unstable soils, soils most susceptible to
erosion and soils suitable for urban development. The analysis
of soils will be based on the Allegheny County Soil Survey
(United States Department of Agriculture Natural Resources
Conservation Service).
(d) Topography. Analysis of the site's terrain, including mapping of
contours and delineation of slope areas greater than 25%,
between 15% and 25%, between 8% and 15%, and less than
8%.
(e) Vegetation and wildlife. Analysis of tree and plant cover and
wildlife habitats of the site, emphasizing the location of
woodland and meadowland areas. Dominant tree, plant and
animal species should be identified and the characteristics of
each recognized.
(f) Microclimate. Analysis of seasonal temperatures, seasonal
precipitation, seasonal prevailing winds and daily hours of
sunlight in specific areas of the planned residential
development site.
(2) The Board of Commissioners shall require site planning to be in
accord with the results of such analysis and may require
modifications where, in its opinion, site planning has been
insufficiently attentive thereto.
B. Density and amount of open space.
(1) The maximum allowable average gross residential density for
planned residential developments shall be equal to the same
number of dwelling units per acre of land as allowed in the most
permissive zoning district in the Township, except that higher
§ 225-211 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-211
1:959
densities may be allowed in accordance with the bonus provisions
contained in this section. In no event shall the average gross
residential density exceed 1.25 times the dwelling units per acre as
allowed above.
(2) Supplemental facilities for commercial services to serve the
residents of the planned residential development and for
recreational purposes may be provided within a planned residential
development, based upon the following requirements:
(a) Recreational facilities may be located within required open
space areas; provided, however, that no building shall be
constructed within a floodplain area or within an area having a
slope greater than 25%. Ownership and maintenance shall be
in accordance with Subsection F(2) and (5) hereof.
(b) No convenience commercial facilities may be provided unless
the planned residential development shall contain a minimum
of 300 dwelling units, in which case a maximum of 3,600
square feet of gross leasable floor space may be provided. The
total of such floor space may be increased by an additional 15
square feet for each dwelling unit in excess of 300 within the
planned residential development.
(3) Not less than 25% of the gross acreage of the tract proposed for
planned residential development shall be designated and devoted
to common open space.
(4) The Zoning Hearing Board may grant a variance to permit that not
less than 15% of the gross acreage of the tract proposed for the
development shall be designated as and devoted to common open
space, provided that unnecessary hardship upon the applicant is
proven, and provided, further, that all other applicable
requirements of this chapter are met.
C. Density bonus. Permissible average gross residential density may be
increased, up to the maximum set forth in Subsection B(1) hereof, by
incorporation of the following features, either alone or in combination,
into the planned residential development:
(1) Additional open space. For each additional percentage point of land
in common open space above 25%, the average gross residential
density may be increased by 0.25%.
(2) Achievement of other purposes. The Board may grant a density
bonus to achieve other purposes, such as historic preservation,
outstanding site planning and design, unusual measures for
environmental enhancement, etc.
D. Design, bulk and location standards.
(1) Site design.
§ 225-211 SHALER CODE § 225-211
1:960
(a) All housing shall be designed with regard to topography and
natural features of the site. The effects of prevailing winds,
seasonal temperatures and hours of sunlight on the physical
layout and form of the proposed buildings shall be taken into
account.
(b) Housing and other facilities near the periphery of the planned
residential development shall be designed so as to be
harmonious with neighboring areas.
(c) Development in environmentally sensitive areas is subject to
the following limitations:
Type of Land Limitation
Floodplain area No units permitted
Wetlands No units permitted
Slope of 25% or
more
No units permitted
Slope of 15% to
25%
Maximum total disturbance of soil by
methods, including, but not limited to,
cutting, grading, filling, bulldozing,
plowing, regrading, digging or defoliation,
shall not exceed 5% of the total area
within a 15% to 25% slope
(2) Conservation of trees and natural features.
(a) The development shall be designed and programmed so as to
minimize earthmoving, erosion, tree clearance and the
destruction of natural amenities.
(b) No portions of tree masses or trees with eight inches or
greater diameter at breast height (dbh) shall be removed
unless clearly necessary for effectuation of the proposed
development. Developers shall make all reasonable efforts to
harmonize their plans with the preservation of existing trees.
(c) When effectuation of a proposed planned residential
development necessitates the clearing of trees or portions of
tree masses, the developer shall be guided by the following
criteria in selecting trees and ornamentals of retention or
clearing:
[1] Aesthetic values (autumn coloration, types of flower and
fruit, bark and crown characteristics and amount of
dieback present).
[2] Susceptibility of tree to insect and disease attack and to
air pollution.
[3] Species longevity.
§ 225-211 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-211
1:961
[4] Wind firmness and capability of soil to hold trees.
[5] Wildlife values (e.g., oak, hickory, pine, walnut and
dogwood have high food value).
[6] Comfort to surroundings (e.g., hardwoods reduce summer
temperatures to surroundings more effectively than pines
or cedars).
[7] Existence of disease, rot or other damage to the tree.
(Trees in poor physical condition should be removed.)
[8] Protection of buildings (e.g., dead and large limbs hanging
over buildings should be removed).
[9] The size of the tree at maturity.
(d) Developers shall exercise care to protect remaining trees from
damage during construction. The following procedures shall be
utilized in order to protect remaining trees:
[1] Where existing ground levels are raised, drainage tiles
shall be placed vertically at the old soil level and tops
brought up to the surface of the ground and filled with
coarse, crushed stone or gravel. The tiles should be placed
to the perimeter of the dripline of the tree and at a
maximum of four feet apart.
[2] Trees within 25 feet of a building or bordering entrances
or exits to building sites shall be protected by a temporary
barrier.
[3] No boards or other material shall be nailed to trees during
construction.
[4] Heavy equipment operators shall be warned to avoid
damaging existing tree trunks and roots. Roots shall not be
cut closer than the tree's dripline.
[5] Tree trunks and exposed roots damaged during
construction shall be protected from further damage by
being treated immediately with professional procedures.
[6] Tree limbs damaged during construction shall be sawed
flush to tree trunks and treated immediately with tree
paint.
[7] The operation of heavy equipment over root systems of
such trees shall be minimized in order to prevent soil
compaction.
[8] Nondormant trees shall be given a heavy application of
fertilizer to aid in their recovery from possible damage
caused by construction operations.
§ 225-211 SHALER CODE § 225-211
1:962
[9] Construction debris shall not be disposed of around or
near the bases of such trees except for mulched vegetative
matter used to prevent soil compaction.
(e) Trees with a minimum diameter at breast height of two inches
shall be provided by the developer where deemed necessary by
the Board to mitigate the loss of existing trees. Unless clearly
unfeasible, native species shall be utilized.
(3) Area spacing and yard requirements. The front yard depth; rear
yard depth; side yard width, each side; and side yard width
abutting street of all dwelling units and other structures in a
planned residential development shall not exceed the requirements
of the R-5 Zoning District.
(4) Height regulations. No structure shall exceed the maximum height
requirements of the R-5 Zoning District.
(5) Street and walkways.
(a) The design, dimensions and construction of all streets shall
comply with applicable standards in the Shaler Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.254 Where the
Board finds that the purposes of this chapter will be better
served, however, it may modify the terms of the Subdivision
and Land Development Ordinance, provided that a comparable
level of performance will be achieved.
(b) The street and walkway systems shall be designed so as to
relate harmoniously with land uses and adjacent streets and to
minimize through traffic in residential areas. All residential
parking and recreational areas shall be connected by
pedestrian walkways. Walkways that connect residential areas
and parking areas shall be of a durable, all-weather surface
satisfactory to the Board.
(c) Separation of vehicular from pedestrian and bicycle traffic is
encouraged. Where pedestrian walkways are not within a
street right-of-way, a walkway easement at least 10 feet in
width shall be designated. Where a walkway crosses over open
space land, however, the easement shall not be subtracted
from the open space land for purposes of calculating the area
thereof.
(d) Where dwelling units front on a perimeter collector street, no
direct vehicular access from the lot or tract to the collector
street shall be permitted.
254. Editor's Note: See Ch. 195, Subdivision of Land.
§ 225-211 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-211
1:963
(6) Parking. All planned residential developments shall have the
minimum number of off-street parking spaces for each dwelling
unit and structure as set forth in this chapter.
(7) Lighting.
(a) All common parking areas, steps, ramps, walkways of high
pedestrian use and directional signs shall be adequately
lighted.
(b) The Board may require lighting in other areas for reasons of
public safety.
(c) All above-required lighting and all external lighting fixtures
appurtenant to a structure shall be shielded from all
residential properties and from all rights-of-way so as to
eliminate light glare beyond an angle of 35° from a vertical
plane. No such lighting shall violate the applicable standards
set forth elsewhere in this chapter.
(8) Stormwater management. All requirements of the Shaler Township
Stormwater Management Ordinance,255 if any exists, shall be
applicable to a planned residential development.
(9) Landscaping and buffers.
(a) All common parking areas shall be landscaped with trees and
shrubs of varying species. At least one shade tree of minimum
diameter at breast height of two inches and height of six feet
on each side of the street shall be provided within the interior
of each parking area for every five parking spaces.
(b) Shade trees of varying species shall be planted along all streets
outside the street right-of-way. At least one tree of minimum
diameter at breast height of two inches and height of six feet
on each side of the street shall be provided for each 25 feet of
street length or fraction thereof.
(c) The Board shall require that, along the entire perimeter of the
tract proposed for a planned residential development or
identified segments thereof, a planting strip be installed that
adequately meets the following criteria:
[1] All existing trees two inches or more in diameter at breast
height and/or six feet or more in height shall be preserved,
except when cutting thereof is specifically approved by the
Board or is necessary for ensuring adequate sight
distance.
[2] The amount, density and types of planting shall be based
upon physiographic features, feasibility of using native
255. Editor's Note: See Ch. 190, Stormwater Management.
§ 225-211 SHALER CODE § 225-211
1:964
species, proximity to existing dwellings, compatibility of
adjacent uses and natural views. Where adjacent property
has been developed in such a manner that privacy from the
planned residential development is desirable, the planting
strip adjacent thereto shall be of sufficient density and
contain sufficient evergreen material to effectively screen
the portions of the planned residential development from
which privacy is desired. In other areas, particularly where
the physiographic features and existing vegetation provide
an attractive setting, the planting strip may be left in its
natural state or enhanced with additional plant material of
lesser density than a full screen.
[3] No planting shall be placed with its center closer than five
feet from a property line of the tract.
[4] Plantings shall be permanently maintained and, if
necessary to maintain an effective screen, replaced in the
event that they become diseased or dead.
[5] Planting species shall be mixed; generally, a minimum of
25% shall be evergreen and 10% flowering material.
(d) In addition to perimeter planting strips, the following
landscaping requirements shall be met:
[1] Disturbed topsoil shall be stockpiled, protected from
erosion and replaced after construction.
[2] Planting and protection of landscape material shall be in
accordance with a plan and schedule prepared by a
registered landscape architect and shall be completed
within six months of initial occupancy of each stage of
development. Maintenance precautions for all plant
materials shall be submitted with the final plan.
(10) Signs. All outdoor signs shall be in conformity with the provisions
of Article VIII, Signs, of this chapter, and with the most restrictive
zoning district in which the planned residential development is
located.
(11) Supplemental nonresidential facilities. All convenience commercial
facilities shall comply with the following standards:
(a) Locations shall be such as not to interfere with the adjacent
residential uses. Architectural compatibility with residential
structures to be erected within the planned residential
development shall be maximized.
(b) Freestanding or lighted signs are prohibited. All such signs
shall be attached to an exterior wall (not roof) of the structure
§ 225-211 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-211
1:965
and may be mounted either flush thereto or at right angles
thereto.
(c) Any parcel on which such facilities are located shall be
bounded by a buffer strip on all property lines abutting
residential uses. Such buffer strips shall be so designed that a
vegetative screen of installed and/or existing plant materials
provides, to the satisfaction of the Board, a barrier to visibility,
airborne particles, glare and noise.
(d) Refuse stations must be designed and screened, be in locations
convenient for collection and removal, and not be offensive or
visible to the occupants of adjacent residential uses.
(e) Buildings designed or intended to be used, in part or in whole,
for commercial purposes shall not be occupied or used as such
prior to the completion of and the issuance of occupancy
permits for at least 50% of the dwelling units proposed in the
plan.
(12) Sanitary sewers. All planned residential developments shall be
connected to a public sanitary sewer system.
(13)Water supply. All planned residential developments shall be
provided with a complete public water distribution system. The
design and installation of such public system shall be subject to the
approval of the Township.
(14) Other utilities.
(a) All other utility lines, including, but not limited to, electric, gas,
streetlight supply, cable television and telephone, shall be
placed underground. Installation of all utilities shall be in strict
accordance with the construction standards and specifications
of the Township, Municipal Authority or other public utility
concerned. All such underground utilities shall be put in place,
connected and approved before the streets are constructed,
where such utilities lie under the proposed cartway, and before
any person is permitted to occupy any building to be served by
such utilities.
(b) In accordance with the provisions of Act 170 of 1988,256 the
developer will contact all applicable utilities and accurately
determine the locations and depths of all underground utilities
within the boundaries of the tract proposed for development
prior to excavation. A list of the applicable utilities and their
phone numbers shall appear on the plans submitted for review,
and proof of contact shall be presented to the Township prior
to final plan approval.
256. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 225-211 SHALER CODE § 225-211
1:966
E. Development in stages. A developer may construct a planned
residential development in stages if the following criteria are met:
(1) The application for tentative approval covers the entire planned
residential development and shows the location and approximate
time of construction for each stage, in addition to other information
required by this chapter.
(2) At least 25% of the dwelling units in the plan given tentative
approval shall be included in all but the final stage.
(3) The second and subsequent stages are completed consistent with
the tentatively approved plan and are of such size and location,
including a sufficient degree of completion of the road network and
other infrastructure, that they constitute economically sound units
of development.
(4) Each phase shall include common open space in amounts and at
locations deemed acceptable by the Board to meet, at minimum,
the open space needs generated by that phase and to assure
protection of the sensitive features of the tract.
(5) Gross residential density may be varied from stage to stage,
provided that final approval shall not be given to any stage if the
gross residential density of the area which includes stages already
finally approved and the stage for which final approval is being
sought exceeds by more than 20% the gross residential density
allowed for the entire planned residential development in the
tentatively approved plan.
F. Standards for common open space.
(1) Amount. Not less than 25% of the total tract proposed for planned
residential development shall be designated as and used
exclusively for common open space.
(2) Ownership. Any of the following methods may be used, either
individually or together, to preserve, own and maintain common
open space: condominium, homeowners' association, dedication in
fee simple, dedication of easements and transfer of fee simple title
and easements to a private conservation organization. Such land
shall not be eligible for transfer to another party except for transfer
to another method of ownership permitted under this section and
then only where there is no change in the open space ratio. The
following specific requirements are associated with each of the
various methods:
(a) Homeowners' association. The common open space may be
held in common ownership by a homeowners' association. This
method shall be subject to all of the provisions for
homeowners' associations set forth in Subsection F(3) and
§ 225-211 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-211
1:967
(4)(a) below, and the homeowners' association agreement shall
be recorded.
(b) Fee simple dedication. The Township may, but shall not be
required to, accept any portion or portions of the common open
space, provided that:
[1] Such land is accessible to the residents of the Township;
[2] There is no cost of acquisition (other than any costs
incidental to the transfer of ownership, such as title
insurance); and
[3] The Township agrees to and has access to maintain such
lands.
(c) Transfer to private conservation organization. With permission
of the Township, an owner may transfer either the fee simple
title, with appropriate deed restrictions running in favor of the
Township, or restrictive easement to a private nonprofit
organization among whose purposes is to conserve open space
land and/or natural resources, provided that:
[1] The organization is acceptable to the Township and is a
bona fide conservation organization with perpetual
existence;
[2] The conveyance contains appropriate provision for proper
reversion or retransfer in the event that the organization
becomes unwilling or unable to continue carrying out its
functions; and
[3] A maintenance agreement acceptable to the Township is
reached.
(d) Dedication of easement. The Township may but shall not be
required to accept easements for public use of any portion or
portions of open space land, title to which is to remain in
ownership by condominium or homeowners' association,
provided that:
[1] Such land is accessible to the residents of the Township;
[2] There is no cost of acquisition (other than any costs
incidental to the transfer of ownership, such as title
insurance); and
[3] A maintenance agreement acceptable to the Township is
reached.
(e) Condominium. The common open space may be controlled
through the use of condominium agreements. Such
agreements shall be in conformance with the Uniform
§ 225-211 SHALER CODE § 225-211
1:968
Condominium Act of 1980.257 All open space land shall be held
as common element.
(3) Specific requirements for homeowners' association. If a
homeowners' association is formed, it shall be governed according
to the following regulations:
(a) The developer shall provide to the Township a description of
the organization, including its bylaws and documents
governing open space maintenance and use restrictions.
(b) The organization shall be established by the developers and
shall be operating (with financial subsidization by the
developers, if necessary) before the sale of any lots within the
development.
(c) Membership in the organization is mandatory for all
purchasers of homes therein and their successors.
(d) The organization shall be responsible for maintenance of and
insurance on common open space. The organization also shall
be responsible for real estate taxes on common open space,
except where the following alternative is utilized:
[1] The developer of any subdivision or land development
proposed to contain an area(s) of common open space shall
arrange with the County Board of Assessment a method of
assessment of the open space which will allocate to each
tax parcel in the subdivision a share of the total
assessment for such open space. Where this alternative is
to be utilized, the method of allocation shall be approved
by the Board of Commissioners.
(e) The members of the organization shall share equitably the
costs of maintaining and developing common open space, in
accordance with the procedures established by them.
(f) In the event of any proposed transfer of common open space
land by the homeowners' association within the methods here
permitted or of the assumption of maintenance of common
open space land by the Township as hereinafter provided,
notice of such action shall be given to all property owners
within the planned residential development by the
homeowners' association.
(g) The organization shall have or hire adequate staff to
administer common facilities and maintain common open
space.
257. Editor's Note: 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 3101 et seq.
§ 225-211 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-211
1:969
(h) The homeowners' association may lease back open space lands
to the developer, his heirs or assigns or to any other person or
corporation qualified to manage open space for operation and
maintenance of open space lands, but such a lease agreement
shall provide that the residents of the planned residential
development shall at all times have access to the open space
lands contained therein, that the common open space to be
leased shall be maintained for the purposes set forth in this
chapter and that the operation of open space facilities may be
for the benefit of the residents of planned residential
development only or may be open to the residents of the
Township. The lease shall be subject to the approval of the
Township, as shall any transfer or assignment of the lease.
Lease agreements so entered upon shall be recorded with the
Recorder of Deeds of Allegheny County within 30 days of their
execution, and a copy of the recorded lease shall be filed with
the Township.
(4) Location, design and layout standards.
(a) The open space shall be laid out to the satisfaction of the Board
in accordance with the best principles of site design, shall be
consistent with the Township Comprehensive and Open Space
Plans, and shall be located and designed as an area or areas
easily accessible to residents of the planned residential
development and preserving natural features. Common open
space areas should include both active recreation areas for all
age groups and particularly, where the site includes a
watercourse or sloped or wooded areas, land which is left as a
natural area. At least 50% of the open space area shall be
appropriate for active recreational use and, subject to the
provisions of Subsection F(4)(b)[3], at least 75% shall be
located outside floodplain areas and areas of greater than 25%
slope. In addition, no less than 50% of the open space area
shall remain as a natural area.
(b) The tentative and final plans shall designate the use of open
space, the type of maintenance to be provided and a planting
plan or schedule. In designating use and maintenance, the
following classes may be used:
[1] Lawn. A grass area with or without trees, which may be
used by the residents for a variety of purposes and which
shall be mowed regularly to ensure a neat and tidy
appearance.
[2] Natural area. An area of natural vegetation undisturbed
during construction or replanted; such areas may contain
pathways. Meadows shall be maintained as such.
Maintenance may be minimal but shall prevent the
proliferation of undesirable plants. Litter, dead trees and
§ 225-211 SHALER CODE § 225-211
1:970
such shall be removed and streams kept in free-flowing
conditions.
[3] Recreation area. An area designated for a specific
recreational use, including but not limited to tennis,
swimming, play fields and tot-lots. Such areas shall be
located and maintained in such manner as not to create a
hazard or nuisance and shall perpetuate the proposed use.
(c) The following design standards, as deemed appropriate by the
Board, shall apply to areas of common open space. Such areas
shall be:
[1] Interconnected with common open space areas on
abutting parcels wherever possible, including provisions
for pedestrian pathways for general public use to create
linked pathway systems within the Township.
[2] Provided with sufficient perimeter parking when
necessary and with safe and convenient access from
adjoining public road frontage or other rights-of-way or
easements capable of accommodating pedestrian, bicycle
and maintenance and vehicle traffic and containing
appropriate access improvements. Areas required for
parking may be included in calculating the minimum
acreage required for open space.
[3] Undivided by any crossings of public or private roads,
except where necessary for proper traffic circulation, and
then only upon recommendation of the Township Engineer
and Planning Commission.
[4] Free of all structures, except those related to outdoor
recreational use.
[5] Suitably landscaped by retaining existing natural cover
and wooded areas and/or by a landscaping plan, which is
consistent with the purposes of this section and which
minimizes maintenance costs.
[6] Made subject to such agreement with the Township and
such deed restrictions duly recorded in the office of the
Recorder of Deeds in Allegheny County as may be required
by the Board of Commissioners for the purpose of
preserving the common open space for such use.
(5) Maintenance.
(a) In the event that the organization established to own and
maintain a common open space or any successor organization
shall at any time after establishment of the planned residential
development fail to maintain the common open space in
§ 225-211 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-211
1:971
reasonable order and condition in accordance with the
development plan, the Township may serve written notice upon
such organization or upon the residents and owners of the
planned residential development, setting forth the manner in
which the organization has failed to maintain the common open
space in reasonable condition, and said notice shall include a
demand that such deficiencies of maintenance be cured within
30 days thereof and shall state the date and place of a hearing
thereon, which shall be held within 14 days of the notice.
At such hearing, the Township may modify the terms of the
original notice as to the deficiencies and may give an extension
of time within which they shall be corrected. If the deficiencies
set forth in the original notice or in the modifications thereof
shall not be corrected within said 30 days or any extension
thereof, the Township, in order to preserve the taxable values
of the properties within the planned residential development
and to prevent the common open space from becoming a public
nuisance, may enter upon said common open space and
maintain the same for a period of one year. Said entry and
maintenance shall not constitute a taking of said common open
space and shall not vest in the public any rights to use the
common open space except when the same is voluntarily
dedicated to the public by the residents and owners and such
dedication is acceptable to the Township. Before the expiration
of said year, the Township shall, upon its initiative or upon
the request of the organization theretofore responsible for the
maintenance of the common open space, call a public hearing
upon notice to such organization or the residents and owners
of the planned residential development, to be held by the
Township, at which hearing such organization or the residents
and owners of the planned residential development shall show
cause why such maintenance by the Township shall not, at the
election of the Township, continue for a succeeding year. If
the Township shall determine that such organization is ready
and able to maintain said common open space in reasonable
condition, the Township shall cease to maintain said common
open space at the end of said year. If the Township shall
determine such organization is not ready and able to maintain
said common open space in a reasonable condition, the
Township may, in its discretion, continue to maintain said
common open space during the next succeeding year and
subject to a similar hearing and determination in each year
thereafter. The decision of the Township in any case shall
constitute a final administrative decision subject to judicial
review.
(b) The cost of such maintenance and enforcement proceedings by
the Township shall be assessed ratably against the properties
within the planned residential development that have a right of
enjoyment of the common open space and shall become a lien
§ 225-211 SHALER CODE § 225-211
1:972
§ 225-212. Contents of application.
on said properties. Said assessments or charges shall be
subordinate in lien to the lien of any prior mortgage or
mortgages on the property which is subject to such
assessments or charges. The Township, at the time of entering
upon such said common open space for the purpose of
maintenance, shall file a notice of such lien in the office of
the Prothonotary of the County upon the properties affected by
such lien within the planned residential development.
G. Enforcement of plan provisions. In accordance with Section 706 of Act
170,258 the provisions of the development plan relating to the use, bulk
and location of buildings and structures; the quantity and location of
common open space; and the intensity of use or the density of
residential units shall run in favor of the Township and shall be
enforceable in law or in equity by the Township, without limitation on
any powers of regulation otherwise granted the Township by law. The
development plan shall specify those of its provisions which shall run in
favor of and be enforceable by residents of the planned residential
development and, in addition, the manner in which such residents may
modify or release such rights.
A. Application for tentative approval.
(1) The application for tentative approval shall include documentation
illustrating compliance with all of the standards for planned
residential development set forth in this section.
(2) The application for tentative approval shall include, but not
necessarily be limited to, the following documents:
(a) A key map, drawn at a scale of one inch equals 400 feet,
showing the location and size of the property and showing the
relation of the property to adjoining areas and streets and
showing the nature of the landowner's interest in the land
proposed to be developed;
(b) Plans, at a scale of no greater than one inch equals 50 feet, on
sheets of 36 inches by 24 inches, showing existing natural and
man-made features of the land, including topography,
vegetation, drainage and soils classification. The following
information shall be included on such plan:
[1] Contour lines at vertical intervals of not more than two
feet if the general slope is less than 10% and at intervals of
five feet if the general slope is greater than 10%, and
showing location and elevation of the closest established
258. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10706.
§ 225-211 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-212
1:973
National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 bench mark(s)
from which the contour elevations are derived.
[2] Total tract boundaries of the property being developed,
showing bearings and distances and a statement of the
total acreage of the property.
[3] Locations of all existing tree masses, trees of diameter at
breast height of over eight inches not part of a tree mass,
other specimen trees, rock outcroppings, watercourses,
floodplain areas, wetlands and other significant natural
features. (Where floodplain areas, as defined in this
chapter, are located on the tract, such areas shall be
delineated in accordance with the floodplain district map
that is part of this chapter.259
[4] Slope differentials delineating all slopes of 8% or less,
from 9% to 15%, from 16% to 25% and in excess of 25%.
[5] Delineation of existing drainage patterns on the property.
[6] Existing soil classifications.
[7] Any existing sewer lines, waterlines, electric and
telephone utility lines, pipelines, culverts, bridges,
railroads, roads and other significant man-made features.
[8] Locations of all structures and areas of known or potential
historical significance on the tract or within 50 feet of the
property boundary.
(c) A site plan, at a scale of no greater than one inch equals 50
feet, on sheets of 36 inches by 24 inches, showing proposed
use areas, common open space and location of buildings and
improvements to be installed. The following shall be shown on
the site plan:
[1] The total number of residential units proposed, with
subtotals for each housing type.
[2] The total acreage of the tract.
[3] The average gross residential density.
[4] The approximate location of all buildings, roads, parking
areas, sidewalks or pathways; descriptions of the use of all
structures; dimensions (including height) of all buildings
and other structures; road rights-of-way and cartway
widths; and proposed structures and facilities for control
of stormwater runoff.
259. Editor's Note: The floodplain district map is on file in the Township offices.)
§ 225-212 SHALER CODE § 225-212
1:974
[5] The location, function, size, ownership and manner of
maintenance of common open space areas, indicating the
nature of the facilities or structures therein and proposed
uses thereof.
[6] Connections to public utilities and streets, accompanied by
documentation as to the impact of the proposed
development on such utilities and streets.
[7] Lot lines with approximate dimensions for all residential
units for such utilities and streets.
[8] Proposed utility easement locations.
[9] Stormwater management and proposed detention
structure and facilities with runoff calculations and
narrative.
[10] Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures.
[11] Site grading plan with typical section, proposed cut and fill
slopes, conforming to Chapter 140, Grading, Excavating
and Filling.
(d) The substance of covenants, grants of easements or other
restrictions to be imposed upon the use of land, buildings and
structures, including proposed grants and/or easements for
public utilities.
(e) A site plan and narrative illustrating phasing, including a time
schedule for all on-site and off-site improvements which shall
be made, and the proposed times within which applications for
final approval of all sections of the planned residential
development are intended to be filed. The schedule must be
updated annually on the anniversary of its approval until the
development is completed and accepted.
(f) A written statement by the landowner setting forth reasons
why, in his opinion, the planned residential development would
be in the public interest and would be consistent with the
Township's Comprehensive Plan.
B. Application for final approval.
(1) The application for final approval may be for all the land included in
the tentative application or, to the extent set forth in the tentative
approval, for a section thereof. The application for final approval
shall include all conditions cited in the tentative approval and all
documents illustrating compliance with all of the standards for
planned residential development set forth herein.
(2) The application for final approval shall include but not necessarily
be limited to the following documents:
§ 225-212 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-212
1:975
(a) A key map in accordance with the requirements of Subsection
A(2)(a) of this section.
(b) Plans, at a scale of no greater than one inch equals 50 feet, on
sheets of 36 inches by 24 inches, of existing natural and manmade
features of the land, including topography, vegetation,
drainage and soils classification, in accordance with the
requirements of Subsection A(2)(b) of this section.
(c) A site plan, at a scale of no greater than one inch equals 50
feet, on sheets of 36 inches by 24 inches, showing proposed
use areas, common open space and location of buildings and
improvements to be installed. In addition to the requirements
of Subsection A(2)(c), the site plan shall show the following:
[1] The total tract boundary lines of the area being developed,
with accurate distances to hundredths of a foot and
bearings in degrees, minutes and seconds. Boundaries
shall be determined by an accurate field survey and shall
show the location of all boundary line monuments.
[2] The exact location of all buildings, roads, parking areas,
sidewalks or pathways; descriptions of the use of all
structures; dimensions (including height) of all buildings
and other structures; road rights-of-way and cartway
widths; and all stormwater detention structures and
facilities, as well as all utilities.
[3] Lot lines with exact dimensions for all residential units for
which individual ownership is proposed, together with
proposed building setback lines for each lot and the
proposed placement of each building.
[4] Clear sight triangles for all street intersections.
[5] Accurate dimensions of common open space areas and,
where structures are to be situated therein, the exact
location and dimensions of all such structures.
[6] Proposed names of all streets.
(d) A construction plan at a scale of no greater than one inch
equals 50 feet, on sheets of 36 inches by 24 inches, showing
profiles and grades for all proposed streets, whether to be
dedicated or to be privately owned, within the tract, showing at
least the following information:
[1] Existing natural profiles along the center line of each
proposed street.
[2] Proposed finished grade along the center line of each
proposed street.
§ 225-212 SHALER CODE § 225-212
1:976
[3] The length and curve data for all vertical curves.
[4] Location, profile and proposed grade of all existing and
proposed sanitary sewers, storm sewers and waterlines,
with location and depth of all proposed manholes, storm
inlets and fire hydrants.
[5] Typical cross sections of all roads at intervals of 50 feet.
(e) A soil erosion and sedimentation plan at a scale of no greater
than one inch equals 50 feet, on sheets of 36 inches by 24
inches, showing adequate soil erosion and sedimentation
controls, structures, sediment basins, silt traps and other
measures to control siltation and minimize erosion during
grading and filling operations and the construction of utilities
and other improvements, conforming to the requirements and
specifications of the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection Soil Erosion and Sedimentation
Control Manual.
(f) A site grading plan at a scale of no greater than one inch
equals 50 feet, on sheets of 36 inches by 24 inches, showing
proposed cut and fill areas with typical sections, cut and fill
slopes conforming to the requirements of Chapter 140,
Grading, Excavating and Filling.
(g) A stormwater management plan at a scale of no greater than
one inch equals 50 feet, on sheets of 36 inches by 24 inches,
showing the location, size and details of all stormwater
detention structures and facilities with stormwater
calculations conforming to the requirements of the Storm
Water Management Act,260 Allegheny County and Shaler
Township.
(h) Approvals and permits from the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection for the proposed sanitary sewers
and appurtenances.
(i) Architectural drawings illustrating exterior and interior
designs of typical residential buildings of each type and of each
nonresidential structure to be constructed, including
statements and illustrations of materials to be used in
construction.
(j) Final drafts of all offers of dedication, covenants, easements,
deed restrictions and maintenance agreements to be imposed
upon the use of land, buildings and structures and pertaining
to the ownership, use and maintenance of all common space
areas and any other common facilities, as set forth herein, and
260. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
§ 225-212 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-212
1:977
§ 225-213. Submission and review procedures.
including proposed grants and/or easements for public
utilities.
(k) Landscaping plan and schedule, prepared by a registered
landscape architect.
(3) Arrangements for and documents governing performance and
maintenance guaranties as required herein.
A. Preapplication procedures. A landowner proposing to develop a
planned residential development is strongly encouraged to submit a
sketch plan to the Planning Commission for informal discussion prior to
the drafting of the tentative plan.
B. Application for tentative approval.
(1) The application for tentative approval shall be executed by or on
behalf of the landowner and filed with the Township Secretary. An
initial deposit in the amount set and from time to time amended by
the Commissioners shall be paid upon filing of the application, and
additional deposits shall be made from time to time as requested by
the Township. Such deposits shall be applied against the expenses
of processing and reviewing the application and are not to exceed
actual expenses incurred by the Township.
(2) The developer shall submit 13 copies of all required plans and
information; the Township Secretary shall thereafter distribute
copies of the plans to all appropriate agencies, including but not
limited to (for example) the Township Planning Commission, the
Board of Commissioners, the County Planning Commission, the
County Health Department, the Township Engineer, the Natural
Resources Conservation Service, the Township Park and
Recreation Board and the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection.
(3) The Planning Commission shall receive copies of all applications
and all pertinent reviews for planned residential developments and
shall make recommendations thereon and shall forward such
recommendations to the Board of Commissioners.
(4) All pertinent reviews, including those of the Township and County
Planning Commission and the Township Engineer, shall be effected
within 45 days of referral or at least five days prior to the public
hearing to be held by the Board of Commissioners on the tentative
application, whichever shall first occur. The Township Planning
Commission shall forward to the Board copies of reports received
from the Township Engineer and all other reviewing agencies,
together with its own recommendations, within the aforesaid time
limitations. Copies of such reports and recommendations also shall
be furnished to the applicant within the aforesaid time limitations.
§ 225-212 SHALER CODE § 225-213
1:978
C. Public hearings.
(1) Within 60 days after the filing of an application for tentative
approval of a planned residential development pursuant to this
chapter, a public hearing pursuant to public notice on said
application shall be held by the Board in the manner prescribed in
this chapter for the enactment of an amendment.
(2) The Board may continue the public hearing; provided, however,
that the ensuing hearings shall be concluded within 60 days from
the date of the first public hearing.
(3) The Township may offer a mediation option as an aid in completing
proceedings authorized by the Municipalities Planning Code prior
to final approval by the Board of Commissioners. In exercising such
an option, the municipality and mediating parties shall meet the
stipulations and follow the procedures set forth in Article IX of the
Municipalities Planning Code.261
D. Findings.
(1) Response.
(a) Within 60 days following the conclusion of the public hearing
provided for in this section, the Board shall, by official written
communication to the landowner, either:
[1] Grant tentative approval of the development plan as
submitted;
[2] Grant tentative approval subject to specified conditions
not included in the development plan as submitted; or
[3] Deny tentative approval of the development plan.
(b) Failure to so act, within said period, shall be deemed to be a
grant of tentative approval of the development plan as
submitted. In the event, however, that tentative approval is
granted subject to conditions, the landowner may, within 30
days after receiving a copy of the official written
communication of the Board of Commissioners, notify the
Board of his refusal to accept all said conditions; in which case,
the Board shall be deemed to have denied tentative approval of
the development plan. In the event that the landowner does
not, within said period, notify the Board of his refusal to accept
all said conditions, tentative approval of the development plan,
with all said conditions, shall stand as granted.
(2) The grant or denial of tentative approval by official written
communication shall include not only conclusions but also findings
of fact related to the specific proposal and shall set forth the
261. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10901 et seq.
§ 225-213 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-213
1:979
reasons for the grant, with or without conditions, or for the denial;
and said communication shall set forth, with particularity, in what
respects the development plan would or would not be in the public
interest, including but not limited to findings of fact and
conclusions on the following:
(a) Those respects in which the development plan is or is not
consistent with the Comprehensive Plan for the development of
the Township.
(b) The extent to which the development plan departs from zoning
and subdivision regulations otherwise applicable to the subject
property, including but not limited to density, bulk and use, and
the reasons, if any, why such departures are not deemed to be
in the public interest.
(c) The purpose, location and amount of the common open space
in the planned residential development, the reliability of the
proposals for maintenance and conservation of the common
open space, and the adequacy or inadequacy of the amount and
purpose of the common open space as related to the proposed
density and type of residential development.
(d) The physical design of the development plan and the manner in
which said design does or does not make adequate provision
for public services, provide adequate control over vehicular
traffic, and further the amenities of light and air, recreation
and visual enjoyment.
(e) The relationship, beneficial or adverse, of the proposed
planned residential development to the neighborhood in which
it is proposed to be established.
(f) In the case of a development plan which proposes development
over a period of years, the sufficiency of the terms and
conditions intended to protect the interests of the public and of
the residents of the planned residential development in the
integrity of the development plan.
(3) In the event a development plan is granted tentative approval, with
or without conditions, the Board may set forth in the official written
communication the time within which an application for final
approval of the development plan shall be filed or, in the case of a
development plan which provides for development over a period of
years, the periods of time within which applications for final
approval of each stage thereof shall be filed. Except upon the
consent of the landowner, the time so established between grant of
tentative approval and an application for final approval shall not be
less than three months and, in case of developments over a period
of years, the time between applications for final approval of each
stage of a plan shall not be less than 12 months.
§ 225-213 SHALER CODE § 225-213
1:980
E. Status of plan after tentative approval.
(1) The official written communication provided for in Subsection D of
this section shall be certified by the Secretary of the Board of
Commissioners and shall be filed in his office, and a certified copy
shall be mailed to the landowner. Where tentative approval has
been granted, it shall be deemed an amendment to the Zoning Map
effective upon final approval and shall be noted on the Shaler
Township Zoning Map.262
(2) Tentative approval of a development plan shall not qualify a plat of
the planned residential development for recording nor authorize
development or the issuance of any building permits. A
development plan which has been given tentative approval as
submitted or which has been given tentative approval with
conditions which have been accepted by the landowner (and
provided that the landowner has not defaulted nor violated any of
the conditions of the tentative approval) shall not be modified or
revoked nor otherwise impaired by action of the Township pending
an application or applications for final approval without the consent
of the landowner, provided that an application or applications for
final approval is filed or, in the case of development over a period of
years, provided that applications are filed within the period of time
specified in the official written communication granting tentative
approval.
F. Application for final approval.
(1) An application for final approval may be for all the land included in
a development plan or, to the extent set forth in the tentative
approval, a section thereof. Said application shall be made to the
official of the Township designated by this chapter within the time
or times specified by the official written communication granting
tentative approval. The application shall include any drawings,
specifications, covenants, easements, performance bonds and such
other requirements as may be specified by ordinance, as well as
any conditions set forth in the official written communication at the
time of tentative approval. A public hearing on the application for
final approval of the development plan or part thereof shall not be
required, provided the development plan or part thereof submitted
for final approval is in compliance with the development plan
theretofore given tentative approval and with specified conditions
attached thereto.
(2) In the event that the application for final approval has been filed,
together with all drawings, specifications and other documents in
support thereof and as required by this chapter and the official
written communication of tentative approval, the Township shall,
262. Editor's Note: Said map is on file in the Township offices.
§ 225-213 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-213
1:981
within 45 days of such filing, grant such development plan final
approval.
(3) In the event that the development plan as submitted contains
variations from the development plan given tentative approval, the
Board may refuse to grant final approval and shall, within 45 days
from the filing of this application for final approval, so advise the
landowner in writing of said refusal, setting forth in said notice the
reasons why one or more of said variations are not in the public
interest.
(a) In the event of such refusal, the landowner may either:
[1] Refile his application for final approval without the
variations objected to; or
[2] File a written request with the Board that it hold a public
hearing on his application for final approval.
(b) If the landowner wishes to take either such alternate action, he
may do so at any time within which he shall be entitled to apply
for final approval or within 30 additional days if the time for
applying for final approval shall have already passed at the
time when the landowner was advised that the development
plan was not in substantial compliance. In the event that the
landowner shall fail to take either of these alternate actions
within said time, he shall be deemed to have abandoned the
development plan. Any such public hearing shall be held
pursuant to public notice within 30 days after request for the
hearing is made by the landowner, and the hearing shall be
conducted in the manner prescribed in this chapter for public
hearings on applications for tentative approval. Within 30 days
after the conclusion of the hearing, the Board shall, by official
written communication, either grant final approval to the
development plan or deny final approval. The grant or denial of
final approval of the development plan shall, in cases arising
under this section, be in the form and contain the findings
required for an application for tentative approval set forth in
this chapter.
(4) A development plan or any part thereof which has been given final
approval shall be so certified without delay by the Board and shall
be filed of record forthwith in the office of the Recorder of Deeds
before any development shall take place in accordance therewith.
Upon the filing of record of the development plan, the zoning and
subdivision regulations otherwise applicable to the land included in
such plan shall cease to apply thereto.
(5) In the event that a development plan or a section thereof is given
final approval and thereafter the landowner shall abandon such
plan or the section thereof that has been finally approved and shall
so notify the Board in writing, or in the event that the landowner
§ 225-213 SHALER CODE § 225-213
1:982
§ 225-214. Administration.
shall fail to commence and carry out the planned residential
development in accordance with the time provisions stated in
Section 508 of the Municipalities Planning Code263 after final
approval has been granted, no development or further
development shall take place on the property included in the
development plan until after said property is reclassified by
enactment of an amendment to this Zoning Chapter, as amended.
A. Performance guaranty. Prior to release of the approved final plan for
recording, the developer shall guarantee the installation of all required
improvements by posting a performance guaranty. The amount, form,
terms of release, etc., of the performance guaranty shall be the same as
those specified in § 195-6 of the Shaler Township Subdivision of Land
Chapter, as amended.
B. Dedication and maintenance guaranty.
(1) All streets, recreational facilities, surface drainage, water and
sewer facilities and other improvements shown on the final plan
shall be privately owned until such time as they have been offered
for dedication to the Township and accepted by resolution of the
Board.
(2) Before accepting any such offer of dedication, the Board shall
require of the developer a maintenance guarantee. The amount,
form, duration, terms of release, etc., shall be the same as those
specified in § 195-6 of the Shaler Township Subdivision of Land
Chapter, as amended.
C. Permits.
(1) Issuance of permits and all matters pertaining to administration of
the plan as finally approved shall be the responsibility of the
Township Zoning Officer.
(2) Upon application of the landowner showing compliance with the
requirements of final approval, the Zoning Officer shall issue
permits for construction pursuant to the plan or any section
thereof.
(3) The provisions of the section involving conditional uses of this
Zoning Chapter, as amended, shall be fully applicable to the plan as
finally approved insofar as the provisions thereof are consistent
with the provisions of this article and the conditions of final
approval. The Zoning Officer shall review the progress and status
of construction of the plan and render monthly progress and status
of construction of the plan and render monthly reports thereon to
263. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10508.
§ 225-213 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-214
1:983
the Board in order to assure compliance with the provisions of this
chapter and the conditions of final approval.
D. Fees. The Board shall establish by resolution a schedule of fees to be
paid by the developer at the time of filing the tentative and final
applications.
§ 225-214 SHALER CODE § 225-214
1:984
ARTICLE XXI
Enforcement; Penalties
§ 225-215. Enforcement notice.
§ 225-216. Causes of action.
A. If it appears to Shaler Township that a violation of this chapter has
occurred, Shaler Township shall initiate enforcement proceedings by
sending an enforcement notice as provided in this section.
B. The enforcement notice shall be sent to the owner of record of the
parcel on which the violation has occurred, to any person who has filed
a written request to receive enforcement notices regarding that parcel,
and to any other person requested in writing by the owner of record.
C. The enforcement notice shall state at least the following:
(1) The name of the owner of record and any other person against
whom the Township of Shaler intends to take action.
(2) The location of the property in violation.
(3) The specific violation with a description of the requirements which
have not been met, citing in each instance the applicable provisions
of this chapter.
(4) The date before which the steps for compliance must be
commenced and the date before which the steps must be
completed.
(5) That the recipient of the notice has the right to appeal to the Shaler
Township Zoning Hearing Board within 30 days of the mailing date
of the notice in accordance with procedures set forth in this
chapter.
(6) That failure to comply with the notice within the time specified,
unless extended by appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board,
constitutes a violation, and upon being found liable therefor in a
civil enforcement proceeding, shall pay a judgment of not more
than $500, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorneys' fees
incurred by the Township.
A. In case any building, structure, landscaping, sign or land is or is
proposed to be erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired,
converted, maintained or used in violation of this chapter, the Board of
Commissioners or, with the approval of the Board of Commissioners, an
officer of Shaler Township or any aggrieved owner or tenant of real
property who shows that his property or person will be substantially
affected by the alleged violation, in addition to other remedies, may
institute any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, restrain,
correct or abate such building, structure, landscaping, sign or land or
§ 225-215 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-216
1:985
§ 225-217. Enforcement remedies; violations and penalties.
to prevent, in or about such premises, any act, conduct, business or
use constituting a violation. When any such action is instituted by a
landowner or tenant, notice of that action shall be served upon Shaler
Township, by certified mail, at least 30 days prior to the time the
action is to begin by serving a copy of the complaint on the Board of
Commissioners of Shaler Township. No such action may be maintained
unless such notice has been given.
B. Jurisdiction. Magisterial District Judges shall have initial jurisdiction
over proceedings brought under Subsection A of § 225-216.
A. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated or
permitted the violation of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding
commenced by Shaler Township, pay a judgment of not more than $500,
plus all court costs, including reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by
Shaler Township as a result thereof. No judgment shall commence or be
imposed, levied or payable until the date of the determination of a
violation by the Magisterial District Judge. If the defendant neither pays
nor timely appeals the judgment, Shaler Township may enforce the
judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure. Each day
that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation, unless
the Magisterial District Judge determining that there has been a
violation further determines that there was a good-faith basis for the
person, partnership or corporation violating this chapter to have
believed that there was no violation, in which event there shall be
deemed to have been only one such violation until the fifth day
following the date of the determination of a violation by the Magisterial
District Judge; and thereafter each day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate violation. All judgments, costs and reasonable
attorneys' fees collected for the violation of this chapter shall be paid
over to Shaler Township.
B. The Court of Common Pleas of Allegheny County, upon petition, may
grant an order or stay, upon cause shown, tolling the per-diem fine
pending a final adjudication of the violation and judgment.
C. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted to
grant to any person or entity other than Shaler Township the right to
commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this section.
§ 225-216 SHALER CODE § 225-217
1:986
ARTICLE XXII
Definitions
§ 225-218. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABANDONED SIGN — A sign which has not been utilized for a period of
180 days or more, or a sign, the content of which no longer identifies or
advertises a bona fide business, lessor, service, owner, product or activity;
or a sign, the contents of which pertains to a place, time, event or purpose
which no longer exists, applies or which has occurred.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A structure clearly and customarily
subordinate to and on the same lot as the principal building and used
exclusively for the purposes constituting an accessory use, including, but
not to limit the applicability of the foregoing, private garages, barns, utility
sheds, greenhouses, satellite dish antennas, and buildings for housing
household pets, and excluding signs, antennas, communications towers,
communications facilities, telecommunications equipment buildings, colocation/
shared-use communications facilities, and power-mounted/shareduse
communications facilities.
ACCESSORY USE — A use which is clearly part of, incidental to,
subordinate to, devoted exclusively to and located on the same lot occupied
by the principal use of the land or structures, but excluding signs, antennas,
communications towers, communications facilities, telecommunications
equipment buildings, co-location/shared-use communications facilities, and
power-mounted/shared-use communications facilities.
ADULT ARCADE — Any place to which the public is permitted or invited
wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or
mechanically controlled still- or motion-picture machines, projectors or
other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or
fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so
displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing
of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
ADULT BOOKSTORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE — An establishment having
a substantial or significant portion of its stock and trade in, or an
establishment which as one of its principal business purposes offers for
sale, books, films, video cassettes or magazines and other periodicals, which
are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas and, in conjunction therewith, has facilities for the presentation of
adult entertainment for observation by patrons.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT —
An exhibition of any adult-oriented motion pictures, meaning those
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
A.
§ 225-218 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-218
1:987
ADULT MINI MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed building with a
capacity of less than 50 persons which has a principal business purpose of
exhibiting, presenting or selling material distinguished or characterized by
an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons.
ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENT —
ADVERTISING SIGN — A sign which directs attention to a business,
commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered only
elsewhere than upon the premises where the sign is displayed.
ALTERATION — As applied to a building or structure, a change or
rearrangement in the structural parts or in the exit facilities or an
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
A live performance, display or dance of any type which has as a
significant or substantial portion of the performance any actual or
simulated performance of specified sexual activities or exhibition and
viewing of specified anatomical areas, removal of articles of clothing
or appearing unclothed, pantomiming, modeling or any other personal
services offered customers.
B.
Includes, without limitation, the following establishments when
operated for profit, whether direct or indirect:
(1) Adult bookstores.
(2) Adult motion-picture theaters.
(3) Adult mini motion-picture theaters.
Any premises to which the public, patrons or members are invited
or admitted and which are so physically arranged as to provide
booths, cubicles, rooms, studios, compartments or stalls separate
from the common areas of the premises for the purpose of viewing
adult-oriented motion-pictures or where an entertainer provides
adult entertainment to a member of the public, patron or a member.
(4)
An adult entertainment studio or any premises that are physically
arranged and used as such, whether advertised or represented
as an adult entertainment studio, rap studio, exotic dance studio,
encounter studio, sensitivity studio, modeling studio or any other
term of like import.
(5)
A.
The term "booths, cubicles, rooms, studios, compartments or stalls,"
for purposes of defining adult-oriented establishments, does not mean
enclosures which are private offices used by the owner, manager or
persons employed on the premises for attending to the tasks of their
employment, and which are not held out to the public for the purpose
of viewing motion pictures or other entertainment for a fee, and which
are not open to any persons other than employees.
B.
§ 225-218 SHALER CODE § 225-218
1:988
enlargement, whether by extending on a side or by increasing in height or
depth, or the moving from one location or position to another.
AMUSEMENT ARCADE — An establishment in which are possessed or used
any mechanical and/or electronic devices, machines or other apparatus
whatsoever for the playing of games and amusement, including, by way
of illustration and not limitation, what are commonly known as "pinball
machines," "jukeboxes" and "video games," and are operated or played by
the insertion of a coin or any other disk, slug or token or by any other form
of payment whatsoever.
ANSI — The American National Standards Institute.
ANTENNA — An upraised rod or system of rods and wires for transmitting
and receiving electromagnetic or radio waves and communications signals,
including but not limited to omnidirectional antennas, directional antennas,
microwave antennas, microwave dishes, panels and single-pole whips. This
definition shall include monopoles and lattice construction steel structures,
but shall exclude private home use of satellite dish antennas, television
antennas or equipment used by amateur radio operators as licensed by the
FCC. For the purposes of this chapter, antennas utilized for noncommercial
use shall be excluded.
ANTENNA ARRAY — One or more antennas located on the same structure
and at the same height.
APARTMENT BUILDING — Three or more dwelling units in a single
building, not having a separate exterior entrance for each dwelling unit.
APPLICANT — A landowner or developer, as hereinafter defined, who has
filed an application for development, including his heirs, successors and
assigns.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — Every application, whether
preliminary, tentative or final, is required to be filed and approved prior
to start of construction or development, including but not limited to an
application for a building permit, for the approval of a subdivision plat or
plan or for the approval of a development plan.
AREA OF SIGN — The entire area within a single continuous perimeter
enclosing the extreme limits of writing, representation, emblem or any
figure or similar character, together with any frame or other materials
or color forming an integral part of the display or used to differentiate
such sign from the background against which it is placed (excluding the
necessary supports or uprights on which the sign is placed or apron
designed to cover such uprights or work board installed to provide a safe
area for servicing such sign). Where a sign has two or more faces on the
same side, the area of all faces shall be included in determining the area of
the sign, except that in the case of back-to-back signs or V-type signs, the
area of the sign shall be taken as the area of one face if two faces are of
equal area or as the area of the larger face if the two faces are of unequal
area.
§ 225-218 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-218
1:989
AVERAGE GROSS RESIDENTIAL DENSITY — The total number of dwelling
units in a planned residential development divided by the gross acreage of
the tract as reduced by any areas to be devoted to commercial use.
AWNING SIGN or CANOPY SIGN — Any sign that is a part of or attached
to an awning, canopy or other fabric, plastic or structural protective cover
over a door, entrance, window or outdoor service area. A marquee is not a
canopy.
BACKLIGHT or BACKLIGHTING — A type of light that illuminates a subject
or letters from behind.
BACK-TO-BACK SIGN — A structure with two parallel and directly opposite
signs with their faces oriented in opposite directions and spaced no more
than two feet apart.
BANNER — A sign intended to be hung either with or without a frame,
possessing characters, letters, illustrations or ornamentations applied to
paper, plastic or fabric of any kind, excluding flags, emblems and insignias
of political, professional, religious or educational organizations displayed
for noncommercial purposes.
BARRIER — A kind of fence to obstruct the advance of persons or things;
anything which confines or hinders approach.
BEACON — Any light with one or more beams directed into the atmosphere
or directed at one or more points not on the same lot or site as the light
source; also, any light with one or more beams that rotate or move.
BERM or BERMING — An earthen mound designed to provide visual
interest, screen undesirable views, and/or decrease noise.
BILLBOARD — An off-premises advertising sign with a changeable message
or display that pertains to a business, organization, event, person, place,
service or product not principally located or sold on the premises upon
which said sign is located. See "off-premises advertising sign."
BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS — The Board of Commissioners of the
Township of Shaler.
BOARDINGHOUSE — A building or portion thereof, other than a hotel,
where meals and lodging are provided for compensation to persons other
than members of the family residing in the dwelling unit, including bed-andbreakfast
facilities.
BOAT — Every description of watercraft constructed or sold for the primary
purpose of being used as a means of transportation on the water.
BUFFERYARD — A continuous area of land set aside along the perimeter
of a lot in which landscaping is used to provide a transition between and
to reduce the environmental, aesthetic and other impacts of one type of
land use upon another and to eliminate or minimize conflicts between
them. Bufferyards shall not include any servitudes or rights-of-way unless
approved by the person(s) in whose favor the servitude or right-of-way is
granted and the Township.
§ 225-218 SHALER CODE § 225-218
1:990
BUILDING — Any structure having enclosing walls and roofs and requiring
a permanent location on the land.
BUILDING FACADE — See "facade, building."
BUILDING FACADE, FRONT — The facade that includes the primary
entrance is the "front facade."
BUILDING INSPECTOR — The person authorized to act as the building
official or any assistant to such person, to enforce the provisions of the
Shaler Township Building Code, as adopted by Ordinance No. 1550 of 1983,
as it now exists or as hereafter amended or supplemented.264
BUILDING LINE — A line which designates the minimum distance that a
building must be erected from the street right-of-way. The area between
the building line and the street right-of-way shall be open space as herein
defined.
BUILDING OR STRUCTURE COVERAGE — A percentage of the horizontal
cross-section area of the principal building or structure on a lot, excluding
one-story open porches, bay windows, balconies and terraces, to the lot
area.
BUILDING PERMIT — A permit issued by the Building Inspector pursuant
to the Building Code of the Township of Shaler.265
BUMPER-PULL TRAILER — See "travel trailer."
BUSINESS DIRECTORY — A sign used to identify or list:
BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT — Any business, trade, occupation, work,
commerce or profession conducted for profit or benefit, either directly or
indirectly, on any commercial property in the Township.
BUSINESS SERVICES — Business activities which are carried on in an
office and involve activities, such as accounting, correspondence, research,
consultation, editing or administration, but not including the sale and
delivery of tangible goods on the premises and not including personal
services, such as dancing instructions, group instructions of any kind,
tearooms, barbershops, beauty parlors and massage parlors.
BUSINESS SIGN — A sign which directs attention to a business, profession
or industry located upon the premises where the sign is displayed; to the
type of products sold, manufactured or assembled; and/or to the service
or entertainment offered on such premises, and include electronic signs,
projecting signs, supplemental signs and temporary signs.
The names of the individual or organization occupying, leasing or
owning the premises and/or the profession of the occupants; or
A.
The name and/or management of the building for which the sign is
displayed or the name of the major enterprise or principal product or
service on the premises.
B.
264. Editor's Note: See Ch. 90, Building Construction, as amended by the UCC.
265. Editor's Note: See Ch. 90, Building Construction, as amended by the UCC.
§ 225-218 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-218
1:991
CAMOUFLAGED ANTENNAS — An antenna or antenna array designed to
appear as part of an existing structure and not readily apparent to be an
antenna.
CAMOUFLAGED TOWER — A communications tower which is not
recognized as a conventional communications tower and is disguised to
appear as part of an existing structure and is not readily apparent to be
a communications tower (e.g., a metal lattice structure), but instead is
disguised or concealed in such a fashion as to conform to its surroundings.
A communications tower designed to appear as an object such as church
steeple, tree, building facade or other such object. Other examples of
"camouflaged towers" include the communications tower disguised as a
bell tower approved by the Board on January 12, 1999, in Mount Royal
Cemetery, or a tower which looks like a tree, or a tower which is concealed
in a church steeple.
CAMPER — See "truck camper."
CAMPER VAN — See "Class B motor home."
CAMPING TRAILER — See "folding trailer."
CANDIDATE — One who seeks or offers himself or herself or is put forth by
others for an office, privilege or honor, by election or appointment.
CANOPY SIGN — See "awning sign."
CANOPY TREE — Tall trees that make up the forest canopy 30 or more feet
above the ground.
CARPORT — A structure permanently attached to a dwelling and covered
by a solid roof, which is used for the shelter of a motor vehicle. A carport
must satisfy the following requirements:
A. The carport footprint shall not exceed 220 square feet;
B. The height of the carport shall not exceed 12 feet;
The carport shall not be constructed of fabric, canvas, vinyl or similar
materials;
C.
D. There shall be no enclosed use above the carport;
The carport shall be enclosed from the ground up on three sides by an
opaque wall;
E.
The minimum yard setback requirements shall be met for the zoning
district in which the carport is located;
F.
The area of the carport, combined with all other structures on the lot,
shall not exceed the maximum lot coverage established for the zoning
district in which it is located;
G.
No part of the proposed carport canopy or appurtenance may extend
beyond the front building line or onto the public right-of-way without
entering into a license agreement with the Township;
H.
§ 225-218 SHALER CODE § 225-218
1:992
CARPORT FOOTPRINT — The area within the perimeter of the carport at
its foundation, which shall include the roofed areas and any cantilevered
portions of the carport. The entire area of ground covered by the carport.
CERTIFICATE OF USE AND OCCUPANCY — A certificate issued by the
Zoning Officer, stating that the existing or proposed use or occupancy of a
particular building, structure or land conforms to the requirements of this
chapter.
CHILD-ORIENTED BUSINESS — A commercial establishment which, as one
of its principal business purposes, serves, sells and/or caters food, apparels,
goods, services, play and/or entertainment to children and their families.
CLASS A MOTOR HOME — A Class A motor home is a recreational vehicle
usually built on a stripped truck chassis or a custom undercarriage and the
driving compartment is an integral part of the RV interior. A Class A motor
homes looks like a bus and is also known as a "coach" or "motor coach."
Class A motor homes are usually 31 to 40 feet in length.
CLASS B MOTOR HOME — A Class B motor home is a recreational vehicle
created from a standard passenger or work minivan and is constructed on
a van chassis with elevated rooflines, but no modifications to the length or
width of the original chassis. Most models have raised roofs. Class B motor
homes are also known as camper vans, conversion vans or van campers.
Class B motor homes are usually 17 to 19 feet in length.
CLASS C MOTOR HOME — A Class C motor home, or mini motor home, is
a recreational vehicle built on a cutaway van or truck chassis, including the
cab. A Class C motor home is roughly the size and shape of a rental moving
truck and is generally constructed on a larger van chassis. It differs from
the Class A motor home in that the Class C chassis comes with the cab from
the manufacturer. Another distinguishing feature of the Class C motor home
is the bed compartment over the cab. The driver compartment is similar to
a van, with a large box in the back. Class C motor homes are usually 20 to
31 feet in length.
I. Only one carport per parcel is permitted in a residential district;
J. Portable carports or freestanding carports are prohibited.
§ 225-218 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-218
1:993
CLUB OR LODGE, PRIVATE — Nonprofit corporation or nonprofit
association of persons who are bona fide members, paying regular dues,
which owns or leases a building or portion thereof, the use thereof being
restricted to members and their guests.
COACH — "See Class A motor home."
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The Code Enforcement Officer of the
Township of Shaler.
CO-LOCATION — The locating of one or more antenna arrays and support
structures on either an existing communications tower or an existing
structure.
CO-LOCATION/SHARED-USE COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY — Siting
multiple similar or different antennas, fixed-point microwave dishes and
cellular communications antennas on a single communications tower or
mounted on the roof of an existing building or other existing structure
as is technically and/or structurally feasible. Co-location/shared-use
communications facilities shall not be construed to be within the definition
of "public utility" contained in this section.
COLUMBARIUM — A structure of vaults lined with recesses to receive urns
containing the ashes of the cremated dead.
COMMERCIAL — Managed on a business basis for profit derived from the
promise or delivery of compensation, money, rent or other bargained-for
consideration in exchange for:
COMMERCIAL EQUIPMENT — Implements used for a commercial or
industrial function, operation or activity and includes:
A. Goods, commodities or recyclable materials;
B. Services;
C. Rights or interests in property;
D. Any other valuable consideration; or
E. Activity done, made or performed for financial gain.
Front-loaders, bulldozers, cranes, trenchers, stump grinders, brush
shredders, bobcats, brush-hog, tractors, cement mixers, tar wagons/
pots, snowplows or street vendor carts;
A.
Equipment used as a platform for, or that transports, carries or stores,
materials or equipment, including but not limited to lifts, derricks,
hoists, booms, cranes, racks, gas or chemical tanks, generators, pumps,
building materials, or yard maintenance power tools and mowers, that
B.
§ 225-218 SHALER CODE § 225-218
1:994
COMMERCIAL FREIGHT — A load, goods or a cargo carried by a vehicle
for any fare, fee, rate, charge or other consideration.
COMMERCIAL LETTERING — Any letters, numbers, symbols or
combinations thereof which advertise a trade, business, industry or other
activity for profit, or a product, commodity or service. The term shall not
include bumper stickers or the decal or plate commonly applied to a motor
vehicle by a motor vehicle dealer.
COMMERCIAL USE or COMMERCIAL PURPOSE — An occupation,
employment or enterprise that is carried on to facilitate an exchange of
goods, services or ideas. A use or purpose related to the production,
exhibition, marketing, transportation, processing or manufacture of goods
or services by any person or entity for the purpose of economic gain,
including the carriage of persons or property for any fare, fee, rate, charge
or other consideration, directly or indirectly, in connection with any
business or other undertaking intended for profit.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE —
are visible from the exterior of the commercial equipment, and which
are designed, serve or used for a commercial or industrial purpose, but
excluding domestic equipment.
Implements or devices used in the performance of one's employment
or trade, including but not limited to ladders, painting supplies,
compressors, tool chests, plumbing equipment, pool cleaning
equipment and supplies, lawn mowers, edgers, snowplows,
wheelbarrows or other lawn maintenance equipment, but excluding
domestic equipment.
C.
Vehicles that transport persons or things commercially including but
not limited to school vans or buses, church vans or buses, trailers or
utility trailers, and similar transportation equipment which may or may
not bear lettering or advertising identifying the owner or lessee.
D.
For purposes of this chapter, the term "commercial vehicle" shall
include:
Any vehicle with a stated GVWR of more than 11,000 pounds or
classified as a Class 5 vehicle or higher under the Pennsylvania
Vehicle Code.
(1)
(2) Any part of a tractor-trailer combination, without regard to GVWR.
Any dump truck, utility vehicle or utility truck, school bus or school
vehicle with a GVWR in excess of 11,000 pounds.
(3)
Any construction or industrial equipment of any kind, including but
not limited to any crane, backhoe or any front loader, "Bobcat," skid
steer loaders, or the like, without regard to GVWR.
(4)
A.
§ 225-218 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-218
1:995
COMMON OPEN SPACE — A parcel or parcels of land or an area of water
or a combination of land and water within a development site and designed
and intended for the use or enjoyment of residents of a development, not
Chippers, dozers, excavators, forklifts, graders, landscaping and
lawn mower trailers, pavers and snowplows operated or used for a
commercial purpose without regard to GVWR.
(5)
Any vehicle with a mechanical bucket or permanently mounted
equipment, such as aerial bucket or platform, welding equipment,
mechanical or hydraulic devices used or designed to assist in
loading and unloading freight, without regard to GVWR.
(6)
Any vehicle with a tandem axle or any vehicle which has more than
two axles, without regard to GVWR.
(7)
Any trailer which is designed or used, in whole or in part, for a
commercial purpose, without regard to GVWR and without regard
to the length of the trailer, including but not limited to
construction, landscaping or for the transportation of passengers
or merchandise, equipment, supplies, tools, freight, vehicles or
animals, but excluding specifically any trailer which is used solely
for home utility, recreational or other personal and noncommercial
use.
(8)
Any tow truck, wrecker or flatbed truck operated or used for the
transport of vehicles, without regard to GVWR.
(9)
Other motor vehicles, including but not limited to buses,
semitrailers, step-vans, box trucks, panel trucks, flatbed and stakebed
trucks, bucket trucks, cement mixers, tank trucks, tractors for
semitrailers, trucks with rollback beds, trucks with utility bodies as
well as any other similar vehicles.
(10)
Any trailer or semitrailer used for transporting landscaping or
lawn-care equipment, whether or not such a trailer or semitrailer
is attached to another vehicle.
(11)
Any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer containing debris,
construction materials or equipment intended for a commercial
or business use, whether in the open or covered by a removable
material or fabric.
(12)
Any vehicle or motor vehicle carrying commercial freight in plain
view.
(13)
(14)Any other vehicle having a total length in excess of 22 feet.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, under no circumstances shall any
vehicle which is owned by the Township or other municipal entity or
which is used in connection with fire, safety, rescue or medical services
within the Township be considered to be a commercial vehicle.
B.
§ 225-218 SHALER CODE § 225-218
1:996
including streets, off-street parking areas and areas set aside for public
facilities.
COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY — The equipment and structures (including,
but not limited to, communications towers, antennas and
telecommunications equipment buildings) involved in the reception, and/or
transmission, of electromagnetic or radio waves. Communications facilities
shall not be construed to be within the definition of "public utility" contained
in this section.
COMMUNICATIONS TOWER — A structure of any height which is intended
to or which supports communications (broadcasting and/or transmitting
and/or receiving) equipment for telecommunications or radio signals,
including but not limited to antennas, fixed point microwave dishes and
cellular communications antennas, capable of receiving and/or transmitting
communications signals and utilized by commercial, government, public
or quasi-public users. This definition shall include monopoles and lattice
construction steel structures, but shall exclude private home use of satellite
dish antennas, television antennas, or equipment used by amateur radio
operators as licensed by the FCC. Communications towers shall not be
construed to be within the definition of "public utility" contained in this
section. For the purposes of this chapter, communications towers utilized
for noncommercial use shall be excluded.
COMMUNICATIONS TOWER SITE — Any lot, parcel, building or structure
on which a communications facility, communications tower, power-mounted/
shared-use communications facility, antenna, co-location/shared-use
communications facility or telecommunications equipment building, as
defined herein, is located or proposed to be located.
COMMUNITY SPECIAL EVENT SIGN — A temporary sign, either portable
or nonportable, displayed for a limited time, which carries information
about a special event or activity such as an auction, flea market, festival,
carnival, meal, charitable or educational activities or fund-raising event of
interest to the general public.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use permitted in a particular zoning district
which requires approval by the Board of Commissioners under terms and
procedures and with conditions prescribed therein.
CONSTRUCTION — The building of something, typically a large structure.
CONSTRUCTION OR INDUSTRIAL EQUIPMENT — Any motor vehicle,
trailer or implement used in construction or industry, and only incidentally
operated or moved over public highways. The term includes, but is not
necessarily limited to, bulldozers, cranes, excavators, forklifts, motor
graders, road rollers, mixers, earth movers, compressors, generators and
lot clearing equipment but excluding domestic equipment.
CONSUMER FIREWORKS —
Any combustible or explosive composition or any substance or
combination of substances intended to produce visible and/or audible
effects by combustion and which is suitable for use by the public
A.
§ 225-218 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-218
1:997
CONVALESCENT HOME — See "nursing home or convalescent home."
CONVENTIONAL TRAILER — See "travel trailer."
CONVERSION VAN — See Class B motor home."
CUL-DE-SAC — A street terminating in a circular vehicular turnaround
area, having only one means of access.
DAY — As used in this section, shall mean the twenty-four-hour period from
00:00 to 24:00.
DAY NURSERY — A building or portion thereof where children are
temporarily cared for in their parents' absence between the hours of 6:00
a.m. and 7:00 p.m.
DBH — Diameter at breast height.
DEAD END — A street having only one means of access with no turnaround
at its closed end.
DECIDUOUS — A plant with foliage that is shed annually.
DECKED SIGN — A structure consisting of two signs, one above the other,
both facing the same direction.
DETENTION — The slowing, dampening or attenuating of runoff flows
entering the natural drainage pattern or storm drainage system by
temporarily holding water on a surface area, such as in detention basins,
in reservoirs, on rooftops, in streets, parking lots or within the drainage
system itself, and releasing the water at a desired rate of discharge.
DEVELOPER — Any landowner, agent of such landowner or tenant with
the permission of such landowner, who makes or causes to be made a
subdivision of land or a land development.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN — The provisions for development, including a
planned residential development, a plat of subdivision and all covenants
relating to use, location and bulk of buildings and other structures, intensity
of use or density of development, streets, ways and parking facilities,
common open space and public facilities. The phrase "provisions of the
development plan," when used in this chapter, shall mean the written and
graphic materials referred to in this definition.
that complies with the construction, performance, composition and
labeling requirements promulgated by the Consumer Products Safety
Commission in 16 CFR (relating to commercial practices) or any
successor regulation, and which complies with the provisions for
"consumer fireworks" as defined in the American Pyrotechnics
Association (APA) Standard 87-1 (relating to the Standard for
Construction for Approval for Transportation of Fireworks, Novelties
and Theatrical Pyrotechnics), or any successor standard.
The term does not include devices known as "ground and handheld
sparkling devices," "novelties" and "toy caps" in APA Standard 87-1, the
sale, possession and use of which shall be permitted as set forth herein.
B.
§ 225-218 SHALER CODE § 225-218
1:998
DIRECTIONAL SIGN or DIRECTIONAL INCIDENTAL SIGN — A sign
generally informational, that has a purpose secondary to the use of the
lot or site on which it is located, such as "No Parking," "Entrance," "Exit,"
"One Way," "Loading Only," "Telephone" and other similar directives, and
provided that such sign does not exceed three square feet. Directional,
incidental sign shall be located only in conjunction with site drive entrances
and/or internal traffic drive aisles.
DOMESTIC EQUIPMENT — Power tools or equipment designed and
intended for use by a homeowner for household utility applications, building
repair and maintenance, including but not limited to power hand tools, lawn
mowers, garden equipment, snowblowers and snow removal equipment,
and not designed, used or intended to be used for commercial or industrial
purposes.
DRIVEWAY — A private road from a house or a garage to a street and used
especially by automobiles.
DUMP TRUCK — A truck designed and used for the transportation of bulk
material that has a body which tilts to dump its contents.
DUMPSTER — Any portable container, receptacle, compactor unit, trailer,
roll-off box, collection bin, tub, or similar unit with or without wheels that
is used or designed for temporary storage, containment or transport of
refuse, debris, trash, garbage, food waste, solid waste, recyclable material,
incidental demolition debris or other discarded or like materials. Also
"refuse container" or "trash container."
DWELL TIME — The interval of change between each individual static
message and which shall be at least 10 seconds and a change of which must
be completed within one second or less. The dwell time shall not include the
one second or less required to change a message. There shall be no special
effects between messages.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more living or sleeping rooms with cooking and
sanitary facilities for one family. A portable trailer, a shack or any makeshift
abode shall not be deemed to be a "dwelling unit."
ELECTRIC TRANSMISSION TOWER — A structure of any height which is
intended to or which supports the principal or trunk conductor or wire of an
electric lighting or power transmission system.
ELECTRONIC SIGN — Any sign, video display, projected image or similar
device or portions thereof with text, images, or graphics generated by solid
state electronic components. Electronic signs include, but are not limited
to, signs that use light-emitting diodes (LED), plasma displays, fiber optics,
or other technology that results in bright, high-resolution text, images and
graphics. See "off-premises advertising sign." See also "business sign."
EMPLOYEE — Any and all persons, including independent contractors, who
work in or at or render any services directly related to the operation of an
adult-oriented establishment.
§ 225-218 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-218
1:999
ENCLOSURE WALL — An upright work or structure constructed of stone,
brick or other material, built to enclose a place or area. An enclosure wall is
similar to a fence in that both sides of the structure are visible. See "wall."
ENFORCEMENT NOTICE — A notice as provided in Section 616.1 of the
MPC, 53 P.S. § 10616.1, sent by the Township to the owner or occupant
of record of a parcel on which a violation of this chapter has occurred, to
any person who has filed a written request to receive enforcement notices
regarding that parcel, and to any other person requested in writing by the
owner or occupant of record, the purpose of which is to initiate enforcement
proceedings.
ENTERTAINER — A person who provides entertainment within an adultoriented
establishment, whether or not a fee is charged or accepted for
entertainment and whether or not entertainment is provided as an
employee or an independent contractor.
ENTERTAINMENT — An interesting, diverting or amusing thing or that
which serves as amusement, such as a show, performance or music.
ESCORT — A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a
companion, guide or date for another person and who agrees or offers to
privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another
person.
ESCORT AGENCY — A person or business association who furnishes, offers
to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business
purposes for a fee, tip or other consideration.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — Underground or overhead gas, electrical, steam
or water transmission or distribution systems, collection, communication,
supply or disposal systems and their required buildings, owned and
operated by a public utility [licensed by the Pennsylvania Utility
Commission (hereinafter "PUC") as such]. Essential services do not include
public or private incinerators, landfills or similar waste disposal facilities,
or communications towers, communications facilities, telecommunications
equipment buildings, telecommunications equipment buildings or other
structures used for telecommunications, radio, cellular telephone, paging,
television or similar uses.
EVERGREEN — A plant with foliage that persists and remains green yearround.
FAA — The Federal Aviation Administration.
FACADE — All the wall planes of a structure as seen from one side or
view. The exterior face of a building, including but not limited to the wall,
windows and doorways. For example, the front facade of a building would
include all of the wall area that would be shown on the front elevation of the
building plans.
FACADE, BUILDING — That portion of any exterior elevation on the
building extending from finished grade to top of the parapet, wall or eaves
and the entire width of the building elevation as determined by the Code
Enforcement Officer. For example, the front facade of a building would
§ 225-218 SHALER CODE § 225-218
1:1000
include all of the wall area that would be shown on the front elevation of the
building plans.
FACE OF SIGN — The side or sides of a sign on which the lettered, pictorial
or sculptured matter designed to convey information is to be placed.
FALL RADIUS — The area in which a communications tower is designed to
fall as measured from its base.
FAMILY — Either an individual or two or more persons related by blood or
marriage or adoption and, in addition, any domestic servants or gratuitous
guests thereof or a group of not more than three persons who need not be
related, who are living together in a single dwelling unit and maintaining
a common household. Nothing in this chapter is intended or shall be
interpreted, enforced or administered in any means or manner inconsistent
with or conflicting with the Federal Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
FENCE — A barrier of wooden posts, wire, iron or other material erected
for the purpose of enclosing a piece of land or to divide a piece of land into
distinct portions or to separate two contiguous estates or which is used as
a boundary or means of protection or confinement.
FIFTH-WHEEL TRAILER RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A fifth-wheel is a
towable recreational vehicle designed to be towed by a motor vehicle using
a towing mechanism that is mounted above or forward of the tow vehicle's
rear axle by way of a special fifth-wheel hitch. Fifth-wheel trailers are also
known as "a 5th wheel" or a "fiver." Fifth-wheel trailers are usually 22 to 40
feet in length.
FIREWORKS — Any composition or device designed to produce a visible
or an audible effect by combustion, deflagration or detonation, and which
meets the definition of "consumer fireworks" in this section.
FIVER — See "fifth-wheel trailer recreational vehicle."
FLAG — Any fabric, banner or bunting containing distinctive colors,
patterns or symbols, used as a symbol of a government, political
subdivision, religious, education or corporate organization, providing that
such flags are displayed for noncommercial purposes.
FLASHING SIGN — A sign, the illumination of which is intermittently on
and off so as to flash or blink or the intensity varies so as to appear to flash
or blink. Such signs are prohibited.
FLATBED — A truck or trailer with a body in the form of a platform with no
sides or roof.
FLOOR AREA — The sum of the gross area of all floors of a building
measured from the face of the interior walls.
§ 225-218 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-218
1:1001
FOLDING CAMPER — See "folding trailer."
FOLDING TRAILER — A folding trailer is a small, lightweight, towable
recreational vehicle that folds or collapses into a low profile and can be
towed behind light vehicles such as cars, SUVs, and mini pickup trucks.
Some of the smallest models can be towed behind large motorcycles.
Folding trailers are also known as camper trailers, folding campers, popup
trailers and tent trailers. Folding trailers are usually eight to 24 feet in
length.
FOOTPRINT — The total area of the foundation of the structure. The
horizontal area, as seen in plain view, of a building or structure, measured
from the outside of exterior walls and supporting columns, and excluding
eaves.
FRATERNAL LODGE — A structure or portion thereof exclusively occupied
by a club, society, order or voluntary association, or a subordinate lodge
or branch thereof, which is organized and carried on solely for religious,
social, charitable or professional purposes, and nonprofit, which has
restricted membership and a representative form of government.
FRONT FACADE — The facade of the building adjacent to the front property
line. That portion of the facade of a dwelling fronting on a street or
trafficway, or the portion of the facade most closely complying with that
definition, as in the case of a flag lot. Where a lot has more than one
frontage on a street or trafficway, all such frontages shall be considered the
front facade, except where a facade meets the definition of rear facade. The
front facade of a building would include all of the wall area that would be
shown on the front elevation of the building plans.
FRONT YARD DEPTH — The prescribed minimum open space extending
across the entire width of the lot between the front line of the building and
the street right-of-way.
GARAGE — An accessory building or portion of a main building designed
or used for parking or storage of motor vehicles by the occupants of the
dwelling and wherein no business, occupation or service is conducted for
profit or economic gain. A garage may be attached to or detached from
another structure.
GROSS VEHICLE WEIGHT RATING (GVWR) — The value specified on the
federal weight certification label by the manufacturer as the loaded weight
of a single vehicle. It is the maximum allowable total weight of a vehicle or
trailer when loaded and includes the weight of the vehicle itself plus fuel,
passengers, cargo and trailer tongue weight.
GROUND AND HANDHELD SPARKLING DEVICES — Any devices designed
to produce a shower of sparks or a cloud of smoke, do not rise into the air or
§ 225-218 SHALER CODE § 225-218
1:1002
shoot projectiles into the air, and do not explode or produce a report. They
include: cylindrical fountains, cone fountains, illuminating torch, wheels,
ground spinners, flitter sparklers, toy smoke devices and wire sparklers/
dipped sticks (the larger type wire sparkler, up to 100 grams of pyrotechnic
composition per item).
GROUND COVER — Plants, other than turf grass, normally reaching an
average maximum height of not more than 24 inches at maturity.
GROUND SIGN — A two-sided freestanding business sign or business
directory sign that is not attached to any building and that is supported
by upright structural members anchored into the ground. The height of a
ground sign shall be measured from the ground elevation nearest to the
sign to the highest elevation of the sign structure, and the overall height of
the sign shall not exceed a height of 25 feet.
GROUP-CARE FACILITY — A facility which provides resident services to two
or more individuals who are unrelated. It is a facility where individuals who
are handicapped, aged, disabled or undergoing rehabilitation are provided
services to meet their needs. This type of use includes uses licensed or
supervised by any federal, state or county health/welfare agency, such as
group homes, halfway houses, resident schools, resident facilities and foster
homes or boardinghomes.
GUYED TOWER — A communications tower anchored by guy wires.
HEDGE — A screen or barrier made of living plants; any self-supporting
barrier of living vegetation that encloses, screens or separates areas. A
dense row of bushes, shrubs or small trees planted close together, forming
a fence or boundary.
HEDGEROW — An artificially constructed barrier of naturally vegetated
plant material installed to enclose or screen areas of land uses, buildings,
structures, parking areas, private outdoor areas such as lawns and decks
and/or storage areas.
HEIGHT — In the case of buildings, the vertical distance from the mean
level of the ground surrounding the building to the top of the highest roof
beams of a flat roof or the mean level of the highest gable or slope of a hip
roof. When the building faces on more than one street, the height shall be
measured from the average of the grades at the center of each street front.
Retaining walls shall be measured from the lowest level of grade to the
top of the wall. In case of other structures, the height shall be the vertical
distance from the mean level of the ground surrounding the structure to the
highest point of the structure.
HEIGHT OF COMMUNICATIONS TOWER — The vertical distance
measured from the ground level to the highest point on a communications
tower, including antennas mounted on the tower.
HIGHWAY — The entire width between the boundary lines of every way
publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public
for the purposes of vehicular travel. The term includes roadways,
§ 225-218 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-218
1:1003
trafficways, shot and chipped roads and laned roadways open to the use of
the public for vehicular travel.
HOME OCCUPATION — An accessory use of a service character customarily
conducted within a dwelling by the residents therein, which is clearly
secondary to the use of the dwelling for living purposes and does not change
the principal character thereof nor have any exterior evidence of such
secondary use other than a small nameplate, and which does not involve
the keeping of a stock-in-trade. Dancing instructions, commercial sale of
firearms and guns, group musical instructions, tearooms, barbershops,
beauty shops, massage parlors and the conduct of a commercial enterprise
shall not be deemed to be a "home occupation."
IDENTIFICATION SIGN — A sign used to identify:
ILLEGAL SIGN — Any sign erected, altered, moved, repaired, maintained or
replaced in violation of this chapter.
ILLUMINATED SIGN — Any sign that has characters, letters, figures,
designs or outlines illuminated by electric lights or luminous tubes as a part
of the sign:
IMPROVED SURFACE — A paved surface designed for the use of motor
vehicles and constructed of concrete, asphalt, gravel or similar materials.
INDUSTRIAL — Of or pertaining to the commercial production, provision or
sale of goods or services.
INSPECTOR — The Township Building Inspector, Zoning Officer or an
employee of the Township's Police Department authorized by the Township
Chief of Police, or other persons designated by the Township Board of
Commissioners to inspect premises regulated under this article, to
cooperate in taking the required actions authorized by this article where
The name of the individual or organization occupying, leasing or
owning the premises and/or the profession of the occupant; or
A.
The name and/or management of the building on which the sign is
displayed or the name of the major enterprise or principal product or
service on the premises.
B.
BACKLIGHTING — Illumination of an outside area or object by any
man-made device that shines from behind the object or area.
A.
INTERNAL LIGHTING — Illumination of an outside area or object by
any man-made device that shines from within the object or area.
B.
EXTERNAL LIGHTING — Illumination of an outside area or object by
any man-made device that shines onto or reflects from said area or
object.
C.
HOURS OF ILLUMINATION — No billboard or electronic off-premises
advertising sign shall be illuminated between 12:00 midnight and 5:00
a.m., prevailing time.
D.
§ 225-218 SHALER CODE § 225-218
1:1004
violations are found on premises, and to request correction of unsatisfactory
conditions found on premises.
INSTITUTIONAL IDENTIFICATION SIGN — A sign or bulletin board which
identifies the name and other characteristics of a public, semipublic or
private institution on the site where the sign is located. Institutions shall
include churches, hospitals, nursing homes, schools and other nonprofit and
charitable organizations.
INSTITUTIONAL INFORMATIONAL SIGN — Any sign giving information
to employees, visitors or delivery vehicles to an institution but containing
no advertising. Such signs may include the name of institution but must
predominantly represent a directional or informational message.
INTERMEDIATE TURNAROUND — A turnaround for vehicles located
midway between the beginning and the end of a street that is not a through
street.
JUNK — Any discarded material or article such as is not ordinarily disposed
of as rubbish or refuse and shall include worn out and discarded material
or article that may be turned into some use, and shall include, by way of
illustration and not limitation, scrap copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries,
paper, trash, rubber debris, waste, iron, steel and other old or scrap ferrous
or nonferrous material, including wrecked, scrapped, ruined, dismantled or
junked motor vehicles, or parts thereof, as well as scrapped, scavenged,
junked or recovered machinery, equipment, appliances and household
furnishings or any parts of or from any of the foregoing, including articles
and recyclable materials that have outlived their usefulness in their original
form and are commonly gathered up and sold to be converted into another
product, either of the same or of a different kind, and other salvageable
or unsalvageable material. The term is not intended to be applied to
accumulation of materials reasonably and normally accumulated by private
families.
JUNK DEALER — Any person who is engaged in the business of buying and
selling junk as herein defined or who accumulates, buys, sells, salvages,
collects, deals in, stores or disposes of junk in the Township.
JUNKYARD — Any outdoor establishment, place of business, or activity in
the Township which is maintained, used or operated for storing, keeping,
buying or selling junk, including any premises where junk is stored,
disposed of or accumulated, as well as any place in the Township owned,
leased, operated, maintained or used by a junk dealer where junk is stored,
kept, disposed of or accumulated. Any premises having two or more
scrapped, abandoned or junked motor vehicles thereon shall be deemed to
be a junkyard.
JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle which does not bear a
then-current registration plate and an approved and current inspection
sticker from the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation or of the motor
vehicle bureau of any other state.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:
§ 225-218 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-218
1:1005
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land, including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option
or contract is subject to any condition), a lessee if he is authorized under
the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner or other person having a
proprietary interest in land.
LARGE VIDEO DISPLAY — An electronic sign that features real-time, fullmotion
or pictorial imagery of television quality or better.
LATTICE TOWER — A self-supporting communications tower with three or
more sides of an open-framed construction.
LCD — A liquid crystal display, electronic visual display or video display that
uses light-modulating properties of liquid crystals.
LED — Light-emitting diode. A type of LCD screen; how the LCD screen is
backlit.
LICENSE — The permit issued by the Township to a person who
accumulates, buys, sells, salvages, collects, deals in, stores or disposes of
junk.
LOAD HAZARD — The weight borne by a structure, including all load
factors and including but not limited to dead loads, wind loads, ice loads,
seismic loads, material properties, shear force, bending movement, and
axial load deflections, antennas and transmissions.
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as a
unit. See Exhibits A, B, B-1, C and D.266
LUMINANCE — The photometric quantity most closely associated with the
perception of brightness. Luminance is measured in candelas per square
meters or "nits."
MARQUEE — Any permanent roof-like structure projecting beyond a
building or extending along and projecting beyond the wall of the building,
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots, regardless of the number of
occupants or tenure; or
(1)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of or for the purposes of streets,
common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other
features.
(2)
A.
B. A subdivision of land.
266. Editor's Note: Exhibits A B, B-1, C and D are located in "Street and Building Details"
attached to this chapter.
§ 225-218 SHALER CODE § 225-218
1:1006
generally designed and constructed to provide protection from the weather,
and which provides an area for manual or electronic changeable copy.
MEDIATION — A voluntary negotiating process in which parties in a dispute
mutually select a neutral mediator to assist them in jointly exploring and
settling their differences, culminating in a written agreement which the
parties themselves create and consider acceptable.
METHADONE TREATMENT FACILITY — A facility licensed by the
Department of Health to use the drug methadone in the treatment,
maintenance or detoxification of persons.
MINI MOTOR HOME — See "Class C motor home."
MINOR — A person under 18 years of age.
MOBILE HOME — A transportable, one-family dwelling intended for
permanent occupancy, contained in one unit or in two or more units
designed to be joined into one integral unit, capable of again being
separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site complete and ready
for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly
operations and constructed so that it may be used without a permanent
foundation.
MOBILE HOME LOT — A piece or parcel of land in a mobile home park,
improved with the necessary utility connections and other appurtenances
necessary for the erection thereon of a single mobile home.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel or contiguous parcels of land which has
been so designed that it contains two or more mobile home lots for the
placement thereon of mobile homes.
MONOPOLE TOWER — A communications tower which consists of a single
pole.
MOTION — The depiction of movement or change of position of text, images
or graphics. "Motion" shall include, but not be limited to, visual effects such
as dissolving and fading text and images, running sequential text, graphic
bursts, lighting that resembles zooming, twinkling or sparkling, changes in
light or color, transitory bursts of light intensity, moving patterns or bands
of light, expanding or contracting shapes, and similar actions.
MOTOR COACH — See "Class A motor home."
MOTOR VEHICLE — A vehicle of any kind which is self-propelled, except
one which is propelled solely by human power or by electric power obtained
from overhead trolley wires but not operated upon rails.
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — A building or portion thereof containing three
or more distinct and noncommunicating dwelling units, each for exclusive
use by one family and each with its own separate exterior entrance.
MUNICIPAL BUILDING OR STRUCTURE — A building or structure owned
by the Township of Shaler or other municipality.
NITS — A unit of measure of brightness or luminance. One nit is equal to
one candela/square meter.
§ 225-218 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-218
1:1007
NO-IMPACT HOME-BASED BUSINESS — A business or commercial activity
administered or conducted as an accessory use which is clearly secondary
to the use as a residential dwelling and which involves no customer, client or
patient traffic, whether vehicular or pedestrian, pickup, delivery or removal
functions to or from the premises in excess of those normally associated
with residential use. The business or commercial activity must satisfy the
following requirements:
NONCONFORMING FENCE OR WALL — A fence or wall lawfully existing
on the effective date of this chapter or subsequent amendment hereto,
which does not completely conform to this chapter. An illegal fence or wall
is not a nonconforming fence or a nonconforming wall.
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot, the area or dimension of which was
lawful prior to the adoption or amendment of this chapter, but which fails to
conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located by
reasons of such adoption or amendment.
NONCONFORMING SIGN — A sign, lawfully existing on the effective date
of this chapter or subsequent amendment hereto, which does not
completely conform to the sign regulations applicable in the district in
which it is located. An illegal sign is not a nonconforming sign.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure or part of a structure
manifestly not designed to comply with the applicable use or extent of use
provisions in this chapter or amendment heretofore or hereafter enacted,
where such structure lawfully existed prior to the enactment of this chapter
or amendment or prior to the application of this chapter or amendment
The business activity shall be compatible with the residential use of the
property and the surrounding residential uses.
A.
The business shall employ no employees other than family members
residing in the dwelling.
B.
There shall be no display or sale of retail goods and no stockpiling of
inventory of a substantial nature.
C.
There shall be no outside appearance of a business use, including, but
not limited to, parking, signs or lights.
D.
The business activity may not use any equipment or process which
creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical or electronic
interference, including interference with radio or television reception,
which is detectable in the neighborhood.
E.
The business activity may not generate any solid waste or sewage
discharge in volume or type that is not normally associated with
residential use in the neighborhood.
F.
The business activity shall be conducted only within the dwelling and
may not occupy more than 25% of the habitable floor area.
G.
H. The business may not involve any illegal activity.
§ 225-218 SHALER CODE § 225-218
1:1008
to its location by reason of annexation. Such "nonconforming structures"
include, but are not limited to, nonconforming signs.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use, whether of land or structure, which
does not comply with the applicable use provisions in this chapter or
amendment heretofore or hereafter enacted, where such use was lawfully
in existence prior to the enactment of this chapter or amendment or prior
to the application of this chapter or amendment to its location by reason of
annexation.
NONPROFIT — An entity not intending or intended to earn a profit, which
is organized as a nonprofit corporation or nonprofit unincorporated
association under the laws of this commonwealth or the United States or
any entity which is authorized to do business in this commonwealth as a
nonprofit corporation or unincorporated association under the laws of this
commonwealth, including schools, libraries, colleges, museums, community
swimming pools, day nurseries, kindergartens, recreational and community
centers and volunteer fire and ambulance and religious, charitable,
veterans and civic associations or any separately chartered auxiliary of the
foregoing, if organized and operated on a nonprofit basis.
NOVELTY — A device containing small amounts of pyrotechnic and/or
explosive composition but does not fall under the category of consumer
fireworks. Such devices produce limited visible or audible effects. Examples
are snakes, tanks, poppers, snappers, toy smoke devices (not more than
five grams of pyrotechnic composition), snakes/glow worms (less than two
grams of composition) and wire sparklers/dipped sticks (up to 100 grams of
composition).
NUDE MODEL STUDIO — Any place where a person who appears in a state
of nudity or displays specified anatomical areas is provided to be observed,
sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed or similarly depicted
by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration.
NUDITY or A STATE OF NUDITY — The appearance of a human bare
buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or female breast.
NURSING HOME or CONVALESCENT HOME — Any structure with
sleeping rooms where persons are housed or lodged and furnished with
meals and nursing care for hire or such home operated by a nonprofit group
or entity.
OFF-PREMISES ADVERTISING SIGN or OFF-PREMISES SIGN — A sign
that directs attention to a business, commodity, service or entertainment
conducted, sold or offered only elsewhere than upon the premises where
the sign is displayed and shall include billboards and electronic signs.
ONE-FAMILY DWELLING — A detached building containing only one
dwelling unit, for exclusive use by one family.
OPACITY — The quality or fact of being opaque; opaqueness; the property
of a substance whereby it partially or wholly obstructs the transmission of
visible light expressed as the percentage to which light is obstructed; the
degree of light-obscuring capability of emissions of visible air contaminants
§ 225-218 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-218
1:1009
expressed as a percentage. Complete obscuration is expressed as 100%
opacity and complete transparency is expressed as 0% opacity.
OPAQUE — Not letting light pass through; not transparent.
OPAQUE BARRIER — A visual screening accomplished by way of
vegetation, wall or fencing not exceeding the height standards set forth in
Chapter 118 of the Code (relating to fences, walls and hedges).
OPEN SPACE — An area within the requirements for front yard depth,
rear yard depth and side yard width on which no structures are permitted
above the ground level except steps, flagpoles, lampposts, mailboxes, fences
and cornices, driveways, sidewalks, air conditioners, chimneys or other
roof overhangs, including gutters, not to exceed 24 inches in width and
open porches not to exceed five feet in depth and 12 feet in width and
excepting enclosure walls in open spaces in NS Neighborhood Shopping, P
Professional, GC General Commercial and I Industrial Zoning Districts in
the Township.
OPERATOR — A person, partnership or corporation operating, conducting
or maintaining an adult-oriented establishment.
OWNER — A person, other than a lienholder, having the property right in
or title to a vehicle. The term includes a person entitled to the use and
possession of a vehicle subject to a security interest in another person but
excludes a lessee under a lease not intended as security.
PARK or PARKING —
PARKING AREA — An open area, other than a street or way, with an
improved surface, used for the parking of motor vehicles.
PARKING SPACE — A space in a garage or parking area, not less than
nine feet wide and 20 feet long, reserved for the parking of only one motor
vehicle.
PENNANT — Any lightweight plastic, fabric or other material, whether or
not containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire or string,
usually in a series, designed to move in the wind.
PERMITTEE and/or LICENSEE — A person in whose name a permit and/or
license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as
the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a permit and/or
license.
PERSON — Includes any individual, partnership, association, company,
firm, corporation or any other legal entity.
When permitted, means the temporary storing of a vehicle, whether
occupied or not, off or on a roadway or a highway.
A.
When prohibited, means the halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or
not, except momentarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged
in loading or unloading property or passengers.
B.
§ 225-218 SHALER CODE § 225-218
1:1010
PERSONAL WATERCRAFT — A small boat which uses an inboard motor
powering a water jet pump as its primary source of power. Generally,
a watercraft designed for one or two persons only, not weighing over
350 pounds and always not being more than 10 feet in length. The term
"personal watercraft," for the purposes of this chapter, shall also include
"sea sleds," "jet skis," "wave runners" or other such product name meeting
the description herein provided.
PET CONTAINMENT FENCE — An out-of-sight fencing system using
electric current on buried wire designed to keep pets on a property.
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — An area of land, controlled by
a landowner, to be developed as a single entity for a number of dwelling
units or a combination of residential and nonresidential uses, the
development plan for which does not correspond in lot size, bulk, type of
dwelling or use, density or intensity, lot coverage and required open space
to the regulations established in any one district created, from time to time,
under the provisions of this chapter.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of the Township of
Shaler.
PLAT — The map or plan of a subdivision or land development, whether
preliminary or final.
POP-UP TRAILER — See "folding trailer."
PORTABLE CARPORT or FREESTANDING CARPORT — A detached
manufactured accessory building customarily used for the shelter or
storage of vehicles, including canopies used for such, which can be easily
moved without disassembly after removal of any tie-down or other
anchoring provisions intended to compensate for wind displacement and
which is generally a frame covered by lightweight material.
PORTABLE SIGN — Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or
other permanent structure, or a sign designed to be transported, including,
but not limited to, signs designed to be transported by means of wheels;
signs converted to A- or T-frames; sandwich board signs; balloons used as
signs; umbrellas used for advertising; and signs attached to or painted on
vehicles parked and visible from the public right-of-way, unless vehicle is
used in the normal day-to-day operations of the business.
PORTABLE STORAGE UNITS (also known as "PORTABLE ON-DEMAND
STORAGE UNITS"), hereinafter PODS® — Portable containers that are
placed on, in front of, beside or behind a property for the purpose of storing,
loading or unloading furniture, clothing or other personal or household
belongings as part of the process of renovation or moving, the relocation
of belongings to an off-site commercial storage location, or on-site storage
in the aftermath of the property being affected by a natural disaster and
include but are not limited to certain trade-named units called PODS®,
Door-to-Door Storage, Pack Rat, Smart Box Portable Storage, Smart Move
and the like portable on-demand storage containers. Unlike trailers
typically attached to semitrucks for transport, portable storage units must
be no larger than eight feet by eight feet by 16 feet.
§ 225-218 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-218
1:1011
POWER-MOUNTED/SHARED-USE COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY — A
steel or metal antenna which is to be mounted upon a preexisting steel or
metal electrical transmission tower owned or operated by a public utility.
PRIVATE GARAGE — An accessory structure or part of a main building
in which not more than four passenger automobiles per dwelling unit are
housed for the convenience of the occupants of the main building or one
commercial vehicle with a GVWR of less than 5,000 pounds and is used
solely by the occupants of the main building.
PROFESSION — Includes any occupation or vocation in which a professed
knowledge of some department of science or learning is used by its practical
application to the affairs of others, either advising, guiding or teaching
them, and in serving their interest or welfare in the practice of an art
founded on it. The word implies attainments in professional knowledge as
distinguished from mere skill in the application of such knowledge to uses
for others. It requires knowledge of an advanced type in a given field of
science or instruction and study. It includes, for example, doctors, dentists,
architects, engineers, lawyers, accountants, optometrists, ministers and
funeral directors.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — The office of a member of a profession
maintained for the conduct of such profession.
PROJECTING SIGN — A two-sided sign attached perpendicular to the
building face. See "business sign."
PUBLIC GARAGE — A building or part thereof, other than a private garage,
for the storage and/or repair of motor vehicles.
PUBLIC GROUNDS — Includes:
PUBLIC HEARING — A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice,
intended to inform and obtain public comment prior to taking action.
PUBLIC MEETING — A forum held pursuant to notice under the Act of July
3, 1986 (P.L. 388, No. 84), known as the "Sunshine Act."267
PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice published once each week for two successive
weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality. Such notice
shall state the time and place of the hearing and the particular nature of
the matter to be considered at the hearing. The first publication shall not be
more than 30 days and the second publication shall not be less than seven
days from the date of the hearing.
Parks, playgrounds, trails, paths and other recreational areas and other
public areas.
A.
Sites for schools, sewage treatment, refuse disposal and other publicly
owned or operated facilities.
B.
C. Publicly owned or operated scenic and historic sites.
267. Editor's Note: See now 65 Pa.C.S.A. § 701 et seq. (October 15, 1998, P.L. 729, No. 93).
§ 225-218 SHALER CODE § 225-218
1:1012
PUBLIC UTILITY — A system providing distribution of water, gas, electric
or telephone services, or the collection and disposal of wastewater, such
system operating as a municipal authority or under the rules and
regulations of the State Public Utility Commission. This definition does not
include any system or device used for the transmission or reception of radio,
television, wireless telephone, pager, commercial mobile radio service or
any other wireless communications signals.
PUBLIC UTILITY BUILDING — A building, or extension thereof, used or to
be used by a public utility corporation licensed by the PUC as such. The
term shall not include equipment buildings or storage structures that house
transmitting equipment for radio, cellular telephone, paging or television
towers and antennas, telecommunications equipment buildings or other
transmission facilities.
PUC — The Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission.
REAR FACADE — The facade of a building adjacent to the rear property
line; that facade parallel to the front facade. For example, the rear facade
of a building would include all of the wall area that would be shown on the
rear elevation of the building plans.
REAR YARD DEPTH — The prescribed minimum open space extending
across the entire width of the lot between the back line of the building or
accessory structure and the rear lot line as shown on the exhibits attached
hereto.268
RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT — A vehicle or equipment designed for
outdoor recreational use that is not otherwise defined as a recreational
vehicle and includes but is not limited to all-terrain vehicles (ATVs), dirt
bikes, go-karts, golf carts, and any other similar vehicles.
RECREATIONAL TRAILER — A trailer designed or adapted and used
exclusively for recreational purposes.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle built on a single chassis, designed
for recreational purposes and which may be self-propelled or towed by
another vehicle. A recreational vehicle is not designed or intended for
use as a permanent dwelling. A recreational vehicle shall include but not
be limited to recreational trailers, travel trailers, trailer coaches, truckcampers,
motor homes, boats, personal watercraft, houseboats and
campers.
RESIDENTIAL IDENTIFICATION SIGN — Any on-site noncommercial sign
located in a district zoned for residential uses that contains no commercial
message and intended to identify the name of the resident and/or the street
number or apartment number of the dwelling unit.
RESTAURANT — A place where the principal and substantial activity is
the sale of food and the incidental sale of nonintoxicating beverages or
intoxicating beverages if licensed by the Pennsylvania Liquor Control
Board.
268. Editor's Note: Exhibits are located in "Street and Building Details" attached to this
chapter.
§ 225-218 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-218
1:1013
RETAINING WALL — An upright work or structure constructed of block,
stone, brick or other material and used to either directly support retained
material or to serve as a facing of a cut slope. A structure erected or
constructed for the purpose of restraining the lateral movement of soil, to
contain earth or other natural materials, and which does not exceed the
height of earth intended to be supported. Unlike a fence or an enclosure
wall, only one side of a retaining wall is visible. See "wall," "retaining wall,
engineered."
RETAINING WALL, ENGINEERED — A professionally engineered structure
designed and constructed to retain the earth on one side at a higher
elevation than the earth on the other side in such a way that resists the
lateral displacement of soil or other materials in order to stabilize slopes
and provide usable areas of land at different elevations.
RFI — Radio frequency interference.
ROOF SIGN — Any sign erected and constructed wholly on and over the
roof of a building, supported by the roof structure and extending vertically
above the top walk or edge of a flat roof, the eaves line of a building with
a gambrel, gable or hip roof, or the deckline of a building with a mansard
roof.
ROOMING HOUSE — A building or portion thereof, other than an
apartment hotel or a hotel, containing not more than one dwelling unit, if
any, where lodging is provided without meals, for compensation, to persons
other than members of the family residing in the dwelling unit.
SCHOOL BUS or SCHOOL VEHICLE — A motor vehicle designed and used
for the transportation of pre-primary, primary or secondary students to or
from public, private or parochial schools or events related to such schools
or school-related activities.
SCREEN or SCREENING — As used in this chapter, the method by which
the view from one site to an adjacent site is shielded or hidden. Screening
techniques must cover the entire length and height of the commercial or
recreational vehicle and may include bufferyards, berms and opaque fences
or walls not exceeding the height standards set forth in either Chapter 118,
Fences, Walls and Hedges, or this chapter of the Code (relating to fences,
walls and hedges) and must have at least 75% opacity, thereby reducing
the impact of noise and unsightly vision intrusions with less offensive or
more harmonious elements, such as plants, berms, fences, walls or any
appropriate combination thereof so that the adjacent site is not visible at
ground level from another property or from any public right-of-way.
SEARCH RING — The defined area in which an antenna array may be
located which will fulfill the radio frequency needs of a provider in providing
a coverage area. Generally, the search ring is shown on a map.
SECTION — A geographical area or portion of a tract that is proposed
for planned residential development and which is to be developed in
accordance with a timetable for development that is included as part of the
applicant's development plan.
§ 225-218 SHALER CODE § 225-218
1:1014
SEMINUDE — A state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the
genitals, pubic region and areola of the female breast, as well as portions of
the body covered by supporting straps or devices.
SEMITRAILER — A trailer so constructed that some part of its weight rests
upon or is carried by the towing vehicle.
SETBACK — The required minimum distance from the property line to
where a structure may be built, constructed or erected.
SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — Does not include any of the following:
SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER — A business or commercial enterprise
that, as one of its primary business purposes, offers for any form of
consideration:
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS — An adult arcade, adult bookstore or
adult video store, adult motel, adult mini motion-picture theater, adult
motion-picture theater, escort agency, nude model studio, or sexual
encounter center or any other adult-oriented establishment.
SHALL — Indicates that an action is required or prohibited.
SIDE YARD WIDTH — The prescribed minimum open space extending from
the side of any building or accessory structure along the side lot line
throughout the entire depth of the yard. Any lot line not a rear line or a front
line shall be deemed a side line.
SIDEWALK — A walk consisting of a paved area for pedestrians usually
beside a street or roadway.
SIGHT OBSCURING — Opaque or having such qualities as to constitute
a complete visual barrier to persons outside the perimeter of the sightobscuring
object. A fence which partially obscures sight shall not be
Medical publications or films or bona fide educational publications or
films.
A.
Any art or photography publications which devote at least 25% of
the lineage of each issue to articles and advertisements dealing with
subjects of art or photography.
B.
Any news periodical which reports or describes current events and
which from time to time publishes photographs of nude or seminude
persons in connection with the dissemination of the news.
C.
Any publications or films which describe and report different cultures
and which from time to time publish or show photographs of depictions
of nude or seminude persons when describing cultures in which nudity
is indigenous to the populations.
D.
Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons
of the opposite sex; or
A.
Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same
sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or seminude.
B.
§ 225-218 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-218
1:1015
considered sight-obscuring if the distance or open space between boards,
slats, rails, stanchions or balusters (which shall not exceed four inches in
width) equals or exceeds the width of said boards, slats, etc., measured at
90° angles.
SIGN — Any surface, fabric or device bearing lettered, pictorial or
sculptured matter designed to convey information or images visually and
exposed to public view, or any structure designed to carry the above visual
information.
SIGNAGE — Signs considered as a group; the design or use of signs.
SIGN, CHANGEABLE COPY — A sign or portion thereof with characters,
letters or illustrations that can be changed or rearranged without altering
the face or the surface of the sign. A sign on which the only copy that
changes is an electronic or mechanical indication of time or temperature
shall be considered a time-and-temperature portion of a sign and not a
changeable copy sign for purposes of this chapter.
SLIDE-ON CAMPER — See "truck camper."
SNOWPLOW — An implement specially designed for commercial or
industrial snow removal, whether by pushing it, blowing it away or lifting
it into a truck, but excluding domestic equipment; a flat or curved piece
of metal usually attached to the front of a vehicle to clear away snow. A
A "sign" includes but is not limited to:
A separate structure consisting of a face or faces upon which
information is portrayed and its supporting elements, including the
foundation;
(1)
(2) A structure or device erected in the form of a symbol or trademark;
A structure or device designed to carry visual information, attached
or fastened to another structure, such as on the wall or roof of a
building;
(3)
A surface of a structure or device upon which lettered, pictorial or
other visual information is painted; or
(4)
Window signs, cloth banners, balloons, festoon lighting, pennants
or other devices designed to attract attention by animation or by
direct or reflected lighting.
(5)
A.
A "sign" does not include:
Merchandise, pictures or models of products or services
incorporated in a window display;
(1)
Holiday decorations customarily displayed in a window or on or
about the premises of residential structures or in windows of
business uses, without business advertising; or
(2)
(3) Works of art which in no way identify a business or a product.
B.
§ 225-218 SHALER CODE § 225-218
1:1016
plow-like device or vehicle used to remove snow, especially from roads and
parking lots.
SPECIAL EXCEPTION — A use permitted in a particular zoning district,
which the Zoning Hearing Board is permitted to authorize in specific
instances listed in this chapter, under the terms, procedure and conditions
prescribed herein.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS —
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — Includes any of the following:
STAGE — One or more sections on which an applicant proposes to
commence development at the same time as part of a timetable for
development of a planned residential development over a period of years.
STEP VAN — A motor vehicle having a generally rectangular bulk, designed
and manufactured primarily as a commercial delivery or service truck, and
characterized by having sufficient headroom for an adult six feet in height
to stand upright.
STORE or STORAGE — To park, place or leave any commercial or
recreational vehicle on any residential property or highway for later use for
a period of more than 24 consecutive hours.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT — The method for detention and control of
stormwater runoff from a specific development site.
STORY — That portion of a building included between the upper surface of
any floor and the upper surface of the next floor or roof above it, excluding
a cellar or basement.
STREAMER — A long narrow flag, banner or pennant suspended from one
or more corners, used to draw attention to a business or its signs.
STREET — Includes street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway, freeway,
parkway, lane, alley, viaduct and any other ways used or intended to be used
by vehicular traffic or pedestrians, whether public or private.
Less than completely and opaquely covered:
(1) Human genitals or pubic region;
(2) Buttocks; or
Female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the
areola.
(3)
A.
Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if completely
opaquely covered.
B.
A. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
B. Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy.
Fondling or erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks
or female breasts.
C.
§ 225-218 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-218
1:1017
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary
location on or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the land.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land
by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions
of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs
or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided,
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBSTANTIAL ENLARGEMENT OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS
— The increase in floor areas occupied by the business by more than 25%,
as the floor areas exist on the date of enactment of this article.
SUBSTANTIALLY COMPLETED — Where, in the judgment of the Municipal
Engineer, at least 90% (based on the cost of the required improvements
for which financial security was posted) of those improvements required
as a condition for final approval have been completed in accordance with
the approved plan, so that the project will be able to be used, occupied or
operated for its intended use.
SUPPLEMENTAL SIGN — Any sign identifying special features or services
of a trade or business, including additional corporate or business logos,
entrance or exit signs, or signs identifying functions, such as showroom,
sales, service or repairs. See "business sign."
SURCHARGE — A vertical load imposed on the retained soil that may
impose a lateral force in addition to the lateral earth pressure of the
retained soil. Examples of surcharges include sloping retained soil and
structure footings supported by the retained soil.
TANDEM AXLE — Every axle located within eight feet of another axle.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT BUILDING — The building in
which electronic receiving and relay equipment, cooling equipment and
monitoring devices for a communications facility are housed.
Telecommunications equipment buildings shall not be construed to be
within the definition of "public utility" contained in this section.
TEMPORARY — For the purposes of this chapter, "temporary" means not
more than 24 hours.
TEMPORARY POLITICAL SIGNS — A sign, placard or sticker which
announces a political candidate seeking office, political parties and/or
political and public issues contained on an election ballot and includes,
but is not limited to, structures or devices upon which lettered, pictorial
or other visual information is painted, including paper, plastic or cloth
banners, pennants, balloons or other devices designed to attract attention.
TEMPORARY SIGN — A wall, window, awning, projecting or ground sign
that provides decoration and/or identifies advertising or nonadvertising
information such as a business name, business address, owner, logo and/or
building name relating to brief activity, the erection or display of which is
§ 225-218 SHALER CODE § 225-218
1:1018
not to exceed a period of 30 days in any calendar year and which takes place
not more than one time a year. A temporary sign includes a banner, cloth,
pennant, streamer or other flexible material suspended from a building,
structure or pole. A business establishment may erect or display only one
temporary sign on a lot in any calendar year. See "business sign."
TENT TRAILER — See "folding trailer."
TOTAL SIGNAGE AREA — The area of a sign shall include all lettering,
wording and accompanying designs and symbols together with the
background, whether open or enclosed, on which they are displayed,
together with any material or color forming an integral part of the
background of the display or used to differentiate the sign from the
backdrop or building against which it is placed, but not including any
supporting framework and bracing that are incidental to the display itself.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Shaler.
TOWNSHIP MANAGER — The Manager of the Township of Shaler.
TOY CAPS — Plastic or paper caps for toy pistols in sheets, strips, rolls or
individual caps containing not more than 16 milligrams of composition per
cap.
TRACTOR — A motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing other
vehicles and not so constructed as to carry a load other than a part of the
weight of the vehicle and load so drawn.
TRAILER — A vehicle designated to be towed by a motor vehicle.
TRAILER COACH — A vehicle primarily designed and used as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping or travel purposes and drawn by
another vehicle.
TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED
BUSINESS — Includes any of the following:
TRANSFERABLE DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS — The attaching of development
rights to specified lands which are desired by Shaler Township to be kept
undeveloped, but permitting those rights to be transferred from those lands
so that the development potential which they represent may occur on other
lands within Shaler Township where more intensive development is deemed
by the Township to be appropriate.
TRAVEL TRAILER — A towable recreational trailer that connects to a ball
hitch mounted on the tow vehicle and designed as living quarters for
A. The sale, lease or sublease of the business;
The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the
business, whether by sale, exchange or similar means; or
B.
The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal device which
transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer
by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person
possessing the ownership or control.
C.
§ 225-218 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-218
1:1019
recreational travel. A travel trailer is also known as a conventional trailer,
a bumper-pull trailer, a travel trailer coach, and a tagalong trailer. A travel
trailer is usually between 10 and 35 feet in length.
TRAVEL TRAILER COACH — See "travel trailer."
TRUCK — Any motor vehicle designed, used or maintained primarily for the
transportation of property or designated as a truck by the manufacturer.
TRUCK CAMPER — A truck camper is not a vehicle in itself, but rather is
an add-on camper body with living quarters designed to slide into the bed
of a standard pickup truck to make it a recreational vehicle. The camper
is fastened to the truck frame during transport and slides out onto its own
legs at the campsite. A truck camper is sometimes known as a camper or
a slide-on camper. Truck campers are usually between eight and 20 feet in
length.
TWIRL TIME — The time it takes for static text, images and graphics on
an electronic sign to change to a different text, images or graphics on a
subsequent sign face.
TWO-FAMILY DWELLING — A building containing two noncommunicating
dwelling units, each for exclusive use by one family and each with its own
separate exterior entrance door.
USE — The purpose or activity for which the land or structure thereon is
designed, arranged or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained.
USE REGISTRATION CERTIFICATE — A certificate to be furnished by a
seller of property to a buyer thereof, showing the legal use and zoning
classification of such property.
UTILITY BUILDING — A storage shed for normal household maintenance
materials and tools, not to exceed 144 square feet in floor area or 10
feet in height. The term shall not include equipment buildings or storage
structures that house transmitting equipment for radio, cellular telephone,
paging or television towers and antennas, telecommunications equipment
buildings or other transmission facilities.
UTILITY TRAILER — A trailer having a gross weight, including load
thereon, of 9,000 pounds or less.
UTILITY VEHICLE — A motor vehicle having a utility body attached,
consisting of and containing cabinet compartments.
§ 225-218 SHALER CODE § 225-218
1:1020
VAN CAMPERS — See "Class B motor home."
VARIANCE — A modification of the literal provisions of this chapter, which
the Zoning Hearing Board is permitted to grant, subject to the terms and
conditions of this chapter, when strict enforcement of such provisions would
cause undue hardship because of circumstances unique to the individual
property with respect to which the "variance" is sought.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which any person or property
is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices used
exclusively upon rails or tracks. The term does not include a self-propelled
wheelchair or an electrical mobility device operated by and designed for the
exclusive use of a person with a mobility-related disability.
VEHICULAR SIGN — Any sign displayed on a parked vehicle, where the
primary purpose of the vehicle is to advertise a product or business or to
direct people to a business or activity during all or part of the day. For the
purposes of this chapter, vehicular signs shall not include business logos,
identification, or advertising on vehicles primarily used for other business
purposes.
VISIBILITY TRIANGLE or CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE — An imaginary area
created by measuring back from the intersecting point of the two property
lines parallel to the intersecting streets a minimum distance of 20 feet and
drawing an imaginary line across these two points for the purpose of traffic
safety and on which all landscape plantings, structural barriers, shrubs,
trees, fences, walls, structures or other objects, temporary or permanent,
shall permit completely unobstructed vision within a clear sight triangular
area between the heights of 2 1/2 feet and nine feet above the crown of the
streets, drives, or driveways.
The visibility triangle or clear sight triangle shall provide a clear sight
triangle of at least 20 feet as measured along the center line from the
intersecting roads or such greater distance as determined by the Township
Engineer and the Township Code Enforcement Officer, contingent on
unusual site topography, proposed site design features and other unique
circumstances pertaining solely to the site and surrounding properties so as
not to constitute a traffic or pedestrian safety hazard.
V-TYPE SIGN — A structure of two signs arranged in the shape of the letter
"V," when viewed from above, and with their faces oriented in different
directions.
WALL — A continuous, vertical, linear, unroofed structure, usually
constructed of wood, stone, concrete or masonry, that encloses or divides an
area for the purpose of delineating a boundary or functioning as a barrier,
including but not limited to enclosure walls and retaining walls. An upright
structure raised to some height and intended for purposes of providing
protection, security or enclosure. See "enclosure wall," "retaining wall,"
"retaining wall, engineered."
WALL SIGN — Any sign painted on, attached or erected against the wall of
a building, the front or sides of a marquee or a canopy, with the exposed
§ 225-218 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-218
1:1021
face of the sign in a place parallel to the plane of the wall or the marquee or
canopy so that only one side is visible.
WATER SURVEY — An inventory of the source, quantity, yield and use of
groundwater and surface water resources within the Township.
WATERCRAFT — Every description of device used on the water or ice or
capable of being used as a means of transport on water or ice, including
boats, motorboats, iceboats, all-terrain or amphibious vehicles when they
are operated on water and all such other devices, but excluding seaplanes
and personal watercraft.
WRECKER or TOW TRUCK — A motor vehicle designed or constructed and
used for the towing of abandoned or disabled vehicles.
ZONING HEARING BOARD — The Zoning Hearing Board established under
this chapter.
ZONING OFFICER — The person appointed to act as Zoning Officer, or any
assistant to such person, to administer and enforce this chapter as provided
herein.
§ 225-218 SHALER CODE § 225-218
1:1022
Appendix
Chapter A245
MEDICAL SERVICES FRANCHISE
§ A245-1. Title.
This ordinance shall be known as the "Township of Shaler Nonexclusive
Ambulance Franchise Ordinance."
§ A245-2. Conflict with other provisions.
All ordinances and resolutions and any parts of either thereof which are
inconsistent herewith or conflicting herewith shall be and the same are
hereby repealed.
§ A245-3. Purpose and intent.
This ordinance is to promote the health, safety and welfare of the Township,
to provide Shaler Township with a coordinated system of emergency
medical care for individuals and improve the efficiency of emergency
medical care, the quality of care and the outcomes of medical emergencies,
including reducing premature death and suffering related to accidents and
other emergencies and nonemergencies, as well as to provide readily
available emergency and nonemergency medical facilities within Shaler
Township that include communication, transportation and treatment, and
to prevent the loss of life and suffering due to an uncoordinated system of
emergency medical facilities.
§ A245-4. Rules of construction.
In the construction of this ordinance, the rules and definitions contained in
this section shall be observed and applied, except when the context clearly
indicates otherwise:
§ A245-5. Granting of franchise.
The Township hereby grants to the Shaler Area Emergency Medical
Services a nonexclusive franchise to provide primary ambulance service
to the residents of the Township, and emergency and nonemergency
A. Words used in the singular shall include the plural and the plural the
singular.
B. Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense.
C. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary.
D. The word "may" is permissive.
§ 225-218 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A245-5
1:1023
ambulances services shall be dispatched through the Shaler Area
Emergency Medical Services.
§ A245-6. Term.
The franchise granted by this ordinance shall be for an initial term of 10
years from the effective date of the ordinance.
§ A245-7. Nonexclusive grant.
The right to provide primary ambulance service to the residents of the
Township as set forth above shall not be exclusive.
§ A245-8. Review of records; compliance; monitoring.
Shaler Area Emergency Medical Services agrees that Shaler Township may
review such of its books and records, during normal business hours and on a
nondisruptive basis, as is reasonable to monitor compliance with the terms
herewith and to protect the health, safety and welfare of the residents of
the Township.
§ A245-9. Emergencies.
In the case of any emergency or disaster, Shaler Township shall utilize its
dispatch facilities to best promote the health, safety and welfare of the
residents of the Township, including using any and all available emergency
medical facilities.
§ A245-10. Transfer of franchise.
Shaler Area Emergency Medical Services shall not transfer any right, title
or interest in the franchise, and such franchise shall not be sold,
transferred, assigned or otherwise encumbered in any way, without the
prior written consent of the Township.
§ A245-11. Minimum standard of ambulance services.
Shaler Area Emergency Medical Services shall comply in all respects with
Act 45 of 1985, the Pennsylvania Emergency Medical Services Act, as well
as all other statutes of this commonwealth, including licensures, rules and
regulations, and minimum standards of staffing, and upon violation thereof
or suspension or refusal by the Department of Health of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania to renew a license, the franchise granted herein may be
revoked.
§ A245-12. Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance are severable, and if any sentence, term or
provision hereof is determined to be illegal or held to be unconstitutional
or otherwise held to be invalid, the decision of the court shall not affect or
impair any of the remaining provisions. It is hereby declared to be the intent
§ A245-5 SHALER CODE § A245-12
1:1024
of the Board of Commissioners that this ordinance would have been enacted
had such unconstitutional provisions or parts thereof not been included
herein.
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No. 1731 3-12-1996 Cross-connections Repealed by Ord.
No. 1925; see now
Ch. 218, Art. III
Ord. No. 1732 3-26-1996 Grading moratorium NCM
Ord. No. 1733 4-9-1996 Interim tax assessment NCM
Ord. No. 1734 5-14-1996 Street acceptance NCM
Ord. No. 1735 5-14-1996 Street acceptance NCM
Ord. No. 1736 5-14-1996 Street acceptance NCM
Ord. No. 1737 5-14-1996 Street acceptance NCM
Ord. No. 1738 5-14-1996 Street acceptance NCM
Ord. No. 1739 5-14-1996 Adoption of Code Repealed by Ord.
No. 1925
Ord. No. 1740 5-28-1996 Condemnation of
property
NCM
Ord. No. 1741 5-28-1996 Fees: attorneys' fees Ch. 115, Art. I
Ord. No. 1742 10-8-1996 Library amendment Ch. 26
Ord. No. 1743 12-10-1996 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No. 1744 12-10-1996 1997 tax rate NCM
Ord. No. 1745 2-11-1997 Zoning amendment Repealed by Ord.
No. 1925
Ord. No. 1746 3-11-1997 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
See Ch. 212
Ord. No. 1747 5-13-1997 Authorization to enter
intergovernmental
agreement
NCM
Ord. No. 1748 11-11-1997 Signs amendment Superseded by Ord.
No. 1916
§ A245-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1025
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No. 1749 11-11-1997 Condemnation of
property
NCM
Ord. No. 1750 12-9-1997 1998 budget NCM
Ord. No. 1751 12-9-1997 1998 tax rate NCM
Ord. No. 1752 1-13-1998 Police Department:
restitution of workers'
compensation paid to
police officers
Ch. 40, Art. III
Ord. No. 1753 1-27-1998 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
Ord. No. 1754 1-27-1998 Rules of order
amendment
Ch. 51
Ord. No. 1755 3-10-1998 Condemnation of
property
NCM
Ord. No. 1756 3-24-1998 Floodplain
management
amendment
Ch. 130, Art. II
Ord. No. 1757 4-14-1998 Sewers: crossconnections
amendment
Ch. 181, Art. VIII
Ord. No. 1758 4-14-1998 Street name change NCM
Ord. No. 1759 5-12-1998 Police Department:
mutual aid agreement
Ch. 40, Art. IV
Ord. No. 1760 7-15-1998 Street vacation NCM
Ord. No. 1761 12-15-1998 1999 tax rate NCM
Ord. No. 1762 12-15-1999 1999 budget NCM
Ord. No. 1763 2-9-1999 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
Ord. No. 1764 4-13-1999 Sewers: additional
sewer service charges
amendment
Ch. 181, Art. VII
Ord. No. 1765 4-13-1999 Building construction:
International One- and
Two-Family Dwelling
Code
Ch. 90, Art. I
Ord. No. 1766 5-11-1999 Building construction:
BOCA National Code
Ch. 90, Art. II
Ord. No. 1767 6-8-1999 Street vacation NCM
§ DL-1 SHALER CODE § DL-1
1:1026
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No. 1768 8-10-1999 Retirement and
pensions: union pension
plan amendment
Ch. 47, Part 3
Ord. No. 1769 8-10-1999 Retirement and
pensions: nonunion
pension plan
amendment
Ch. 47, Part 2
Ord. No. 1770 8-10-1999 Building construction:
BOCA National Fire
Prevention Code;
burning, outdoor
amendment
Ch. 90, Art. III;
repealed by Ord.
No. 1925
Ord. No. 1771 12-14-1999 2000 tax rate NCM
Ord. No. 1772 12-14-1999 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No. 1773 1-3-2000 Increase of
indebtedness
NCM
Ord. No. 1774 2-8-2000 Numbering of houses
and buildings
Repealed by Ord.
No. 1793
Ord. No. 1775 3-14-2000 Retirement and
pensions: union pension
plan amendment
Ch. 47, Part 3
Ord. No. 1776 12-12-2000 Narcotics enforcement
team agreement
NCM
Ord. No. 1777 12-12-2000 Appropriation of funds NCM
Ord. No. 1778 2-13-2001 2001 tax rate NCM
Ord. No. 1779 5-8-2001 Rights-of-way Ch. 176
Ord. No. 1780 6-12-2001 Wellhead protection
areas
Ch. 222
Ord. No. 1781 8-14-2001 Taxation: real estate tax
memorandum bills
Superseded; see
now Ch. 115, Art. II
Ord. No. 1782 9-11-2001 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
Ord. No. 1783 9-11-2001 Retirement and
pensions: nonunion
pension plan
amendment
Ch. 47, Part 2
Ord. No. 1784 9-11-2001 Retirement and
pensions: union pension
plan amendment
Ch. 47, Part 3
Ord. No. 1785 10-9-2001 Street vacation NCM
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1027
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No. 1786 10-9-2001 Condemnation of
property
NCM
Ord. No. 1787 11-13-2001 Taxation: attorneys'
fees for collection of tax
claims and liens
Superseded; see
now Ch. 115, Art. I
Ord. No. 1788 12-11-2001 2002 tax levy NCM
Ord. No. 1789 12-11-2001 2002 budget NCM
Ord. No. 1790 12-11-2001 Increase of
indebtedness
NCM
Ord. No. 1791 12-11-2001 Repeal of 1992 cable
television franchise
ordinance
NCM
Ord. No. 1792 2-26-2002 Retirement and
pensions: police
pension plan
amendment
Ord. No. 1793 5-14-2002 Numbering of houses
and buildings
Ch. 143
Ord. No. 1794 6-11-2002 Street vacation NCM
Ord. No. 1795 7-9-2002 Zoning amendment Ch. 225
Ord. No. 1796 7-9-2002 Protection of
environment:
abandoned and junked
vehicles
Superseded; see
now Ch. 146
Ord. No. 1797 7-9-2002 Trees and shrubs:
dangerous trees
Ch. 207, Art. I
Ord. No. 1798 10-8-2002 Vacation of a portion of
North Park Avenue
NCM
Ord. No. 1799 10-8-2002 Sewers: holding tanks
amendment
Ch. 181, Art. VI
Ord. No. 1800 12-10-2002 Maps: Official Township
Zoning Map
Ch. 153, Art. I
Ord. No. 1801 12-10-2002 Maps: Official Township
Ward Map
Ch. 153, Art. II
Ord. No. 1802 12-10-2002 Maps: Official Township
Street Map
Ch. 153, Art. III
Ord. No. 1803 12-17-2002 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No. 1804 12-17-2002 2003 tax levy NCM
§ DL-1 SHALER CODE § DL-1
1:1028
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No. 1805 12-10-2002 Board of
Commissioners: salary,
compensation and
emoluments
Ch. 10, Art. I
Ord. No. 1806 1-14-2003 Retirement and
pensions: union pension
plan amendment
Ch. 47, Part 3
Ord. No. 1807 1-14-2003 Retirement and
pensions: nonunion
pension plan
amendment
Ch. 47, Part 3
Ord. No. 1808 1-14-2003 Declaration of Spencer
Woods Drive as public
street
NCM
Ord. No. 1809 1-14-2003 Declaration of Spencer
Grove Court as public
street
NCM
Ord. No. 1810 1-14-2003 Declaration of Spencer
Grove Lane as public
street
NCM
Ord. No. 1811 1-14-2003 Declaration of Spencer
Lane Extension as
public street
NCM
Ord. No. 1812 2-11-2003 Fire lanes: designation
by Fire Official
amendment
Ch. 123, Art. II
Ord. No. 1813 4-8-2003 Stormwater
management
Ch. 190
Ord. No. 1814 4-8-2003 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
Ord. No. 1815 4-22-2003 Refinance of 1993 bond
issue
NCM
Ord. No. 1816 8-12-2003 Official adoption of
various public roads
NCM
Ord. No. 1817 8-12-2003 Official adoption of
various public roads
NCM
Ord. No. 1818 11-11-2003 Taxation: earned
income tax amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 1898
Ord. No. 1819 12-30-2003 2004 budget NCM
Ord. No. 1820 12-30-2003 2004 tax levy NCM
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1029
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No. 1821 2-10-2004 Fees: municipal claim
attorneys' fees and
servicing charges
Superseded by Ord.
No. 1885
Ord. No. 1822 2-10-2004 Zoning amendment Repealed by Ord.
No. 1925
Ord. No. 1823 5-11-2004 Zoning amendment Repealed by Ord.
No. 1925
Ord. No. 1824 6-8-2004 Building construction:
uniform construction
codes
Ch. 90, Art. IV
Ord. No. 1825 7-13-2004 Adoption of East
Elfinwild Road as public
road
NCM
Ord. No. 1826 7-13-2004 Taxation: earned
income tax amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 1898
Ord. No. 1827 9-14-2004 Rules of order
amendment
Ch. 51
Ord. No. 1828 9-14-2004 Building construction:
uniform construction
codes amendment
Ch. 90, Art. IV
Ord. No. 1829 12-14-2004 Official adoption of
various public roads
NCM
Ord. No. 1830 12-28-2004 2005 tax levy NCM
Ord. No. 1831 12-28-2004 2005 budget NCM
Ord. No. 1832 3-8-2005 Pennvest loan NCM
Ord. No. 1833 Zoning Map
amendment
Not adopted
Ord. No. 1834 7-12-2005 Retirement and
pensions: union pension
plan amendment
Ch. 47, Part 3
Ord. No. 1835 7-12-2005 Retirement and
pensions: nonunion
pension plan
amendment
Ch. 47, Part 2
Ord. No. 1836 12-12-2006 Littering Repealed by Ord.
No. 1925; see Ch.
149
Ord. No. 1837 7-12-2005 Condemnation of
property
Withdrawn
§ DL-1 SHALER CODE § DL-1
1:1030
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No. 1838 Taxation: emergency
and municipal services
tax
Withdrawn
Ord. No. 1839 12-13-2005 Retirement and
pensions: union pension
plan amendment
Ch. 47, Part 3
Ord. No. 1840 12-13-2005 Retirement and
pensions: nonunion
pension plan
amendment
Ch. 47, Part 2
Ord. No. 1841 12-13-2005 2006 tax levy NCM
Ord. No. 1842 12-13-2005 2006 budget NCM
Ord. No. 1843 1-3-2006 Property, municipal:
dedication of Beyerle
property
Ch. 42, Art. I
Ord. No. 1844 4-11-2006 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
Ord. No. 1845 4-11-2006 Zoning amendment Repealed by Ord.
No. 1925
Ord. No. 1846 6-13-2006 Sewers amendment Ch. 181
Ord. No. 1847 7-11-2006 Noise amendment Repealed by Ord.
No. 1925; see Ch.
158
Ord. No. 1848 10-10-2006 Animals: beekeeping Repealed by Ord.
No. 1925; see now
Ch. 84
Ord. No. 1849 8-8-2006 Retirement and
pensions: mandatory
retirement amendment
Ch. 47, Part 1
Ord. No. 1850 12-12-2006 2007 tax levy NCM
Ord. No. 1851 12-12-2006 2007 budget NCM
Ord. No. 1852 5-8-2007 Taxation: senior
citizens tax exemption
Ch. 201, Art. VII
Ord. No. 1853 Not adopted
Ord. No. 1854 7-10-2007 Retirement and
pensions: police
pension plan
amendment
Ch. 47, Part 4
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1031
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No. 1855 9-11-2007 Retirement and
pensions: nonunion
pension plan
amendment
Ch. 47, Part 2
Ord. No. 1856 9-11-2007 Retirement and
pensions: union pension
plan amendment
Ch. 47, Part 3
Ord. No. 1857 10-9-2007 Cable television:
Verizon franchise
agreement
Ch. 97, Art. II
Ord. No. 1858 11-13-2007 Declaration of Wible
Wood Court as public
street
NCM
Ord. No. 1859 11-13-2007 Declaration of
Teakwood Court as
public street
NCM
Ord. No. 1860 11-13-2007 Declaration of Ash
Drive as public street
NCM
Ord. No. 1861 11-13-2007 Sewers: main line
sewer extensions
amendment; connection
to sanitary sewer
amendment
Ch. 181, Arts. III
and IV
Ord. No. 1862 12-11-2007 2008 tax levy NCM
Ord. No. 1863 12-11-2007 2008 budget NCM
Ord. No. 1864 1-7-2008 Sewers: main line
sewer extensions
amendment
Ch. 181, Art. III
Ord. No. 1865 1-7-2008 Retirement and
pensions: nonunion
pension plan
amendment
Ch. 47, Part 2
Ord. No. 1866 Condemnation of
property
Withdrawn
Ord. No. 1867 6-17-2008 Adoption of Emerald
Drive as public road
NCM
Ord. No. 1868 6-17-2008 Adoption of Topaz Drive
as public road
NCM
Ord. No. 1869 7-8-2008 Fireworks amendment Repealed by Ord.
No. 1925; see Ch.
127
§ DL-1 SHALER CODE § DL-1
1:1032
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No. 1870 9-9-2008 Stormwater
management
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 1949
Ord. No. 1871 11-25-2008 Taxation: local services
tax amendment
Ch. 201, Art. III
Ord. No. 1872 12-9-2008 2009 tax levy NCM
Ord. No. 1873 12-9-2008 2009 budget NCM
Ord. No. 1874 12-9-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 1925
Ord. No. 1875 4-14-2009 Zoning amendment Repealed by Ord.
No. 1925
Ord. No. 1876 4-14-2009 Authorities: Girty's Run
Joint Sewer Authority
amendment
Ch. 5, Art. I
Ord. No. 1877 5-12-2009 Intergovernmental
agreements: North
Hills Council of
Governments Municipal
Appeals Board
Ch. 24, Art. II
Ord. No. 1878 5-12-2009 Solid waste Repealed by Ord.
No. 1925; see Ch.
187
Ord. No. 1879 12-12-2009 2010 tax levy NCM
Ord. No. 1880 12-12-2009 2010 budget NCM
Ord. No. 1881 3-9-2010 Fees: tax certification
fee
Ch. 115, Art. II
Ord. No. 1882 3-9-2010 Zoning amendment Repealed by Ord.
No. 1925
Ord. No. 1883 4-13-2010 Retirement and
pensions: police
pension plan
amendment
Ch. 47, Part 4
Ord. No. 1884 6-8-2010 Sewers: water line
extensions amendment;
metered service
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 1925; see Ch.
218, Arts. I and II
Ord. No. 1885 9-14-2010 Fees: municipal claim
attorneys' fees and
servicing charges
amendment
Ch. 115, Art. I
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1033
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No. 1886 10-12-2010 Adoption of Bowen
Road as public road
NCM
Ord. No. 1887 11-9-2010 Zoning amendment Repealed by Ord.
No. 1925
Ord. No. 1888 12-14-2010 2011 tax levy NCM
Ord. No. 1889 12-14-2010 2011 budget NCM
Ord. No. 1890 1-11-2011 Burning, outdoor
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 1925; see Ch.
95
Ord. No. 1891 1-11-2011 Adoption of Elmwood
Terrace No. 9 portion of
Richard Drive as a
public road
NCM
Ord. No. 1892 2-8-2011 Taxation: interim tax
assessment
Ch. 201, Art. IX
Ord. No. 1893 4-12-2011 Zoning amendment Repealed by Ord.
No. 1896
Ord. No. 1894 4-26-2011 Authorities: Joint Water
Authority with
Township of Hampton
Ch. 5, Art. II
Ord. No. 1895 6-14-2011 Property maintenance Ch. 171
Ord. No. 1896 7-12-2011 Zoning amendment Repealed by Ord.
No. 1925
Ord. No. 1897 8-9-2011 Dague fee simple
ordinance
Repealed by Ord.
No. 1907
Ord. No. 1898 11-9-2011 Taxation: earned
income tax amendment
Ch. 201, Art. I
Ord. No. 1899 Pennvest NCM
Ord. No. 1900 12-13-2011 Retirement and
pensions: nonunion
pension plan
amendment
Ch. 47, Part 2
Ord. No. 1901 12-13-2011 Retirement and
pensions: union pension
plan amendment
Ch. 47, Part 3
Ord. No. 1902 12-13-2011 Retirement and
pensions: police
pension amendment
Ch. 47, Part 4
Ord. No. 1903 12-13-2011 2012 budget NCM
Ord. No. 1904 12-13-2011 2012 tax levy NCM
§ DL-1 SHALER CODE § DL-1
1:1034
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No. 1905 3-13-2011 Taxation: earned
income tax amendment
Ch. 201, Art. I
Ord. No. 1906 4-10-2012 Fees: duplicate tax bill
fee
Ch. 115, Art. III
Ord. No. 1907 6-12-2012 Dague fee simple
ordinance repealer
NCM
Ord. No. 1908 7-10-2012 Retirement and
pensions: union pension
plan amendment
Ch. 47, Part 3
Ord. No. 1909 7-10-2012 Retirement and
pensions: nonunion
pension plan
amendment
Ch. 47, Part 2
Ord. No. 1910 7-10-2012 Building construction:
uniform construction
codes amendment
Ch. 90, Art. IV
Ord. No. 1911 9-11-2012 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 171
Ord. No. 1912 11-13-2012 Retirement and
pensions: nonunion
pension plan
amendment
Ch. 47, Part 2
Ord. No. 1913 12-11-2012 2013 Police Pension
Plan participant
contribution rate
NCM
Ord. No. 1914 12-11-2012 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No. 1915 Tabled
Ord. No. 1916 4-9-2013 Signs Ch. 183
Ord. No. 1917 2-12-2013 Tax Collector Ch. 59
Ord. No. 1918 5-14-2013 2013 tax levy NCM
Ord. No. 1919 7-9-2013 Parks and playgrounds
amendment
Ch. 165
Ord. No. 1920 12-10-2013 Tax rate for 2014 NCM
Ord. No. 1921 12-10-2013 Appropriations for 2014 NCM
Ord. No. 1922 12-10-2013 Pension plan rate for
2014
NCM
Ord. No. 1923 3-11-2014 Zoning (Riverfront
Green Overlay District)
Repealed by Ord.
No. 1925; see Ch.
225
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1035
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No. 1924 4-8-2014 Intergovernmental
agreements: regional
speed enforcement
Ch. 24, Art. Ill
Ord. No. 1925 7-8-2014 Adoption of code;
penalties for violations
Ch. 1, Art. I;
multiple chapters
Ord. No. 1925 10-14-2014 Zoning Ch. 225
Ord. No. 1926 9-9-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 212
Ord. No. 1927 9-23-2014 Flood damage
prevention: floodplain
management
Ch. 130, Part 2
Ord. No. 1928 12-9-2014 Appropriations for 2015 NCM
Ord. No. 1929 12-9-2014 Tax rate for 2015 NCM
Ord. No. 1930 12-9-2014 Pension plan rate for
2015
NCM
Ord. No. 1931 2-10-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 225
Ord. No. 1932 3-10-2015 Peddling and soliciting
amendment
Ch. 169
Ord. No. 1933 7-14-2015 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
Ord. No. 1934 7-14-2015 Retirement and
pensions: union pension
plan amendment
Ch. 47, Part 3
Ord. No. 1935 Not adopted
Ord. No. 1936 12-8-2015 Tax rate for 2016 NCM
Ord. No. 1937 12-30-2015 Appropriations for 2016 NCM
Ord. No. 1938 7-12-2016 Wind energy facilities Ch. 223
Ord. No. 1939 1-10-2017 Subdivision and land
development
Ch. 195
Ord. No. 1940 12-13-2016 Tax rate for 2017 NCM
Ord. No. 1941 12-13-2016 Appropriations for 2017 NCM
Ord. No. 1942 10-10-2017 Street vacation NCM
Ord. No. 1943 11-14-2017 Fire Department:
volunteer companies
amendment
Ch. 22, Art. III
Ord. No. 1944 12-12-2017 Tax Rate for 2018 NCM
Ord. No. 1945 12-12-2017 Appropriations for 2018 NCM
Ord. No. 1946 6-12-2018 Peddling and
Solicitation Amendment
Ch. 169
§ DL-1 SHALER CODE § DL-1
1:1036
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No. 1947 12-11-2018 Tax Rate for 2019 NCM
Ord. No. 1948 12-11-2018 Appropriations for 2019 NCM
Ord. No. 1949 12-11-2018 Stormwater
Management
Ch. 190
Ord. No. 1950 5-14-2019 Nuisance Properties Ch. 160
Ord. No. 1951 5-14-2019 Fire Hydrants Ch. 121A
Ord. No. 1952 5-14-2019 Road Name Change NCM
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1037