PART I: ADMINISTRATIVE LEGISLATION
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 5-20-1976 by Ord. No. 76-4, approved 5-20-1976]
§ 1-1. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to Section 1008(b) of the Borough Code [53 P.S. § 46008(b)], the
codification of a complete body of ordinances for the Borough of Steelton,
County of Dauphin, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as revised, codified and
consolidated into titles, chapters and sections by General Code Publishers
Corp. and consisting of Chapters 1 through 120, is hereby approved,
adopted, ordained and enacted as a single ordinance of the Borough of
Steelton which shall be known and is hereby designated as the "Code of the
Borough of Steelton," hereinafter referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Effect of Code on previous provisions.
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as
those of ordinances in force immediately prior to the enactment of this
ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such ordinances and not as
new enactments, and the effectiveness of such provisions shall date from
the date of adoption of the prior ordinance. All such provisions are hereby
continued in full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their
adoption by the Council of the Borough of Steelton, and it is the intention of
said Council that each such provision contained within the Code is hereby
reenacted and reaffirmed as it appears in said Code. Only such provisions of
former ordinances as are omitted from this Code shall be deemed repealed
or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-3 below, and only new or changed
provisions shall be deemed to be enacted from the effective date of this
Code, as provided in § 1-6 below.
§ 1-3. Repeal of ordinances not contained in Code.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature
adopted by the Borough of Steelton and in force on the date of the adoption
of this Code and not contained in the Code are hereby repealed as of the
effective date given in § 1-6 below, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 1-4. Ordinances saved from repeal; matters not affected by repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-3 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to December 29, 1975 (Ord. No.
75-16).
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the Borough prior to the effective date of this
Code or any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such
right or liability.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:3
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
Code in violation of any legislative provision of the Borough or any
penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending,
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this Code
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the Borough.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the Borough.
F. Any ordinance or part of an ordinance providing for laying out, opening,
altering, widening, relocating, straightening, establishing grade,
changing name, improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-ofway,
easement, street, road, highway, sidewalk, park or other public
place or property.
G. Any ordinance requiring the construction or reconstruction of
sidewalks, curbs or gutters.
H. Any ordinance or resolution appropriating money or transferring funds,
promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the
issuance and delivery of any bond of the Borough, or other instruments
or evidence of the Borough's indebtedness.
I. Any ordinance adopting an annual budget or establishing an annual tax
rate.
J. Any ordinance authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property, or any lawful contract, obligation or agreement.
K. Any ordinance annexing land to the Borough.
L. Any ordinance establishing water, sewer or other special purpose
districts and designating the boundaries thereof, or providing for a
system of sewers or water supply lines.
M. Any ordinance providing for the salaries and compensation of officers
and employees of the Borough, or establishing personnel policies for
Borough employees; any ordinance or resolution pertaining to the
police pension fund.
N. The levy or imposition of special assessments or charges.
O. The dedication of property.
P. Any ordinance amending the Zoning Map which shows the boundaries
of zones created by the Zoning Ordinance adopted 9-12-1960 by Ord.
No. 60-6.
Q. Any ordinance or resolution establishing rules and regulations for the
conduct of meetings of the Borough Council.
§ 1-4 § 1-4
1:4
§ 1-5. Inclusion of new legislation prior to adoption of Code.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted subsequent
to the date given in § 1-4A and/or prior to the date of adoption of this
ordinance, are hereby deemed to be a part of the Code and shall, upon being
printed, be included therein. Attested copies of all such legislation shall be
temporarily placed in the Code until printed supplements are included.
§ 1-6. Changes and revisions in previously adopted ordinances; new
ordinances.
R. The Articles of Incorporation of any Municipal Authority and any
functions assigned to such Authority, in particular the Articles
contained in Ordinance No. 58-10, adopted 10-6-58, and Ordinance No.
66-5, adopted 4-11-1966.
S. All legislation pertaining to the Borough Water System or water use
within the Borough, in particular Ordinance No. 67-1, adopted
1-19-1967, and Ordinance No. 69-10, adopted 12-11-1969, amendatory
thereto.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances of the Borough for adoption
and revision as part of the Code, certain grammatical changes and
other minor nonsubstantive changes were made in one or more of said
ordinances. It is the intention of the Council that all such changes be
adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances so changed had been
previously formally amended to read as such.
B. Certain changes and revisions of a substantive nature were made to
various ordinances included within the Code during the process of
codification. These changes were made to bring the provisions into
conformity with the desired policies of the Council, and it is the intent of
the Council that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code as if
the ordinances so changed had been previously formally amended to
read as such. All such changes and revisions shall be deemed to be in
effect as of the effective date of the Code specified in § 1-16. Such
changes and revisions are cited within the historical statements of
individual chapters by the phrase ". . .amended (or added) at time of
adoption of Code. . ." An enumeration and description of all substantive
changes and revisions made in previously adopted ordinances during
codification is on file in the office of the Borough Secretary where it
shall be available for inspection during regular office hours.
C. Certain new ordinances were approved by the Council during the
process of codification to replace previously adopted ordinances
deemed obsolete and/or inadequate or to provide regulation and control
on new subject matters. These new ordinances are described in the
notice published in conjunction with the adoption of this Code and are
deemed to be in effect as of the effective date of the Code specified in
§ 1-16. Such ordinances are cited within the historical statements for
§ 1-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-6
1:5
§ 1-7. Interpretation of provisions.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of the Code, they shall be held
to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health,
safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where the provisions of
the Code impose greater restrictions or requirements than those of any
statute, other ordinance or regulation, the provisions of the Code shall
control. Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance or regulation
impose greater restrictions or requirements, the provisions of such statute,
other ordinance or regulation shall control.
§ 1-8. Titles and headings; editor's notes.
§ 1-9. Copies of Code on file.
Three copies of the Code in a post-bound volume shall be filed with the
ordinance book in the office of the Borough Secretary and shall remain
there for use and examination by the public. Upon adoption, such copies
shall be certified to by the Borough Secretary, as provided by law, and such
certified copies shall remain on file in the office of the Borough Secretary
available to persons desiring to examine the same during all times while the
said Code is in effect.
§ 1-10. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code,
when passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the
Council to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into such
Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and intended to
include such changes. Whenever such additions, deletions, amendments or
supplements to the Code shall be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed
and, as provided hereunder, inserted in the post-bound book containing the
said Code, as amendments and supplements thereto.
individual chapters by the phrase "Adopted. . . at time of adoption of
Code. . ."1
A. Chapter and article titles, headings and titles of sections and other
divisions in the Code, or in supplements made to the Code, are inserted
in the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code, and are not part of the
ordinances.
B. Editor's notes indicating sources of sections, giving other information
or referring to the statutes or to other parts of the Code are inserted in
the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
ordinances.
1. Editor's Note: Said wording has been replaced with the ordinance number and dates of
adoption and approval.
§ 1-6 § 1-11
1:6
§ 1-11. Code books to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Borough Secretary, or someone authorized and
directed by him or her, to keep up-to-date the certified copies of the book
containing the Code required to be filed in the office of the Borough
Secretary for the use of the public. All changes in said Code and all
ordinances adopted by the Council subsequent to the effective date of this
codification, which the Council shall adopt specifically as part of the Code,
shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until such
changes or new ordinances are printed as supplements to said Code book,
at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-12. Sale of Code book; supplements provided.
Copies of the book containing the Code may be purchased from the Borough
Secretary upon the payment of a fee to be set by resolution of the Council,
which may also arrange for procedures for the periodic supplementation
thereof.
§ 1-13. Publication; filing.
The Borough Secretary, pursuant to law, shall cause to be published in the
manner required a notice of the introduction and of the adoption of the
Code in a newspaper of general circulation in the Borough. Sufficient copies
of the Code shall be maintained in the office of the Borough Secretary
for inspection by the public at all times during regular office hours. The
enactment and application of this ordinance, coupled with the publication
of the notices of introduction and adoption, as required by law, and the
availability of copies of the Code for inspection by the public, shall be
deemed, held and considered to be due and legal publication of all
provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-14. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section, or part thereof,
to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed
to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other section or part thereof.
§ 1-15. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, or to alter or tamper with the Code, or any part or portion
thereof, in any manner whatsoever, which will cause the law of the Borough
to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section of this
ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to a fine of not more than $300
and costs of prosecution, and in default of payment of such fine and costs,
to imprisonment for not more than 30 days.
§ 1-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-16
1:7
§ 1-16. When effective.
All provisions of the Code shall be in force and effect on and after May 20,
1976.
§ 1-16 § 1-16
1:8
Chapter 2
CODE ENFORCEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 11.
Building construction — See Ch. 44.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 54.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 58.
Plumbing — See Ch. 80.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 82.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 108.
Zoning — See Ch. 120.
§ 2-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Code Enforcement
Ordinance of the Borough of Steelton."
§ 2-2. Establishment of Office of Code Enforcement.
A. Creation of Office of Code Enforcement. There is hereby created by the
Council of the Borough of Steelton an office of the Borough of Steelton
to be known as the "Office of Code Enforcement." Said Office shall have
the responsibility for administrating and enforcing the provisions of this
chapter and those other codes and/or ordinances of the Borough, herein
referred to as the "applicable codes and ordinances," which designate
said Office of Code Enforcement as their official administrative and
enforcement authority.
B. Relief from personal liability. The Code Enforcement Officer or other
official or employees shall not, while acting for the Borough of Steelton,
render himself liable personally because of any act or omission as
required or permitted in the discharge of his duties and shall be
represented by the Solicitor of the Borough unless such representation
occasions a conflict of interest relating to his duties as Borough
Solicitor; and in no case will said officer, official or employee be liable
for costs in any action, suit or proceeding.
C. Department record. An official record shall be kept of all business and
activities of the Office of Code Enforcement, and all such records shall
be open to the public for inspection at all appropriate times, except that
no individual, owner, operator, occupant or other person shall be
subject to unwarranted invasion of privacy and except that all evidence
or information obtained in the course of any inspection or investigation
shall be considered privileged information and shall be kept
confidential. Such evidence or information or other investigative
materials shall not be disclosed except as may be necessary in the
judgment of the Code Enforcement Office for the proper and effective
administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter and
shall not otherwise be made public without the consent of the owner,
§ 1-16 CODE ENFORCEMENT § 2-2
2:9
§ 2-3. Enforcement authority; inspections.
§ 2-4. Powers and duties of Code Enforcement Officer.
occupant, operator or other person in charge of the unit, structure
or premises inspected. Such records shall be retained in the official
records so long as the building or structure to which they relate
remains in existence unless otherwise provided by other regulations.
D. Annual report. At least annually, the Code Enforcement Office shall
submit to the Borough Council a written statement of operations in the
form and content as shall be prescribed by such authority.
A. Appointment of Code Enforcement Officer. There shall be appointed by
the Council of the Borough of Steelton a Code Enforcement Officer, who
shall be in charge of the Office of Code Enforcement of the Borough of
Steelton. The Code Enforcement Officer shall supervise such other
employees or assistants as shall be necessary for the administration
and execution of the responsibilities of said Office, as appointed and
approved by the Council of the Borough of Steelton. Said Code
Enforcement Officer and other personnel may consist of employees
directly hired and compensated by the Borough of Steelton.
B. Fire Chief. In accordance with the Fire Prevention Code of the Borough
of Steelton,2 the Fire Chief or Chiefs of the Borough have been
established as the authorized representatives of the Office of Code
Enforcement of the Borough of Steelton, having, in conjunction with the
Code Enforcement Officer, all of the duties of enforcement of the Fire
Prevention Code of the Borough provided for in this chapter. The Fire
Chief or Chiefs shall continue to serve in the capacity until such time as
Council declares otherwise. The Fire Chief shall be subordinate to the
Code Enforcement Officer.
C. Approved inspection agencies. The Code Enforcement Officer shall
make all the required inspections or may accept reports of inspections
by authoritative and recognized services or individuals, which satisfy
requirements as to qualifications and reliability. All inspection reports
shall be in writing and shall be certified by the approved authority or
responsible officer of the agency or the individual when expert
inspection services are accepted. The Code Enforcement Officer may
engage such expert opinion as may be deemed necessary to report upon
unusual technical issues that may arise subject to the approval of the
appointing authority. When required by the provisions of the codes or
by the approved rules, materials or assemblies shall be inspected at the
point of manufacture or fabrication.
A. Enforcement of codes. The Code Enforcement Officer shall enforce and
administer all of the provisions of this chapter and of those other
2. Editor's Note: See Ch. 58, Fire Prevention.
§ 2-2 § 2-4
2:10
applicable codes and ordinances which establish the Office of Code
Enforcement as their official administration and enforcement authority.
B. Duties. The duties of the Code Enforcement Officer shall include the
receipt of applications; the issuance of permits, notices, certificates and
orders; the making of inspections to determine conformance with
applicable codes and ordinances; the undertaking of research and
investigations; the recommendation of appropriate administrative rules
for review and adoption by the Code Hearing Board; the keeping of
records; the issuance of written annual reports; and such other
activities as may be required.
C. Credentials. The Code Enforcement Officer or his authorized
representative shall disclose proper credentials of their respective
office for the purpose of inspecting any and all buildings and premises
in the performance of duties under the applicable code and/or
ordinances where requested.
D. Coordination of enforcement. Whenever, in the opinion of the Code
Enforcement Officer, initiating an inspection under the applicable codes
and/or ordinances, it is deemed necessary or desirable to have
inspections by any other department, the Code Enforcement Officer
shall make reasonable effort to arrange for the coordination of such
inspections so as to minimize the number of visits by Borough officials
and to confer with the other departments for the purpose of eliminating
conflicting orders before any are issued. The assistance and
cooperation of all other municipal officials, including the Police and Fire
Departments, shall be available to the Code Enforcement Officer to
assist in the performance of his duties.
E. Right of entry. Except in the case of any emergency or a mutually
convenient time agreed to by the Code Enforcement Officer and the
owner, the Code Enforcement Officer or his authorized representative,
in discharging his duties and upon showing proper identification where
requested, is hereby authorized to enter and inspect between the hours
of 8:00 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. any structure or premises in the Borough of
Steelton to enforce the provisions of this chapter and of those other
applicable codes and ordinances. Every occupant of a structure or
premises shall give the owner or operator thereof, or agent or
employee, access to any part of such structure or its premises at
reasonable times for the purpose of making such inspection,
maintenance, repairs or alterations as are necessary to comply with the
provisions of this Code.
F. Access/entry refused. If any owner, operator, occupant or other person
in charge fails or refuses to permit entry and free access to the
structure or premises under his control, or to any part thereof, with
respect to any authorized inspection, the Code Enforcement Officer
may, upon showing that probable cause exists for the inspection,
petition for and obtain an ex parte order directing compliance with the
inspection requirements of this chapter from a court of competent
§ 2-4 CODE ENFORCEMENT § 2-4
2:11
§ 2-5. Certain permits required; applications for permits; issuance
or denial.
jurisdiction, including a District Justice. Any person who refuses to
comply with such an order issued pursuant to this section shall be
subject to such penalties as may be authorized by law for violation of a
court order.
G. Rule-making authority. The Borough Code Enforcement Officer shall
have the power as may be necessary in the interest of public safety,
health and general welfare to interpret the intent of the applicable
codes in specific cases where it clearly appears that, by reason of
special conditions, undue hardship would result from a literal
application of any section of the applicable codes. Where such undue
hardship clearly appears, the Borough Code Enforcement Officer may
permit a variance from the literal provisions of the code, but such
variance shall not have the effect of waiving working stresses or fire
protection requirements specifically provided in the code or violating
accepted engineering practice involving public safety, but will comply
with the spirit and intent of the code. All variances granted shall,
however, be reported in writing to the Code Hearing Board at the end of
the month in which they occur.
H. Preliminary inspections. Before issuing a permit, the Code Enforcement
Officer may examine or cause to be examined all buildings, structures
and sites for which an application has been filed for a permit to
construct, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, demolish or change the use
thereof. This section shall not apply to, or be interpreted as affecting,
any provisions, terms, conditions or requirements of the Zoning
Ordinance or regulations of the Borough.3
I. Required inspections. After issuing a permit, the Code Enforcement
Officer shall conduct such inspections from time to time during and
upon completion of the work for which a permit has been issued. A
record of all such examinations and inspections and of all violations of
this Code shall be maintained by the Code Enforcement Officer. Upon
completion of the building or structure, and before issuance of the
certificate of use and occupancy, a final inspection shall be made, and
all violations of the approved plans and permits shall be abated. No new
building or portion of an existing building which is enlarged or altered
shall be used or occupied, in whole or in part, until such a certificate of
use and occupancy shall have been issued by the Code Enforcement
Officer.
J. Accounting. The Code Enforcement Officer shall keep an accurate
account of all fees collected; and such collected fees shall be deposited
in the Borough treasury or otherwise disposed of as required by law.
3. Editor's Note: See Ch. 120, Zoning.
§ 2-4 § 2-5
2:12
A. When permit is required. An application for a permit shall be filed with
the Code Enforcement Officer, and no work shall be commenced until a
permit has been issued by the Code Enforcement Officer. Permits are
required to repair, construct, enlarge, alter or demolish a building or
structure or to change the occupancy of a building or structure
requiring greater strength, exit or sanitary provisions or to install or
alter any plumbing, electrical or mechanical equipment or systems.
B. When permits are not required. Permits are not required for minor
repairs not involving structural work to floors, walls, ceilings and roofs;
plumbing repairs which involve only the working parts of a faucet or
valve, clearance or stoppages, or repairing or replacement of defective
faucets or valves; and for minor electrical repair work such as repairing
or replacing fuses, switches, receptacles, lamps or lighting fixture parts
and the connection of portable electrical appliances to previously
approved permanent receptacles.
C. Forms of application. The application for a permit shall be submitted in
such form as the Code Enforcement Officer may prescribe and shall be
accompanied by the required fee in this chapter.
D. By whom application is made. The responsibility for applying for and
obtaining a required permit rests jointly with the owner or occupant
and the person or persons doing the work. The full names and
addresses of the owner, lessee and applicant and of the responsible
officers, if the owner or lessee is a corporate body, shall be stated in the
application.
E. Description of work. The application shall contain a general description
of the proposed work, its location, the use and occupancy of all parts of
the building or structure and of all portions of the site or lot not covered
by the building or structure and such additional information as may be
required by the Code Enforcement Officer.
F. Plans and specifications. The application for the permit shall be
accompanied by not less than one copy of specifications and of plans
drawn to scale, with sufficient clarity and detail dimensions to show the
nature and character of the work to be performed. When quality of
materials is essential for conformity to the codes, specific information
shall be given to establish such quality; and the code shall not be cited,
nor the term "legal" or its equivalent be used, as a substitute for specific
information. The Code Enforcement Officer may waive the requirement
for filing plans when the work involved is of a minor nature. If in the
course of the work it is found necessary to make any change from the
approved plans and specifications on which a permit has been issued,
amended plans and specifications shall be submitted; and if approved, a
supplementary permit shall be issued to cover the change after the
same conditions required to secure the original permit have been
satisfied.
§ 2-5 CODE ENFORCEMENT § 2-5
2:13
§ 2-6. Effect of permit issuance.
G. Site plan for new construction. Where new construction is involved,
there shall also be a site plan showing to scale the size and location of
all the new construction and all existing structures on the site,
distances from lot lines, the established street grades and the proposed
finished grades; and it shall be drawn in accordance with an accurate
boundary line survey. Also, the site plan shall show the location of water
service and sewer connections with respect to any building in which a
plumbing system is to be installed. Vent stack terminations shall be
shown with respect to building ventilation openings which could allow
introduction of sewer gases into the building or any adjacent building.
H. Engineering details. The Code Enforcement Officer may require
adequate details of structural, mechanical, plumbing and electrical
work to be filed, including computations, stress diagrams and other
essential technical data. All engineering plans and computations shall
bear the signature of the engineer or architect responsible for the
design. Plans for buildings more than two stories in height shall
indicate where penetrations will be made for electrical, mechanical,
plumbing and communications conduits, pipes and systems and the
materials and methods for maintaining the required structural integrity,
fire-resistance rating and firestopping.
I. Other permits required. At the time of filing an application for a permit,
the applicant shall present to the Code Enforcement Officer evidence
that he has obtained all necessary permits, licenses, approvals and/or
variances as may be required by the laws of the Borough and the
commonwealth. Individuals, agencies, boards and commissions issuing
aforesaid permits, licenses, approvals and/or variances shall include,
but shall not be limited to, the Zoning Officer or Zoning Hearing Board,
the Sewage Enforcement Officer, the Fire Chief, the State Police Fire
Marshal, the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry and the
Pennsylvania Department of Community Affairs.
J. Action on application. The Code Enforcement Officer shall examine said
application to determine compliance with those other applicable codes
and ordinances of the Borough and shall, within 30 days after filing,
either approve or reject said application. If said application is rejected,
the Code Enforcement Officer shall inform the applicant in writing,
stating the reasons for such rejection. If the Code Enforcement Officer
is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the requirements of the
applicable codes, the Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a permit
therefor as soon as practicable.
A. Compliance with codes. The permit shall be a license to proceed with
the work and shall not be construed as authority to violate, cancel or set
aside any of the legally granted variation as described in the
application. All work shall conform to the approved application and
plans for which the permit has been issued and any approved
amendments thereto.
§ 2-5 § 2-6
2:14
B. Signature to be attached to permit. The Code Enforcement Officer's
signature shall be attached to every permit; or the Code Enforcement
Officer may authorize a subordinate to affix such signature thereto.
C. Payment of fees. A permit to begin work shall not be issued until the
permit fees prescribed in this chapter have been paid, nor shall an
amendment to a permit necessitating an additional fee because of the
additional work involved be issued until the additional fee shall have
been paid.
D. Previous approvals. This chapter or the applicable codes shall not
require changes in the plans, the plumbing, electrical or mechanical
systems or the construction or designated use of a building for which a
lawful permit has been heretofore issued or otherwise lawfully
authorized and the construction of which has been actively prosecuted
within 90 days after the effective date of this chapter and is completed
with dispatch.
E. Approvals in part. The Code Enforcement Officer may issue permits for
the construction of foundations or any other part of a building or
structure before the entire plans and specifications for the whole
building or structure have been submitted, provided that adequate
information and detailed statements have been filed complying with all
the pertinent requirements of the codes. The holder of such permits
shall proceed at the holder's own risk with the building operation and
without assurance that permits for the entire structure will be granted.
F. Permit expiration dates.
(1) New construction: one year, provided that an extension may be
requested, in writing, and such extensions may be granted by the
Code Enforcement Officer for good reason.
(2) Repairs, remodeling, alterations or additions: six months.
(3) Demolition: three months only, and if such demolition work is not
completed within that time, any bond posted by the applicant shall
be forfeited.
(4) Abate violations cited: same as deadline stated in violation notice.
G. Revocation of permits. The Code Enforcement Officer may revoke a
permit or approval issued under the provisions of the codes in case of
any false statement or misrepresentation of fact in the application or on
the plans on which the permit or approval was based.
H. Posting of permit. A true copy of the building permit and placard shall
be kept on the site of operations open to public inspection during the
entire time of prosecution of the work and until the completion of the
same.
§ 2-6 CODE ENFORCEMENT § 2-6
2:15
§ 2-7. Permit fees.
§ 2-8. Notices and orders; form; service.
I. Notice of inspection. At least 24 hours' notice, in advance, for required
inspections indicated on the permits shall be given to the Code
Enforcement Officer.
A. Required fees. Applicants for permits required by any of the applicable
codes and ordinances of the Borough shall pay, at the time of
application to the Code Enforcement Officer for use by the Borough,
permit fees as designated from time to time by resolution of the
Borough Council of the Borough of Steelton.
B. Double fees. Any person, firm or corporation who shall commence any
work for which a permit is required by the applicable codes and
ordinances, without first having obtained a permit therefor, shall, if
subsequently permitted to obtain a permit, pay double the permit fee
fixed for such work, provided that this provision shall not apply to
emergency work and first-time offenders.
A. Notice to responsible owner, operator, occupant or other person in
charge. Whenever the Code Enforcement Officer determines that there
are reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any
provisions of this chapter or of the other applicable codes and
ordinances or whenever the Code Enforcement Officer issues a stopwork
order or has condemned and placards any structure or equipment
or whenever the Code Enforcement Officer orders a dangerous, unsafe
or unfit for human habitation structure to be vacated, repaired and/or
demolished, a notice shall be given to the responsible owner, operator,
occupant or person in charge of the structure or premises in the
manner prescribed below.
B. Form. Notice to the responsible owner, operator, occupant or person in
charge shall:
(1) Be in writing, signed by the Code Enforcement Officer or his
authorized representative.
(2) Include a description of the real estate sufficient for identification.
(3) Include a statement of the reasons why the notice is being issued
and the sections of the code and/or ordinances which have been
violated.
(4) Include a correction order allowing a reasonable time, not to
exceed 120 days for the initiation and correction of the violation
alleged or of the remedial actions required, except where
emergency conditions exist which require immediate corrective
action.
§ 2-6 § 2-8
2:16
§ 2-9. Emergency measures.
§ 2-10. Condemnation; restoration of condemned structures.
(5) Include a statement indicating that the notice will become an order
if no request and approval for an extension of time is made to the
Code Enforcement Officer or if no petition for an appeal or hearing
is requested before the Code Hearing Board within 10 days from
the receipt of said notice.
C. Service. The notice shall be served personally on the responsible owner,
occupant, operator or other person in charge by any person authorized
by law to make any service of process as well as the Code Enforcement
Officer and his assistants or shall be served by certified mail with a
return receipt requested; or where such responsible person in charge
cannot be found, service may be made by posting a notice on or about
the structure or premises and taking a picture of said notice, or by
publishing such notice in a newspaper of general circulation for a
period of three consecutive days, or may be served by any other method
for a period of three consecutive days, or may be served by any other
method authorized under the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
A. Vacating structures. When in the opinion of the Code Enforcement
Officer an emergency exists on any premises or in any structure or part
thereof or on any defective equipment, which requires immediate
action to protect the public health, safety or welfare or that of the
occupants thereof, or if there is actual and immediate danger of failure
or collapse of a building or structure, the Code Enforcement Officer
may, with notice and service, issue an order reciting the existence of
such an emergency and requiring the vacating of the premises or such
action taken as the Code Enforcement Officer deems necessary to meet
such emergency. Notwithstanding other provisions of this chapter, such
order shall be effective immediately, and the premises or equipment
involved shall be placarded immediately upon service of the order.
B. Temporary safeguards. When in the opinion of the Code Enforcement
Officer there is actual and immediate danger of collapse or failure of a
building or structure or any part thereof which would endanger life, the
Code Enforcement Officer shall cause the necessary work to be done to
render such building or structure or part thereof temporarily safe,
whether or not the legal procedure herein described has been
instituted.
C. Closing streets. When necessary for the public safety, the Code
Enforcement Officer may temporarily close sidewalks, streets,
buildings and structures and places adjacent to such unsafe structure
and prohibit the same from being used.
A. General. All buildings or structures that are or hereafter shall become
unsafe, unsanitary, unfit for human occupancy or use or deficient in
§ 2-8 CODE ENFORCEMENT § 2-10
2:17
adequate exit facilities or which constitute a fire hazard or are
otherwise dangerous to human life or the public welfare or are found
to involve illegal or improper use, occupancy and maintenance shall
be condemned pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and may be
placarded and vacated. A vacant building or structure unguarded or
open at door or window shall be deemed a fire hazard and unsafe.
B. Unsafe structure. An unsafe structure is one in which all or part thereof
is found to be dangerous to life, health, property or the safety of the
public or its occupants because it is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated
or structurally unsafe or of such faulty construction or unstable
foundation that it is likely to partially or completely collapse, or which
contains unsafe equipment. All unsafe structures shall be taken down
and removed or made safe and secure as the Code Enforcement Officer
may deem necessary.
C. Unsafe equipment. Unsafe equipment includes any boiler, heating
equipment, elevator, moving stairway, electrical wiring or device,
flammable liquid containers or other equipment on the premises or
within the structure which is in such disrepair or condition that it is
found to be a hazard to life, health, property or safety of the public or
occupants of the premises or structure. Unsafe equipment may
contribute to the finding that the structure is unsafe or unfit for human
occupancy or use.
D. Structure unfit for human habitation. A structure is unfit for human
occupancy or use whenever the Code Enforcement Officer finds that it
is unsafe, unlawful or, because of the degree in which it lacks
maintenance or is in disrepair, is unsanitary, vermin- or rat-infested,
contains filth and contamination or lacks ventilation, illumination,
sanitary or heating facilities or other essential equipment required by
this Code4 or because its location constitutes a hazard to its occupants
or to the public.
E. Unlawful structure. An unlawful structure is one found in whole or in
part to be occupied by more persons than permitted under this code, or
was erected, altered or occupied contrary to law.
F. Restoration of unsafe structure. A building or structure condemned by
the Code Enforcement Officer may be restored to a safe condition,
provided that change of use or occupancy is not contemplated nor
compelled by reason of such reconstruction or restoration, except that
if the damage or cost of reconstruction or restoration is in excess of
50% of its replacement value, exclusive of foundations, such structure
shall be made to comply with the Borough's Building, Plumbing and
Electrical Codes in all respects with the requirements for materials and
methods of construction or structures.5
4. Editor's Note: See Ch. 44, Building Construction; Ch. 80, Plumbing; and Ch. 82, Property
Maintenance.
5. Editor's Note: See Ch. 44, Building Construction; Ch. 80, Plumbing; and Ch. 54, Electrical
Standards.
§ 2-10 § 2-10
2:18
§ 2-11. Vacating and placarding of condemned structures.
§ 2-12. Inspection of vacated structures; repair or demolition order.
G. Closing of vacant structures. If the structure or part thereof is vacant
and unfit for human habitation, human occupancy or use and is not in
danger of structural collapse, the code official may post a placard of
condemnation on the premises and may order the structure closed up
so it will not be an attractive nuisance. The exterior of the structure
must be maintained in compliance with the Borough's Property
Maintenance Code, Section PM-302.0, Exterior structure.6 The
windows and doors are to be boarded up with one-half-inch exterior
grade plywood, finished on one side with the finished side out. The
plywood shall be painted with two coats of exterior paint, the same
color as the exterior of the structure.
A. Vacating of structure. If the responsible owner, operator, occupant or
person in charge of the structure or premises fails to comply with an
order to repair or alter a structure condemned as unfit for human
habitation, the structure shall be vacated within a reasonable time, as
ordered by the Code Enforcement Officer.
B. Placarding of structure. Upon issuance of an order to vacate, the Code
Enforcement Officer may placard the structure or parts thereof or
defective equipment, said placard bearing the words "Unsafe for
Human Occupancy or Use" and a statement of the penalties provided
for any occupancy or use or for removing the placard.
C. Removal of placard. The Code Enforcement Officer shall remove the
condemnation placard whenever the defect or defects upon which the
condemnation and placarding action were based have been eliminated.
Any person who defaces or removes a condemnation placard without
the approval of the Code Enforcement Officer shall be subject to the
penalties provided by this chapter.
D. Prohibited use. Any person who shall occupy a placarded premises or
structure or part thereof or shall use placarded equipment and any
owner or any person responsible for the premises who shall let anyone
occupy a placarded premises shall be subject to the penalties provided
by this chapter.
A. General. The Code Enforcement Officer shall make periodic inspection
of any structure vacated as unfit for human habitation or any other
vacant structure.
B. Option by owner. If a structure is so old, deteriorated or has become so
out of repair as to be unsanitary or unfit for human habitation, but can
be made safe by repairs, the Code Enforcement Officer may issue a
notice requiring the owner to make the necessary repairs to bring the
6. Editor's Note: See Ch. 82, Property Maintenance.
§ 2-10 CODE ENFORCEMENT § 2-12
2:19
§ 2-13. Stop-work orders.
structure into compliance with the Borough's codes and/or ordinances
or to demolish and remove the structure at the owner's option. Such
notice shall require the person thus notified to immediately disclose to
the Code Enforcement Officer his acceptance or rejection of the terms
of the order.
C. Unreasonable repairs. Whenever an inspection of a structure reveals
that the structure is so old, dilapidated or has become so out of repair
as to be dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise unfit for human
habitation, occupancy or use and so that it would be unreasonable to
repair, in that the cost of such repairs would exceed 100% of the
current value of such structure, the structure shall be declared a public
nuisance. The Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a notice to the
responsible owner, ordering that the structure be removed or
demolished without option on the part of the owner to repair. All the
rubbish and refuse shall be removed from the premises and the cellar/
basement shall be filled in with clean fill graded to adjacent ground
level.
D. Service connection. Before a structure can be demolished or removed,
the owner or agent shall notify all utilities having service connections
within the structure, such as water, electric, gas, sewer and other
connections. A permit to demolish or remove a structure shall not be
issued until a release is obtained from the utilities, stating that their
respective service connections and appurtenant equipment, such as
meters and regulators, have been removed or sealed and plugged in a
safe manner.
E. Notice to adjoining owners. Only when written notice has been given by
the applicant to the owners of adjoining lots and to the owners of wired
or other facilities, the temporary removal of which may be necessitated
by the proposed work, shall a permit be granted for the removal of a
building or structure.
F. Determination by Code Enforcement Officer. In the event that the
owner or agent is unable to obtain the releases specified in Subsection
D above, the Code Enforcement Officer shall inspect the premises for
which application has been made to determine that the utility service
connections and appurtenant equipment have been removed or sealed
and plugged in a safe manner.
A. Notice to owner. Whenever the Code Enforcement Officer determines
that work on any building or structure is being prosecuted contrary to
the provisions of the Borough's codes and/or ordinances in an unsafe
and dangerous manner, the responsible owner of the property involved
or the owner's agent or the person doing the work shall be notified that
such work shall be immediately stopped.
§ 2-12 § 2-13
2:20
§ 2-14. Violations and penalties.
B. Unlawful continuance. Any person who shall continue any work in or
about the structure after having been served with a stop-work order,
except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a
violation or unsafe conditions, shall be subject to the penalties provided
by this chapter.
A. Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
erect, construct, alter, extend, repair, remove, demolish, use or occupy
any building or structure or plumbing, electrical and mechanical
equipment regulated by this chapter and/or the Borough's codes, or
cause same to be done, in conflict with or in violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter and/or the Borough's codes.
B. Failure to comply. Whenever an order to vacate, repair and/or demolish
a structure which is a public nuisance because it is unsafe, dangerous
or unfit for human habitation has not been complied with, the Code
Enforcement Officer may, in accordance with the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, proceed to cause the structure to be
vacated, repaired and/or demolished or take such other action as is
necessary to abate the nuisance. Abatement under this subsection shall
not commence until at least 10 days after the service of the order,
except that the Code Enforcement Officer may determine that more
immediate action is required because of the special emergency or
dangerous conditions which exist.
C. Recovery of expenses. The expenses incurred pursuant to Subsection B
of this section or § 2-9B and other applicable codes and ordinances shall
be paid by the responsible owner, operator or occupant or by the
persons who caused or maintained such a public nuisance. The Code
Enforcement Officer shall file on his records an affidavit stating with
fairness and accuracy the items and date of the expenses incurred. The
Council of the Borough of Steelton may institute a suit in assumpsit to
recover such expenses to be charged against the property as a lien.
D. Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any
provision of this chapter or who shall fail to correct a violation or
institute a remedial action as ordered by the Code Enforcement Officer
or who shall erect, construct, install, alter or repair a building or
structure or any plumbing, electrical and mechanical equipment or
systems in violation of an approved plan or directive of the Code
Enforcement Officer or of a permit or certificate issued under the
provisions of the Borough's codes shall, upon conviction in a summary
proceeding before any District Justice, be sentenced for each such
violation to pay a fine of not less than $10 plus costs and not more than
$300 plus costs and, in default thereof, to undergo imprisonment in the
county jail for a period not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation
continues after due notice has been served in accordance with the
terms and provisions hereof shall be deemed a separate offense.
§ 2-13 CODE ENFORCEMENT § 2-14
2:21
§ 2-15. Code Hearing Board; variances and appeals.
E. Prosecution. The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not
preclude the Solicitor representing the Borough from initiating
appropriate actions or proceedings at law or in equity to effect the
purposes of this chapter.
A. Code Hearing Board. There is hereby established a Code Hearing
Board, appointed by the Council of the Borough, consisting of such
membership as the Council may from time to time designate by
resolution.
B. Powers of Code Hearing Board. The Code Hearing Board shall have the
following powers and duties:
(1) Interpretation. On appeal from a determination of the Code
Enforcement Officer or on request of any Borough official, the Code
Hearing Board shall decide any questions involving the
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or of those other
applicable codes and ordinances.
(2) Variances. The Code Hearing Board may grant a variance from the
strict application of this chapter or of those other applicable codes
and ordinances. Such variances may be granted only in those cases
which would result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship
and where the public health and safety shall not be jeopardized.
(3) Appeals. The Code Hearing Board shall hear all appeals made to it
and, depending upon its findings, shall decide whether such
appeals shall be granted.
C. Request for appeals or variances.
(1) Appeals or variances. Any person requesting a variance or
aggrieved by a decision of the Code Enforcement Officer or by any
other employee or official charged with the administration and
enforcement of this chapter and of those other applicable codes or
ordinances may take an appeal to the Code Hearing Board. All
appeals shall be made in writing, stating the grounds upon which
the appeal is based, and shall be transmitted to the Office of Code
Enforcement. An appeal must be taken within 10 days of the action
or of the receipt of written notice of any decision or ruling which is
being appealed.
(2) Cost of appeal. Costs of an appeal shall be borne by the appellant. A
minimum fee of $50 for appeals dealing with residential properties
and $75 for nonresidential properties shall be paid with the filing of
the appeal in writing.
D. Appeals and variance procedures.
§ 2-14 § 2-15
2:22
§ 2-16. Effect; severability; repealer.
(1) Public hearing. The Code Hearing Board shall meet and conduct a
hearing within 30 days of the receipt of an appeal or a request for a
variance. All hearings shall be public, and all persons whose
interest may be affected shall be given an opportunity to be heard.
A record shall be kept of all evidence and testimony presented at
the hearing.
(2) Decision of the Board. All decisions of the Board shall be in writing,
and a copy of each decision shall be sent to the applicant and to the
Code Enforcement Officer. The Code Hearing Board shall also
retain in its files a copy of each decision, which files shall be
available for inspection by the public. Each decision shall set forth
fully the reasons for the decision of the Code Hearing Board and
the findings of fact on which the decision was based. The Code
Hearing Board shall make an order on its decision, and the Code
Enforcement Officer shall take immediate action to carry out said
order.
E. Appeals from the decision of the Code Hearing Board. Any person or
persons aggrieved by any final order or decision of the Code Hearing
Board may appeal such order or decision within 30 days to the Court of
Common Pleas in accordance with, as far as practicable, the rules of
civil procedure of the Supreme Court regarding appeals from
administrative agencies.
F. Reports by the Code Hearing Board. The Code Hearing Board shall
report to the Borough periodically, at intervals of not later than 12
months. The report shall summarize all applications and appeals made
to it since the last report and shall contain a summary of the Board's
decision on each case. A copy of the report shall be filed with the Code
Enforcement Officer. The Code Hearing Board may also submit to the
Borough Council advisory reports recommending changes and
modifications in this chapter or in those other applicable codes or
ordinances.
A. Saving clause. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to affect any
suit or proceeding now pending in any court or any rights acquired,
liability incurred or any cause or causes of action accrued or existing
under any act or ordinance repealed hereby. No right or remedy of any
character shall be lost, impaired or affected by this chapter.
B. Validity. The validity of any section, provision or application of this Code
Enforcement Ordinance shall not invalidate other sections, provisions
or applications.
C. Repealer. The Borough of Steelton's Code Enforcement Ordinance,
Ordinance No. 78-4,7 and any ordinance or code provisions conflicting
with the provisions hereof are hereby repealed insofar as they are
inconsistent with this Code Enforcement Ordinance.
§ 2-15 CODE ENFORCEMENT § 2-16
2:23
Chapter 4
AUDITOR
GENERAL REFERENCES
Purchasing — See Ch. 20.
§ 4-1. Independent auditor.
The accounts of the Borough of Steelton shall hereafter be audited by
an independent auditor to be appointed annually by the Borough Council
before the close of the fiscal year, such auditor to have the qualifications
required by law.
§ 4-2. Office of elected Auditor abolished.
The office of elected Borough Auditor is hereby abolished, provided that the
elected auditors now in office may continue to hold their offices during the
terms for which they were elected: but they shall not audit, settle or adjust
the accounts audited by the independent auditor.
Chapter 6
BOROUGH AUTHORITY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 90.
§ 6-1. Authority organized.
The Borough Council hereby signifies its intention and desire to organize an
Authority under the provisions of the Municipality Authorities Act of 1945,
as amended.
§ 6-2. Execution of Articles of Incorporation.
The President and Secretary of the Borough Council are hereby authorized
and directed to execute, on behalf of the Borough of Steelton, Articles of
Incorporation for said Authority.8
7. Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 78-4 comprised former Ch. 2, Code Enforcement, adopted
6-19-1978, approved 6-19-1978.
8. Editor's Note: The Articles of Incorporation and a current listing of members is on file in
the office of the Borough Secretary.
§ 2-16 § 6-3
4:24
§ 6-3. Notice of adoption.
The Borough Secretary is hereby directed to cause a notice of the substance
of this chapter, including the substances of the Articles of Incorporation, to
be published once in Patriot and Evening News, Harrisburg, Pennsylvania,
a daily newspaper published and of general circulation in the County of
Dauphin, and in the Dauphin County Reporter, the legal journal designated
by the Rules of Court for the publication of legal notices in said county, as
required by the Municipality Authorities Act of 1945, as amended.
§ 6-4. Filling of Articles of Incorporation.
The President and Secretary of the Borough Council are directed to file said
Articles of Incorporation, together with the necessary proofs of publication,
with the Secretary of the commonwealth, and to do all other acts and things
necessary or appropriate to effect the incorporation of the Steelton Borough
Authority.
§ 6-5. Initial project.
The initial project to be undertaken by said Authority is to acquire, hold,
construct, improve, maintain, operate, own, lease either in the capacity
of lessor or lessee, sewers, sewer systems or part thereof and sewage
treatment works, including works for treating and disposing of industrial
waste, for the Borough of Steelton and for such other territory as it may be
authorized to serve.
Chapter 7
BOROUGH COUNCIL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 14. Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 23.
§ 7-1. Council reorganized.
All of the wards of the Borough of Steelton, Dauphin County, Pennsylvania,
should be and are hereby abolished, and the governing body of the Borough
of Steelton, Dauphin County, Pennsylvania, shall be and is hereby changed
and reduced from a ten-Councilman Borough Council elected by wards to
a seven-Councilman Borough Council elected at large. The boundaries of
wards and precincts shall be retained for the purpose of voting election
districts under the provision of the Pennsylvania Election Code, Act of June
3, 1937, P.L. 1333, No. 320.
§ 6-3 BOROUGH COUNCIL § 7-2
7:25
§ 7-2. Election and terms of Councilmen.
There shall be two Councilmen at Large elected at the municipal election in
the year 1975 for terms of four years each; there shall be five Councilmen
at Large elected at the municipal election in the year 1977, two of said
Councilmen to serve for terms of two years each and three of said
Councilmen to serve for terms of four years each, to coincide with the
number of Councilmen elected at such election in existing boroughs under
the provisions of the Act of February 1, 1966, P.L. (1965) _____, No. 581,
§ 816 (53 P.S. § 45816). Biennially thereafter, at the municipal election, a
sufficient number of Councilmen shall be elected, for a term of four years
from the first Monday of January next succeeding, to fill the places of those
whose terms shall expire on the first Monday of January next following such
election. Ward Councilmen in office or elected to office at the time of the
enactment of this chapter shall remain in office until the end of the term for
which they were respectively elected or appointed, subject only to removal
or resignation as provided by law.
§ 7-3. Authority to execute.
The officers of the Borough of Steelton are hereby authorized to take any
and all actions, execute any and all documents and do any and all things
necessary to effectuate the purpose of this chapter.
§ 7-4. Meetings. [Added 1-3-1994 by Ord. No. 1994-1, approved
1-22-1994; amended 1-16-1996 by Ord. No. 96-1, approved
1-16-1996]
The regular meetings of the Borough Council of the Borough of Steelton
shall be held on the first and third Mondays of every month (unless said
Monday falls on a holiday, in which case the meeting shall be held on
the next succeeding business day) at 6:30 p.m., prevailing time, at the
Borough Municipal Building, 123 North Front Street, Steelton, Dauphin
County, Pennsylvania. Both meetings shall be meetings at which any and all
business, consideration, action or activity may occur. The Borough Council
may hold such special meetings, from time to time, for the consideration of
special or any other business or matters, as may from time to time be called
by the President of Council or upon written request of 1/3 of the members
of Council.
§ 7-2 § 7-4
7:26
Chapter 11
FIRE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 14.
Pensions — See Ch. 16.
Purchasing — See Ch. 20.
Open burning — See Ch. 48.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 58.
Fire Department rules and regulations — See
Ch. A132.
§ 7-4 FIRE DEPARTMENT § 7-4
11:27

ARTICLE I
Officers
[Adopted 2-9-1925, approved 2-20-1925; amended in its entirety
5-20-1976 by Ord. No. 76-4, approved 5-20-1976]
§ 11-1. Officers designated. [Amended 11-21-1994 by Ord. No. 94-8,
approved 11-21-1994]
The Fire Department of the Borough of Steelton shall be under the control,
superintendence and direction of a Chief, one Assistant Chief and two
Battalion Chiefs, all of whom shall be officers of the Borough.
§ 11-2. Terms of office.
Said officers shall be appointed by the Council and shall serve for and
during the term of two years and until their successors shall have been
confirmed by said Council.
§ 11-3. Powers and responsibilities. [Amended 11-21-1994 by Ord.
No. 94-8, approved 11-21-1994]
Said Chief shall at all times have full control of engines, hose and hose
carriages, hooks, ladders and full apparatus generally and give general
directions how, when and where to use them in case of fires and where
the hose shall be attached, shall place the engines, direct the streams and
order the hose to the several engines and shall have a general supervision
of the fire apparatus. He shall have free access thereto at all times for the
purpose of inspection and shall weekly inspect the same and shall report
to the Council the condition thereof at least every month, and oftener if
the Council shall so direct by resolution. He shall have full power and
authority to have the apparatus repaired when necessary and to purchase
such material as he may deem necessary to keep the Department in proper
condition for service during the intervals between the regular meeting
of the Council and recess of the Council, provided that any repairs that
require the expenditure of more than $1,000 he shall report to the Borough
Property Committee for approval before the contract is let, and in no
event shall he enter into any contract wherein the contract price is $1,000
or more. He shall render an account every month to the Council of
expenditures for the Department. He shall submit to the Council, for its
approval, rules and regulations, with proper penalties, for the government
of said Department.
§ 11-4. Duties of Assistant Chief.
The Assistant Chief shall aid the Chief in the performance of his duties,
and, in the event of the incapacitation of the Chief by reason of sickness or
absence from the Borough, the Assistant Chief shall assume charge and act
as Chief in such order as shall be designated by the Chief.
§ 11-1 FIRE DEPARTMENT § 11-5
11:29
§ 11-5. Duties of Battalion Chiefs. [Added 11-21-1994 by Ord. No.
94-8, approved 11-21-1994]
The Battalion Chiefs shall aid the Assistant Chief in the performance of
his duties, and, in the event of the incapacitation of the Assistant Chief
by reason of sickness or absence from the Borough, the Battalion Chiefs
shall assume charge and act as Assistant Chief in such order as shall be
designated by the Chief; in the event of incapacitation of both the Chief and
the Assistant Chief by reason of sickness or absence from the Borough, the
Battalion Chiefs may assume charge and act as Chief in such order as shall
be designated by the Chief.
§ 11-5 § 11-5
11:30
Chapter 14
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 23. Secretary Treasurer — See Ch. 26.
§ 11-5 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 11-5
14:31

ARTICLE I
Bonds
[Adopted 1-11-1960 by Res. No. 60-R-2, approved 1-12-1960]
§ 14-1. Required bonds. [Amended 5-20-1976 by Ord. No. 76-4,
approved 5-20-1976]
Bonds are hereby required in the following amounts:
§ 14-2. Appropriation authorized.
The cost of these bonds, as herein provided, be and the same is hereby
appropriated from the treasury of the Borough of Steelton.
A. The amount of bond to be furnished by the Borough Secretary-
Treasurer is fixed and established at $50,000.
B. The amount of bond to be furnished by the Assistant Secretary is fixed
and established at $10,000.
C. The amount of bond to be furnished by any clerk in the office of the
Secretary-Treasurer is fixed and established at $5,000.
§ 14-1 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 14-2
14:33
Chapter 16
PENSIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 14.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 23.
Social security — See Ch. 30.
§ 14-2 § 14-2
16:34
ARTICLE I
Employee Pension Plan
[Adopted 11-12-1969 by Ord. No. 69-7, approved 11-13-1969;
amended in its entirety 4-20-1981 by Ord. No. 81-1, approved
4-20-1981]
§ 16-1. Pension plan established; execution of agreement;
employees' rights.
§ 16-2. Repealer.
Any ordinance or part of any chapter of the Code of the Borough of Steelton
conflicting with the provisions of this article is hereby repealed insofar as
the same affects this article.
A. Pension plan established. The Borough of Steelton hereby establishes
and adopts a pension plan for its full-time nonuniformed employees.
B. Pension plan adopted. The plan adopted is the Pennsylvania State
Association of Boroughs Pension Plan and Trust in effect on the date of
the adoption of this section and as amended from time to time in the
future.
C. Authorization to execute joinder agreement. The proper officers of the
Borough are hereby directed and authorized to execute the joinder
agreement with the Trustees of the Pennsylvania State Association of
Boroughs Pension Plan and Trust; a copy of said joinder agreement is
attached to the ordinance by which this section is adopted and said
joinder agreement shall be adopted by reference as part of this section.
D. Authorization to perform duties under agreement. The Borough shall
perform all of the duties and responsibilities assigned to it and may, at
the discretion of Council, exercise all powers vested in it by the joinder
agreement.
E. Nonuniformed employees' rights under agreement. The nonuniformed
employees of the Borough shall have all the rights and duties and may
exercise any or all options granted them by the terms of the joinder
agreement.
§ 16-1 PENSIONS § 16-2
16:35

ARTICLE II
Retirement Compensation
[Adopted 3-30-1966 by Ord. No. 66-4, approved 3-30-1966]
§ 16-3. Amount of compensation. [Amended 7-19-1982 by Ord. No.
82-3, approved 7-19-1982]
Employees of the Borough of Steelton who have rendered to the Borough
not less than 10 years of satisfactory service and who are not less than
60 years of age may, from time to time, upon resolution of the Council, be
retired from Borough service and be compensated as follows: over 20 years'
service, 50% of the compensation last paid to them; 12 to 20 years' service,
45% of the compensation last paid to them; and 10 to 12 years' service,
40% of the compensation last paid to them. In all cases, said payments
are to include benefits received under the Social Security Act, if any. The
Borough Council of the Borough of Steelton may, from time to time, by
resolution, authorize increases in the monthly retirement benefit payments
provided for above to retired Borough employees, which increases reflect
adjustments for the cost of living.
§ 16-4. Other systems authorized.
Nothing herein shall preclude any employee of the Borough from joining in
any pension system or municipal retirement system that the Borough may
adopt.
§ 16-5. Cessation of benefits.
This article may be repealed at any time, and all payments hereunder shall
thereupon cease, this provision in this article being notice to employees that
payments hereunder are in the discretion of the Borough authorities and
that no rights to payments are vested in such employees.
§ 16-3 PENSIONS § 16-5
16:37

ARTICLE III
Police Pension Plan
The Police Pension Plan is on file in the Borough office where it is
available for inspection during regular business hours.
PENSIONS § 16-5
16:39
Chapter 18
PLANNING COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 120.
§ 18-1. Commission created.
Pursuant to the provisions of the Act of July 31, 1968, No. 247 (53 P.S.
§ 10101 et seq.), and in order to carry out the said provisions, there is
here created in the Borough of Steelton a Planning Commission, which shall
be hereafter called the "Planning Commission of the Borough of Steelton,
Pennsylvania."
§ 18-2. Powers and duties.
The said Planning Commission shall have all the powers and duties
conferred upon it by the Act of July 31, 1968, No. 247, and any amendments
thereto.
§ 18-3. Membership; compensation.
The Planning Commission shall consist of five members, who shall be
appointed by the Borough Council and shall serve without compensation,
except that they shall be reimbursed for expenses incurred in carrying out
their Commission duties.
§ 18-4. Terms of office.
The terms of the members of the Planning Commission shall be as follows:
two members shall have a one-year term; one member shall have a two-year
term; one member shall have a three-year term; and one member shall have
a four-year term. The terms of office of the members shall commence on the
date of the adoption of this chapter; and annually thereafter when the term
of any member expires, a new member shall be appointed by the Council of
the Borough of Steelton for a term of four years, and members may succeed
themselves.
§ 18-5. Filling of vacancies.
In case a vacancy is created by resignation, disability, death, removal of
residence from the Borough or in any other way, said vacancy shall be filled
by the Borough Council for the unexpired portion of the term of the member
being replaced.
§ 16-5 § 18-6
18:40
§ 18-6. Residency requirements.
All members of the Planning Commission shall be residents of the Borough
of Steelton, Pennsylvania.
§ 18-7. Records; annual report.
The Planning Commission shall keep a full record of its business and shall
annually make a written report, by March 1 of each year, of its activities to
the governing body.
§ 18-8. Preparation and maintenance of comprehensive plan of
development.
The Planning Commission shall prepare and maintain a comprehensive plan
for the development of the Borough of Steelton.
§ 18-9. Duties relative to zoning.
The Planning Commission shall perform all the duties set forth in the above
Act of Assembly, including but not limited to the preparation of the text and
map or maps of any and all Zoning Ordinances.
§ 18-10. Compliance with statutory provision.
The Planning Commission shall comply with all the obligations and duties
imposed by the above Act of Assembly.
§ 18-11. Adoption of provisions saved by statute.
All matters saved by the Act of July 31, 1968, No. 247 are herewith adopted.
§ 18-12. Purpose.
This chapter is enacted, ordained and passed by the Council of the Borough
of Steelton, County of Dauphin and Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, to
carry out the purposes of the Act of July 31, 1968, No. 247.
Chapter 20
PURCHASING
§ 20-1. Participation requested; conditions.
The Borough Council of the Borough of Steelton hereby requests
authorization to participate in purchase contracts of the Department of
Property and Supplies, subject to the following:
A. That the Borough agrees that it will be bound by such terms and
conditions as the Department may prescribe.
§ 18-6 PURCHASING § 20-1
20:41
Chapter 23
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Borough Council — See Ch. 7.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 14.
Pensions — See Ch. 16.
Social security — See Ch. 30.
Taxation — See Ch. 102.
B. That the Borough agrees that it will be responsible for payment directly
to the vendor under each purchase contract.
§ 20-1 § 20-1
23:42
ARTICLE I
Mayor and Councilmen
[Adopted 12-15-1975 by Ord. No. 75-15, approved 12-15-1975]
§ 23-1. Compensation of Councilmen. [Amended 12-4-2000 by Ord.
No. 2000-6, approved 12-4-2000]
Each Councilman of the Borough of Steelton shall receive compensation in
the amount of $125 a month.
§ 23-2. Compensation of Mayor.
The Mayor of the Borough of Steelton shall receive compensation in the
amount of $125 a month.
§ 23-3. Forfeiture.
No compensation shall be paid in any month to a Councilman who has
failed, without reasonable excuse, to attend at least one regular meeting of
the Council during the month.
§ 23-1 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 23-3
23:43

ARTICLE II
Tax Collector
[Adopted 12-5-1960 by Ord. No. 60-9; approved 12-6-1960; amended
in its entirety 2-14-1985 by Ord. No. 85-1, approved 2-14-1985]
§ 23-4. Compensation set.
Effective the first Monday of January 1986, the Tax Collector of the Borough
of Steelton shall receive, as compensation for the collection of Borough
taxes levied after said date, a commission of 2% of the amount of such taxes
collected.
§ 23-4 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 23-4
23:45
Chapter 26
SECRETARY-TREASURER
§ 26-1. Offices may be held by one person.
Hereafter the offices of Secretary and Treasurer of the Borough of Steelton
may be held by the same person.
Chapter 30
SOCIAL SECURITY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 14.
Pensions — See Ch. 16.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 23.
§ 30-1. Legislative intent.
It is the considered opinion of this Council that the extension of the social
security system to the employees and officers of the Borough of Steelton
will be a great benefit, not only to the employees and officers of the Borough
by providing that the said employees and officers may participate in the
benefits of the Old Age and Survivors Insurance System, but will also be a
great benefit to the Borough of Steelton by enabling it to attract and retain
in employment the best of personnel and thus increase the efficiency of its
government.
§ 30-2. Statutory authority.
The 1951 Session of the General Assembly of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania enacted a statute, Act No. 491,9 which is the enabling Act
provided for in Section 218 of Public Law 734,10 81st Congress, which
designated the Secretary of Labor and Industry of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania to act as the state agency to implement the coverage of
employees and officers under the said Old Age and Survivors Insurance
System.
§ 30-3. Authorization to execute plan and agreement.
The proper officers of the Borough of Steelton are hereby authorized to
execute and deliver to the state agency a plan and agreement, required
under Section 6 of said enabling Act and the Social Security Act, to extend
coverage to employees and officers of the Borough of Steelton and do all
9. Editor's Note: 65 P.S. § 201 et seq.
10.Editor's Note: 42 U.S.C. § 418.
§ 23-4 § 30-3
26:46
other necessary things to effectuate coverage of employees and officers
under the Old Age and Survivors Insurance System.
§ 30-4. System of payroll deductions; payments by Borough.
The Borough Secretary is hereby authorized to establish a system of payroll
deductions to be matched by payments by the Borough of Steelton to be
made into the Contribution Fund of the Social Security Act through the
office of the state agency, and to make charges of this tax to a fund or
funds from which the wage or salary payments are issued to employees
and officers of the Borough of Steelton. Such payments are to be made in
accordance with the provisions of the law and regulations promulgated by
the state agency and the Federal Security Administration. Such payments
which are delinquent shall bear interest at the rate of 1/2 of 1% per month
until such time as payments are made.
§ 30-5. Appropriation from Borough funds authorized.
An appropriation is hereby made from the proper fund or funds of the
Borough of Steelton in the necessary amount to pay into the contribution
fund and as provided in Section 4 of the enabling Act and in accordance
with said plan and agreement.
§ 30-6. Authorization to enter into agreement.
Authority is hereby given to the President of the Council of the Borough
of Steelton, and to the Secretary of said body, approved by the Mayor, to
enter into a plan and agreement with the state agency, which plan and
agreement shall be in accordance with Act No. 491, and with paragraph 218
of the Social Security Act. Such plan and agreement shall provide that the
participation of the Borough of Steelton shall commence as of January 1,
1951.
Chapter 32
LOCAL GOVERNMENT INVESTMENT TRUSTS
§ 30-3 LOCAL GOVERNMENT INVESTMENT TRUSTS § 30-6
32:47

ARTICLE I
Pennsylvania Local Government Investment Trust
[Adopted 3-15-1982 by Ord. No. 82-1, approved 3-15-1982]
§ 32-1. Purpose.
The Pennsylvania Local Government Investment Trust was formed in
accordance with the authorization contained in the Intergovernmental
Cooperation Act of 1972, P.L. 762, No. 180,11 initially by the Boroughs of
Chambersburg and Emmaus, and has later been joined in by other local
government units, with whom the Borough of Steelton desires to join, in
order to invest and to secure a favorable return on temporarily available
funds under the terms of said Pennsylvania Local Government Investment
Trust.
§ 32-2. Joinder with trust.
This Borough, by authority granted by Section 1319(d)(iii) of the Borough
Code [53 P.S. § 46316(d)(iii)], shall join with other municipalities in
accordance with the Pennsylvania Intergovernmental Cooperation Act, by
becoming a settler of the Pennsylvania Local Government Investment Trust
and entering into a declaration of trust, which is adopted by reference with
the same effect as if it had been set out verbatim in this section, and a
copy of which shall be filed with the minutes of the Council, with authority,
from time to time, to purchase shares of the trust from Borough funds and
to redeem some or all of those shares. Those actions shall be taken by the
officials designated for the purpose by the Borough Council, from time to
time, under general or specific instructions, and the designation of those
officials shall be evidenced by the certification of the Borough Secretary.
§ 32-3. Trustees to have custody of funds.
The Trustees of the Pennsylvania Local Government Investment Trust are
designated as having official custody of the funds represented by the shares
which are purchased under the authorization contained in this article.
§ 32-4. Conditions.
As required by the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act, the following
matters are specifically found and determined:
A. The conditions of the agreement are set out in the declaration of trust
referred to in § 32-2 of this article and in the information statement
presented to this meeting.
B. This Borough's participation in the declaration of trust shall be
terminated by the Borough at any time by ordinance.
11.Editor's Note: 53 P.S. § 481 et seq. was repealed 1996, P.L. 1158. See now 53 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 2301 et seq.
§ 32-1 LOCAL GOVERNMENT INVESTMENT TRUSTS § 32-4
32:49
§ 32-5. When effective.
This article shall become effective at the earliest date allowed under the
law.
C. The declaration of trust and the purchase of the shares are for the
purpose of investing Borough funds in obligations, which are otherwise
legal investments of the Borough, as part of a pooled arrangement with
other governmental units, in order to achieve economic and other
advantages of pooled investments.
D. It is not necessary to finance the agreement authorized by this article,
except through the purchase of shares from Borough funds.
E. The trust shall be managed by a Board of Trustees as set forth in the
declaration of trust and in the bylaws provided for in that declaration of
trust.
F. Shares may be purchased, from time to time, and shall be redeemed as
necessary to meet the cash needs of the Borough as provided in § 32-2
of this article.
§ 32-4 § 32-5
32:50
ARTICLE II
Pennsylvania Municipal Investment Program
[Adopted 11-16-1992 by Ord. No. 92-5, approved 11-16-1992]
§ 32-6. Declaration of trust.
The declaration of trust, as presented to this meeting (a copy of which,
together with the accompanying information statement, shall be filed with
the records of this participant), is hereby adopted, and this participant
shall and is hereby authorized and directed to become a participant in the
program and, from time to time, to invest and withdraw its funds all in
accordance with the provisions of the declaration of trust.
§ 32-7. Authorized officers.
For purposes of the investment of moneys pursuant to the program, Kathy
Handley and Michael Rozman (and their respective successors) are hereby
designated as "authorized officers" of this participant and are authorized,
directed and empowered to effectuate, from time to time, the investment
and withdrawal of funds of this participant and to otherwise give effect
to this participant's rights, as a participant of the trust described herein,
including the right to vote, from time to time, in accordance with the
declaration of trust. Such authorized officers are hereby further authorized,
directed and empowered to take such actions and to execute and deliver
counterparts of the declaration of trust and any and all other documents
as they may deem necessary and appropriate to evidence this participant's
approval of the declaration of trust and participation in the program and
otherwise to carry out the purpose of this article (the execution of such
documents shall conclusively evidence their approval).
§ 32-8. Custody of funds.
This participant hereby acknowledges and approves the trustees of the
trust as having official custody of this participant's funds as are invested in
accordance with the declaration of trust.
§ 32-6 LOCAL GOVERNMENT INVESTMENT TRUSTS § 32-8
32:51
PART II: GENERAL LEGISLATION
Chapter 35
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
B.Y.O.B. clubs — See Ch. 49, Art. II. Food and beverage establishments — See Ch.
62.
§ 35-1. Definitions.
Unless the context otherwise requires, the following words or phrases shall
be construed according to the definitions set forth below:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES — Any spirits, wine, beer, ale or other liquid
containing more than 1/2 of 1% of alcohol by volume which is fit for
beverage purposes.
CONTAINER — Any bottle, can or other vessel in which alcoholic beverages
are contained.
§ 35-2. Consumption on or near public property restricted.
No person shall consume any alcoholic beverage in any quantity upon
any street, avenue, alley, sidewalk, stairway, thoroughfare or other public
property within the Borough of Steelton, nor shall any person consume any
alcoholic beverage within five feet of any public way or thoroughfare while
on a private stairway, doorway or other private property open to public view
without the express or implied permission of the owner, his agent or other
party in lawful possession thereof.
§ 35-3. Open containers prohibited on or near public property.
No person shall possess any container of alcoholic beverage whether
wrapped or unwrapped which has been opened or on which the seal has
been broken in any manner on any public street, avenue, alley, thoroughfare
or other public property within the Borough of Steelton, nor shall any
person possess any container of alcoholic beverage within five feet of
any public way or thoroughfare while on a private stairway, doorway or
other private property open to public view without the express or implied
permission of the owner, his agent or other person in lawful possession
thereof.
§ 35-4. Exceptions.
The provisions of §§ 35-2 and 35-3 above shall not apply to interior portions
of any private dwelling, habitat or building, nor to the consumption or
possession by persons in the areas herein designated of any duly prescribed
§ 32-8 § 35-4
35:52
and dispensed medication having alcoholic content as set forth in § 35-1
hereof, and provided further that the provisions of said §§ 35-2 and 35-3
above shall not apply to premises duly licensed by the Pennsylvania Liquor
Control Board and to persons then and there patrons of said licensee.
§ 35-5. Violations and penalties.
Whosoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600 and/or
to be imprisoned for a period not to exceed 90 days.
§ 35-6. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances which are inconsistent herewith are
hereby repealed.
§ 35-7. Severability.
If any sentence, clause, section or part of this chapter is for any reason
found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality,
illegality or invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the remaining
provisions, sentences, clauses, sections or parts of this chapter. It is hereby
declared as the intent of the Borough Council of the Borough of Steelton
that this chapter would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal
or invalid sentence, clause, section or part thereof not been included herein.
§ 35-8. When effective.
This chapter shall become effective immediately upon its adoption.
Chapter 37
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 75.
§ 37-1. Running at large.
A. No person being the owner of or having charge of horses, cattle, sheep,
goats, geese, ducks, turkeys, chickens or other fowl or animals shall
permit them to run at large upon any public place or upon the premises
of another.
B. No person being the owner of or having charge of any dog, whether
licensed or unlicensed, shall permit it to run at large upon any public
place or upon the premises of another or permit the dog to damage a
garden or shrubbery or to frighten or molest any person or child. No
§ 35-4 ANIMALS § 37-1
37:53
§ 37-2. Impoundment and disposition; records; Dog Warden.
owner, keeper or harborer of any female dog shall permit such dog to
go beyond the premises of such owner or keeper at any time such dog
is in heat unless such dog is properly on a leash. The owner or keeper
of every dog shall at all times keep such dog either confined upon the
premises of the owner or keeper or under reasonable control of some
person.
C. The running at large of any such animal or fowl in or upon any of the
places mentioned in this section is prima facie evidence that it is
running at large in violation of this section.
D. No person being the owner of or having control of any animals, wild or
domestic, geese, ducks, turkeys, chickens or other fowl, reptiles or
other nonhuman pets shall bring onto or permit to remain on any
premises of Borough-sponsored festivals or special events such
animals, fowl, reptiles or other nonhuman pets unless same are or used
at such festivals or special events; provided, however, that nothing
contained herein shall prohibit the use of a guide or support animal
because of blindness, deafness or physical handicap of the user.
[Added 6-16-1997 by Ord. No. 97-5]
A. The Police Department or the Humane Society of Dauphin County may
impound every animal or dog found in violation of § 37-1. If such dog is
found not wearing a valid dog license tag, the dog shall forthwith be
turned over to an officer charged by law with the custody and disposal
of such dogs. If such dog is wearing a valid dog license tag or the
identity of the owner or custodian is otherwise established, notice shall
immediately be given to the licensee, owner or custodian that the dog
has been impounded. Such notice may be by telephone or by registered
or certified mail to the last known address of such licensee, owner or
custodian. The dog shall not be released except upon the payment of
reasonable expenses for its taking and keeping plus all other fees
involved. Any dog remaining unclaimed for 10 days shall be sold or
otherwise disposed of as provided by law.
B. A record of all dogs impounded, the disposition of the same, the owner's
name and address, where known, and a statement of any costs or
receipts against such dog shall be kept and furnished monthly to the
Mayor.
C. Appointment and duties of Dog Warden. A Dog Warden shall be
appointed by resolution of the Borough Council of the Borough of
Steelton to serve during its pleasure. Such Dog Warden, along with the
Borough police, shall have concurrent responsibility for the
enforcement of this chapter as it relates to dogs and of the Dog Law of
1982 (3 P.S. § 459-101 et seq., as hereafter amended, supplemented,
modified or reenacted by the General Assembly of Pennsylvania),
provided that the Dog Warden shall not have the power to make arrests
under this Act of Assembly or any other Act of Assembly or ordinance of
§ 37-1 § 37-2
37:54
§ 37-3. Abandonment prohibited.
No owner or keeper of a dog, cat or other domestic animal or fowl shall
abandon such animal or fowl.
§ 37-4. Harming animals.
No person shall maliciously or willfully and without the consent of the
owner, kill, injure or administer poison to any animal that is the property of
another; and no person shall willfully and without the consent of the owner
place any poisoned food where it may be found and eaten by children or
animals, either upon his own lands or the lands of another. This section does
not apply to a licensed veterinarian acting in an official capacity.
§ 37-5. Cruelty.
No person shall overwork, overdrive, overload or torture an animal, deprive
one of necessary sustenance or shelter, unnecessarily or cruelly beat,
needlessly mutilate or kill or impound or confine an animal without
supplying it during such confinement with a sufficient quantity of good,
wholesome food and water. No person shall carry or convey an animal in
a cruel or inhumane manner, or keep horses, cows or other animals in
an enclosure without wholesome exercise and change of air, or work or
abandon to die an old, maimed, sick, infirm or diseased animal.
§ 37-6. Nuisances.
§ 37-7. Barking or howling dogs.
No person shall keep or harbor any dog within the Borough of Steelton
which, by frequent and habitual barking, howling or yelping, creates
unreasonably loud and disturbing noises of such a character, intensity and
duration as to disturb the peace, quiet and good order of any neighborhood
in the Borough of Steelton. Any person who shall allow any dog habitually to
remain or be lodged or fed within any dwelling, building, yard or enclosure
which he occupies or owns shall be considered as harboring such dog.
§ 37-8. Quarantine.
the Borough of Steelton. [Added 3-21-1994 by Ord. No. 94-3,
approved 3-21-1994]
A. No person shall keep or harbor any animal or fowl in the Borough of
Steelton so as to create offensive odors or unsanitary conditions which
are a menace to the health, comfort or safety of the public.
B. No person, whether the owner or person in charge or control of an
animal, shall permit the animal to destroy or damage any lawn, tree,
shrub, plant, building or other property, other than the property of the
owner or of the person in charge or control of such animal, by
scratching, digging, defecating or urinating or by any other means.
§ 37-2 ANIMALS § 37-8
37:55
§ 37-9. Hunting.
The hunting of animals or fowl within the Borough is prohibited. No person
shall hunt, kill or attempt to kill any animal or fowl by the use of firearms or
any other means unless specifically authorized by special permit issued by
the Mayor to eliminate a nuisance.
§ 37-10. Liability of owner.
The owner, keeper or harborer of any animal which damages or destroys
public or private property shall be held liable for the full value of the
property damaged or destroyed, in addition to any penalty imposed for a
violation of this chapter.
§ 37-11. Harboring of certain animals restricted.
Effective one year from date of adoption of this chapter, no horses, donkeys,
burros, cows, pigs, goats, sheep, ducks, geese or other such animals larger
than the average dog shall be harbored within the Borough of Steelton,
except animals on dairy farms presently licensed by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
§ 37-12. Violations and penalties.
A. Whenever it is established that any dog or other animal has bitten any
person or shows signs of being infected with rabies, the owner or
person having custody or possession of such animal, upon the order of
the Board of Health, Chief of Police or the Humane Society of Dauphin
County, shall quarantine such animal in a veterinarian's kennel or in the
owner's home for a period of 10 days.
B. At the end of the quarantine period, the owner or person having custody
or possession of the animal shall have the animal examined by a
veterinarian for signs of rabies. If any animal is found to be rabid, a
report shall be made immediately to the Board of Health, Chief of Police
or the Humane Society of Dauphin County, and such officers shall make
whatever arrangements they believe necessary pursuant to law.
C. If the dog or other animal is quarantined in the home of the owner for
the 10 days, such animal shall not be allowed out of the house except on
a leash and in the custody of an adult.
D. In the event that the owner or person having custody or possession of
the animal fails to comply with the order provided for in Subsection A of
this section within six hours after such order has been issued and
served upon such owner or person having custody or possession, any
police officer or the Humane Society of Dauphin County may take such
animal into custody and place the same in quarantine at the expense of
the owner or person having custody or possession of the animal.
§ 37-8 § 37-12
37:56
Chapter 40
BICYCLES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 94. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 110.
§ 40-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BICYCLES — Includes every device propelled by human power upon which
any person might ride, having two or more tandem wheels, either one or
both of which is of a diameter of 16 inches or more.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Steelton, Pennsylvania.
LICENSE — A metallic plate and/or sticker having numbers stamped
thereon in numerical order.
MINOR — Any person under the age of 18 years.
PERSON — Includes any individual person, firm, association or corporation.
STREET — Includes public streets, highways, thoroughfares, boulevards
and alleys.
§ 40-2. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or use a bicycle upon any
of the streets, alleys or public highways of the Borough of Steelton,
Pennsylvania, without first obtaining a license therefor from the Police
Department of the Borough of Steelton, Pennsylvania.
§ 40-3. Application procedure; fees.
Application for a bicycle license and license plate and/or sticker shall be
made upon a form provided by the Borough and shall be made to the Police
Department or to the person designated by the Chief of Police. The license
fee shall be $0.50 for each new license or replacement license issued, and
this fee shall be paid to the Borough before each license is issued. Minors
shall be accompanied by parents or parent or provide a bill of sale to prove
A. Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $300 or, in
default of the payment of such fine, then to imprisonment for not more
than 30 days.
B. Each day's continuance of a violation of this chapter shall constitute a
separate offense.
§ 37-12 BICYCLES § 40-3
40:57
ownership when applying for a license. Where more than one owner or user
of a bicycle is involved within a family unit, the application shall be made
for a family registration, wherein all members of the family unit owning or
using the bicycle shall be listed.
§ 40-4. Issuance of license; expiration; replacement of license.
The Borough shall provide metallic license plates and/or stickers, together
with ownership certificates, both of which shall be numbered or have
numbers stamped thereon in numerical order. The Chief of Police, under
the supervision of the Mayor of the Borough of Steelton, upon receiving a
properly executed application, is authorized to issue a license plate and/
or sticker and certificate which shall be effective as long as the applicant
retains ownership and possession of the bicycle licensed. In the event a
license is lost or destroyed a new license may be acquired upon application
and payment of the fee set forth in § 40-3 above.
§ 40-5. Applicant to be entitled to possession.
The Chief of Police shall not issue a license for any bicycle when he knows
or has reasonable grounds to believe that the applicant is not the owner of
or entitled to the possession of such bicycle.
§ 40-6. Records.
The Police Department, under the supervision of the Mayor, shall keep a
record of each license issued, showing thereon the date of issuance, the
name of the person to whom issued and the identification number of the
bicycle for which issued, together with a record of the fees collected for
such licenses.
§ 40-7. Attachment required.
The license plate and/or sticker issued shall be attached to the frame of the
bicycle for which it is issued so that the same is visible at all times, and shall
remain so attached during the period that the licensed bicycle is owned by
the person procuring the license.
§ 40-8. Inspection prior to issuance of license.
The Chief of Police of the Borough of Steelton shall have each bicycle
inspected before licensing the same and shall provide for the annual
inspection of each bicycle after it is licensed. The Chief of Police of the
Borough of Steelton shall refuse a license for any bicycle which is
determined to be in an unsafe mechanical condition and not equipped with
proper braking devices, and the Chief of Police of the Borough shall have
the authority to remove the license plate and/or sticker of any bicycle, upon
annual inspection, which bicycle is deemed to be in an unsafe mechanical
condition and not equipped with proper braking devices.
§ 40-3 § 40-9
40:58
§ 40-9. Removal of license after change in ownership; transfer of
license.
If any person to whom a license has been issued for a bicycle sells or
transfers said bicycle, the license plate and/or sticker shall be removed and
surrendered to the Police Department of the Borough of Steelton. Such
person may, upon proper application, without any charge or an additional
fee, have the said license transferred to another bicycle owned by such
person.
§ 40-10. Bicycles lent or rented.
No person shall lend any bicycle or offer the bicycle for rent unless the same
is duly licensed, the plate and/or sticker attached to said bicycle and the
bicycle equipped in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 40-11. Procedure following change of ownership.
Within 15 days after the date of the sale or transfer of any bicycle, it
shall be the duty of the seller to report said sale or transfer to the Police
Department, and the purchaser or transferee shall apply for a registration
card in his name. The Chief of Police shall issue said card upon the payment
of the fee herein provided.
§ 40-12. Dismantled or junked bicycles to be reported.
Any person who dismantles or reduces to junk any bicycle shall report same
to the Police Department.
§ 40-13. Tampering with identification number or license;
exception.
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, destroy, mutilate or alter
the number of any bicycle frame of any bicycle licensed pursuant to this
chapter. It also shall be unlawful for any person to remove, destroy, mutilate
or alter any license plate and/or sticker or license certificate issued under
the authority of this chapter; provided, however, that nothing in this chapter
shall prohibit the Police Department from stamping numbers on the frames
of bicycles on which no serial number can be found or on which said number
is illegible or insufficient for identification purposes.
§ 40-14. Operating regulations.
All persons operating bicycles upon any public street, alley or highway
within the Borough of Steelton shall be subject to the provisions of the
traffic regulations of the Borough of Steelton as the same are applicable
to the operator of any motor vehicle, except as otherwise herein provided;
and all such persons operating bicycles within the Borough of Steelton
shall obey instructions of official traffic signals, signs and other traffic
control devices, unless otherwise provided herein, and shall be subject to
the following regulations:
§ 40-9 BICYCLES § 40-14
40:59
§ 40-15. Equipment requirements.
A. All persons operating a bicycle shall ride only upon the regular seat
provided thereon, and shall not permit any other person to ride said
bicycle at the same time, except upon a regular seat provided in
tandem.
B. No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the
number for which it is designed and equipped.
C. No person shall operate a bicycle at any time unless both hands are
upon the handlebars.
D. No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle or other
article which in any way prevents the operator from keeping both hands
upon the handlebars.
E. All persons operating bicycles upon any public street, alley or highway
within the Borough of Steelton shall operate said bicycle as close to the
right-hand side of said street, alley or highway as practicable under the
circumstances, exercising due care when passing standing vehicles or
passing one proceeding in the same direction.
F. All operators of bicycles when emerging from an alley, driveway or
hidden entrance shall, upon approaching a sidewalk or crosswalk, yield
the right-of-way to all pedestrian traffic and, upon entering the traveled
portion of the street, alley or highway, shall yield the right-of-way to all
vehicles approaching thereon.
G. All persons operating bicycles upon any public street, alley or highway
within the Borough of Steelton shall not ride with more than two
bicycles abreast at any one time, except in such areas or upon such
portions of said highways, streets or alleys as may be set aside for the
exclusive use and operation of bicycles.
H. No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk in the Borough of
Steelton.
I. No person riding upon any bicycle shall attach the same or himself or
herself to any vehicle upon a roadway.
J. No person shall park a bicycle upon a street, other than upon the
roadway against the curb or upon a sidewalk in a rack to support the
bicycle or against a building or at the curb in such manner as to afford
the least obstruction to pedestrian traffic.
A. Bells. No person shall operate a bicycle unless it is equipped with a bell
or other device capable of giving a signal audible for a distance of at
least 100 feet, except that a bicycle shall not be equipped with, nor shall
any person use upon a bicycle, any siren or whistle.
§ 40-14 § 40-15
40:60
§ 40-16. Suspension of license.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter may, in lieu of
conviction thereof, have the license plate and/or sticker and certificate
suspended for a period not to exceed 30 days. In such event, the license
plate and/or sticker shall be removed by the Police Department under
the supervision of the Mayor of the Borough of Steelton, and subsequent
operation of said bicycle during the period of said suspension shall
constitute a violation of this chapter. The Chief of Police of the Borough of
Steelton shall notify the parent, parents or guardian of any person violating
any of the provisions of this chapter of such violation and shall furnish
to said parent or guardian information relative to the specific portions of
the chapter violated. Such a parent or guardian shall then undertake to
correct any mechanical deficiency found that constituted an infraction of
this chapter. Failure of a parent or guardian to correct any mechanical
deficiency shall constitute a violation of this chapter. In the event that a
violation occurs where the license involves a family registration, neither
the license plate and/or sticker nor certificate shall be suspended totally;
however, the person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be
suspended from operating said bicycle or any other bicycle for a period not
to exceed 30 days.
§ 40-17. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof before the Mayor or any Justice of the Peace of the
Borough, or any district magistrate, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $5 and costs of prosecution.
B. Brakes. Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will enable
the operator to make the braked wheel skid on a dry, level, clean
pavement.
C. Lights. Every bicycle when in use at night shall be equipped with a lamp
on the front exhibiting a headlight visible from a distance of at least 500
feet to the front and with a lamp on the rear exhibiting a red light
visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear except that an approved
reflector meeting the minimum requirements of the State Uniform
Highway Traffic Act may be used in lieu of a rear light.
§ 40-15 BICYCLES § 40-17
40:61
Chapter 42
(RESERVED)
Chapter 44
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Office of Code Enforcement — See Ch. 2.
Planning Commission — See Ch. 18.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 54.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 58.
Plumbing — See Ch. 80.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 82.
Sewers — See Ch. 90.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
99.
Trailers, trailer camps and tourist
camps — See Ch. 105.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 108.
Zoning — See Ch. 120.
§ 44-1. Title.
This chapter, together with the Building Officials and Code Administrators
(BOCA) Basic Building Code, 1981 Edition, adopted herein, shall be known
and may be cited as the "Building Code of the Borough of Steelton."
§ 44-2. Adoption of standards; applicability.
§ 44-3. Administration and enforcement by Office of Code
Enforcement.
All the provisions of the Code Enforcement Ordinance of the Borough are
hereby adopted with this chapter.12 The administration and enforcement of
this chapter and of the BOCA Basic Building Code, herein adopted, shall be
A. BOCA Basic Building Code. There is hereby adopted in its entirety by
the Borough of Steelton, copies of which are on file in the office of the
Borough, that certain building code known as the "BOCA Basic Building
Code, 1981 Edition," as amended through the effective date of adoption
of this chapter and as published by the Building Officials and Code
Administrators International, Inc., save and except portions as are
hereinafter deleted, modified or amended.
B. Application. The provisions set forth in this chapter and in the BOCA
Basic Building Code adopted herein shall take effect 31 days from the
date of the enactment of this chapter or any amendment thereto and
shall apply throughout the entire Borough.
12.Editor's Note: See Ch. 2, Code Enforcement.
§ 40-17 § 44-3
42:62
carried out by the Office of Code Enforcement of the Borough in accordance
with the procedures established by the Code Enforcement Ordinance of
the Borough and by the BOCA Basic Building Code adopted herein. Said
Code Enforcement Ordinance provides for certain powers and duties of a
Code Enforcement Officer, for the creation of a Code Hearing Board and
for procedures relative to applications, fees, permits, inspections, appeals,
penalties and other matters.
§ 44-4. Modifications and amendments.
A. Deletions. The following sections and subsections of the BOCA Basic
Building Code, herein adopted, are hereby deleted in their entirety:
(1) Section 102.0, Validity.
(2) Section 104.1, Repairs.
(3) Section 105.0, Demolition of Structures.
(4) Section 108.0, Professional Architectural and Engineering
Services.
(5) Section 109.0, Department of Building Inspection.
(6) Section 110.0, Duties and Powers of the Building Official.
(7) Section 111.0, Application for Permit.
(8) Section 112.0, Permits.
(9) Section 113.0, Conditions of Permit.
(10) Section 114.0, Fees.
(11) Section 115.0, Inspection.
(12) Section 117.0, Violations.
(13) Section 118.0, Stop Work Order.
(14) Section 120.0, Unsafe Structures.
(15) Section 121.0, Emergency Measures.
(16) Section 123.0, Board of Survey.
(17) Section 124.0, Board of Appeals.
(18) Section 714.0, Rear Yards.
(19) Section 804.2.1, Appeal from exit order.
(20) Section 1702.12, Exception No. 2.
(21) Section 1718.2, Exception No. 3.
§ 44-3 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 44-4
44:63
(22) Section 1902.0, Exemptions.
(23) Section 1906.0, Bonds and Liability Insurance.
(24) Article 20, Electric Wiring and Equipment.
(25) Article 21, Elevator, Dumbwaiter and Conveyor Equipment,
Installation and Maintenance.
(26) Article 22, Plumbing Systems.
(27) Section 2316.0, Plumbing, Piping and Sanitary Equipment.
(28) Article 25, Energy Conservation.
B. Amendments. The following sections and subsections of the BOCA
Basic Building Code are hereby amended to read as follows:
(1) Section 100.1, Title, is amended to read as follows:
100.0 Title: These regulations shall be known as the "Building
Code of the Borough of Steelton," hereinafter referred to as "this
code."
(2) Section 501.2, Fire limits, is amended to read as follows:
501.2 Fire limits: The fire limits shall comprise the areas
containing congested business, commercial, manufacturing and
industrial uses or in which such uses are developing. The limits of
such areas shall be as follows: "That area within the boundaries
described starting at a point located at the intersection of Second
and Adams Streets; thence southeast along Second Street to
Chestnut Street; thence southwest along Chestnut Street and
Chestnut Street extended to the canal, formerly the Pennsylvania
Canal; thence northwest along the canal or line of the canal,
formerly the Pennsylvania Canal to Adams Street; thence
northwest along Adams Street to Second Street, the point and
place of beginning."
(3) Section 627.4, Locations, is amended to read as follows:
627.4 Locations: The pool must be located within a side or rear
yard and may be located no closer than six feet to any property
line of the property on which it is located; provided, however,
that to the extent a property line includes a street right-of-way or
cartway within the lot, no portion of the structure of the pool shall
encroach on said cartway or improved right-of-way; to the extent
such right-of-way is not improved, no portion of the aforesaid
pool structure may encroach upon said nonimproved right-of-way
without the specific written permission of the Borough Council of
the Borough of Steelton.
(4) Section 629.1, Applicability, is amended to read as follows:
§ 44-4 § 44-4
44:64
629.1 Applicability: The provisions of this section shall apply to
all buildings of the Group B when five or more stories in height
and Use Group R-1 and R-2 when four or more stories in height.
(5) Section 809.4, Emergency escape, is amended to read as follows:
809.4 Emergency escape: Every sleeping room below the fourth
story in buildings of Use Group R shall have at least one operable
window or exterior door approved for emergency egress or rescue.
The units must be operable from the inside opening without the
use of separate tools. Where windows are provided as a means
of egress or rescue, they shall have a sill height not more than
44 inches (1,118 millimeters) above the floor. All egress or rescue
windows from sleeping rooms must have a minimum net clear
opening of 5.7 square feet (0.53 square meters). The minimum
net clear opening height dimension shall be 22 inches (558
millimeters).
Bars, grills or screens placed over emergency escape windows
shall be releasable or removable from the inside without the use
of a key, tool or excessive force.
Exceptions
1. Grade floor windows may have a minimum net clear opening of
five square feet (0.47 square meters).
2. In buildings of Use Group R-3, where the sleeping room is
provided with a door to a corridor having access to two remote
exits in opposite directions, then an outside window or an
exterior door for emergency escape from each such sleeping
room is not required.
(6) Section 812.5.4, Panic hardware, is amended to read as follows:
812.5.4 Panic hardware: All exit doors equipped with latching
devices in buildings of Use Groups A, B, F and I-2 and Use Groups
R-1 and R-2 with an occupancy load greater than 50 or three
stories or more in height shall be equipped with approved panic
hardware. Acceptable panic hardware will be a door-latching
assembly incorporating a device which causes the door latch to
release and the leaf to open when a force of 15 pounds (66.68
newtons) is applied in the direction of egress to a bar or panel, the
activating portion of which extends not less than 1/2 the width of
the door leaf, and applied at a height greater than 30 inches (762
millimeters) but less than 44 inches (1,118 millimeters) above the
floor. The force shall be applied at the lock side of the door or 30
inches (762 millimeters) from the hinged side, whichever is farther
from the hinge.
(7) Section 823.1, Location, is amended to read as follows:
§ 44-4 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 44-4
44:65
823.1 Location: In all buildings having an occupant load of 10
or more, all required means of egress shall be indicated with
approved internally illuminated signs reading "exit," visible from
the exit access and, when necessary, supplemented by directional
signs in the access corridors indicating the direction and way of
egress. All exit signs shall be located at exit doors or exit access
areas, so as to be readily visible.
(8) Section 824.4.2, Use Group B, is amended to read as follows:
824.4.2 Use Group B: In all buildings of Use Group B containing
more than 50 occupants or three or more stories in height.
(9) Section 824.4.3, Use Group M, is amended to read as follows:
824.4.3 Use Group M: In all buildings of Use Group M when
greater than 2,000 square feet in area on any floor, or where
having one or more floors above grade floor.
(10) Section 824.4.4, Use Group R-1, is amended to read as follows:
824.4.3 Use Group R-1: In buildings of Use Group R-1 containing
more than 25 sleeping rooms or three or more stories in height.
(11) Section 824.4.5, Use Group R-2, is amended to read as follows:
824.4.5 Use Group R-2: In all buildings of Use Group R-2
containing more than 50 occupants or three or more stories in
height.
(12) Section 824.4.6, Windowless buildings, is amended to read as
follows:
824.4.6 Windowless buildings: In all windowless buildings or
portions thereof, except buildings of Use Group R-3.
(13) Section 1225.9.1, Asphalt shingle application, is amended to read
as follows:
1225.9.1 Asphalt shingle applications: Not more than one
overlay of asphalt shingles shall be applied over an existing
asphalt shingle roof. Asphalt shingles shall not be applied over
wood shakes.
(14) Section 1702.4, Use Group A-3, is amended to read as follows:
1702.4 Use Group A-3: In building or structures or portions
thereof of Use Group A-3 when more than 8,000 square feet in
area.
(15) Section 1702.8, Use Groups M, S-1 and F, is amended to read as
follows:
§ 44-4 § 44-4
44:66
1702.8 Use Groups M, S-1 and F: In all buildings or structures
of Use Group M, S-1 and F:
1. When more than 8,000 square feet in area;
2. When more than 16,000 square feet in total area on all floors;
or
3. When more than two stories in height.
(16) Section 1711.2.1, Use Groups A-1, A-2 or A-3, is amended to read
as follows:
1711.2.1 Use Group A-1, A-2 or A-3: In buildings two or more
stories in height of Use Group A-1, A-2 or A-3 with an occupant
load of more than 150.
(17) Section 1711.2.2, Three stories, is amended to read as follows:
1711.2.2 Three stories: In buildings three stories in height
when:
1. Of Use Group B, F, M, or S-1 more than 1,500 square feet in
area per floor;
2. Of Use Group A, I, R-1 or R-2; or
3. Of any use group more than 5,000 square feet in area per floor.
(18) Section 1716.3.3, Use Group B or R-2, is amended to read as
follows:
1716.3.3 Use Group B or R-2: In all buildings of Use Group B
when five or more stories in height, Use Group R-2 when four or
more stories in height.
(19) Section 1717.3.4, Use Group R-2, is amended to read as follows:
1717.3.4 Use Group R-2: In all buildings of Use Group R-2 when
three or more stories in height.
(20) Section 1807.2.1, Deep excavations, is amended to read as follows:
§ 44-4 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 44-4
44:67
§ 44-5. Flood damage control.
1807.2.1 Deep excavations: Whenever an excavation is made
to a depth of more than three feet (914 millimeters) below the
established curb, the person who causes such excavation to be
made, if afforded the necessary license to enter the adjoining
premises, shall preserve and protect from injury at all times and
at his own expense such adjoining structure or premises which
may be affected by the excavation. If the necessary license is not
afforded, it shall then be the duty of the owner of the adjoining
premises to make his building or structure safe by installing
proper underpinning or foundations or otherwise. Such owner, if it
be necessary for the prosecution of his work, shall be granted the
necessary license to enter the premises where the excavation or
demolition is contemplated.
C. Additions. The following new sections and subsections shall be added to
the BOCA Basic Building Code.
(1) Dwelling units (Use Group R-3): Smoke detectors shall be
installed outside of each separate sleeping area in the immediate
vicinity of the bedrooms in dwellings within Use Group R-3 and on
each additional story of the family living unit including basements
and excluding crawl spaces and unfinished attics. Detectors shall
be installed in a manner and location approved by the Office of
Code Enforcement (the authority having jurisdiction).
(2) Improvement or additions to existing dwelling units: A
minimum of one approved smoke detector shall be installed in
accordance with NFPA Standard No. 74 upon the installation of a
wood stove and in every case of a capital improvement or addition
to an existing dwelling unit or remodeling (including repair,
reconstruction or removal of any part) of an existing dwelling unit
when the cost of any such changes exceeds $500.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a permanent structure
having walls and a roof. Included shall be all mobile homes and trailers
to be used for human habitation.
COMPLETELY DRY SPACE — A space which will remain totally dry
during flooding; the structure is designed and constructed to prevent
the passage of water vapor.
DESIGNATED FLOODPLAIN DISTRICTS — Those floodplain districts
specifically designated in the Borough Zoning Ordinance as being
inundated primarily by the one-hundred-year flood.13
13.Editor's Note: See Ch. 120, Zoning, Art. VI, Floodplain Districts.
§ 44-4 § 44-5
44:68
DESIGNATED FLOODWAY DISTRICT OR AREA — The channel of a
river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas required to
carry and discharge a flood of the one-hundred-year magnitude as
specifically defined in the Borough Zoning Ordinance.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures,
streets and other paving, utilities, mining, dredging, filling, grading,
excavation or drilling operations.
ESSENTIALLY DRY SPACE — A space which will remain dry during
flooding, except for the passage of some water vapor or minor seepage;
the structure is substantially impermeable to the passage of water.
FLOOD-FRINGE AREA — The remaining portions of a floodplain which
are located outside of the floodway.
FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA — A relatively flat or low land
area which is subject to partial or complete inundation from an
adjoining or nearby stream, river or watercourse and/or any area
subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation of surface waters from
any source.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or
eliminate flood damage to real estate or improve real property, water
and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
MINOR REPAIR — The replacement of existing work with equivalent
materials for the purpose of its routine maintenance and upkeep, but
not including any addition, change or modification in construction, exit
facilities or permanent fixtures or equipment.
MOBILE HOME — A transportable, single-family dwelling intended for
permanent occupancy, office or place of assembly, contained in one or
more sections, built on a permanent chassis, which arrives at a site
complete and ready for occupancy, except for minor and incidental
unpacking and assembly operations, and constructed so that it may
be used with or without a permanent foundation. The term does not
include recreational vehicles or travel trailers.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel of land under single ownership which
has been planned and improved for the placement of two or more
mobile homes for nontransient use.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — The construction, reconstruction, renovation,
repair, extension, expansion, alteration or relocation of a building,
structure and/or improvement, such as streets, utilities, etc. Also, for
purposes of this section, all proposed subdivision and/or land
development shall be considered to be "new construction," including
the placement of mobile homes.
OBSTRUCTIONS — Any wall, dam, wharf, embankment, levee, dike,
pike abutment, projection, excavation, channel, rectification, culvert,
building, fence, stockpile, refuse, fill, structure or matter in, along,
§ 44-5 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 44-5
44:69
across or projecting into any channel, watercourse or designated
floodplain districts which may impede, retard or change the direction of
the flow of water and might carry the same downstream to the damage
of life or property.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD — A flood that, on the average, is likely
to occur once every 100 years, i.e., that has a one-percent chance of
occurring each year, although the flood may occur in any year; for
purposes of this section, the regulatory flood.
REGULATORY FLOOD — The flood which has been selected to serve
as the basis upon which the floodplain management provisions of this
section and other ordinances have been prepared; for purpose of this
section, the one-hundred-year flood.
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The one-hundred-year flood
elevation plus a freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — For purposes of implementation of these
provisions, construction shall be considered to have started with the
first placement of permanent construction on the site, such as the
pouring of slabs or footings or any work beyond the stage of excavation.
For a structure without a basement or poured footings, the "start of
construction" includes the first permanent framing or assembly of the
structure or any part thereof on its pilings or foundation or the affixing
of any prefabricated structures or mobile home to its permanent site.
"Permanent construction" does not include land preparation, land
clearing, grading, filling, excavation for basement, footings, piers or
foundations, erection of temporary forms, the installation of piling
under proposed subsurface footings or the installation of sewer, gas and
water pipes or electric or other service lines from the street.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected on the ground or
attached to the ground, including but not limited to buildings, sheds,
mobile homes and other similar items.
B. Administration. To ensure that flood damage controls are being
employed in all new construction within the Flood-Fringe District, the
Code Enforcement Officer shall provide the applicant information
concerning the location of any Floodway or Flood-Fringe District
boundary relative to his proposed construction and the water surface
elevation of the one-hundred-year flood at the proposed construction
site.
(1) Plan requirements. The Code Enforcement Officer shall require the
following specific information to be included as part of an
application for a building permit:
(a) A plan which details the existing and proposed contours and
elevation of the ground and the lowest floor of proposed
construction, one-hundred-year elevations and other
associated factors such as pressures and impact forces, etc.,
storage elevations, size of the structure, location and
§ 44-5 § 44-5
44:70
elevations of streets, water supply, sanitary facilities, soil types
and floodproofing measures, including specific reference to the
level of the floodproofing in relation to the one-hundred-year
flood.
(b) A document, certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect, which states that the proposed construction has
been adequately designed to withstand the flood depths,
pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors
associated with the one-hundred-year flood. Such statement
shall include a description of the type and extent of
floodproofing measures which have been incorporated into the
design of the structure.
(2) Review by the County Conservation District. A copy of all plans for
proposed development shall be submitted by the Code
Enforcement Officer to the County Conservation District for review
and comment prior to the issuance of a permit. The
recommendations of the County Conservation District may be
incorporated into the plan to provide for protection against
predictable hazards.
(3) Variances.
(a) If compliance with the elevation or floodproofing requirements
stated above would result in an exceptional hardship for a
prospective builder, developer or landowner, the Borough may,
upon request, grant relief from the strict application of the
requirement.
(b) Requests for variances to the strict application of the
provisions of this section may be granted by the Borough in
accordance with the following procedures and criteria:
[1] No variances shall be granted for any construction,
development, use or activity within any floodway area that
would cause any increase in the one-hundred-year
elevation.
[2] If granted, a variance shall involve only the least
modification necessary to provide relief.
[3] In granting any variance, the Borough may attach
whatever reasonable conditions and safeguards it
considers necessary in order to protect the public health,
safety and welfare and to achieve the objectives of this
chapter.
[4] Whenever a variance is granted, the Borough shall notify
the applicant, in writing, that:
§ 44-5 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 44-5
44:71
[a] The granting of the variance may result in increased
premium rates for flood insurance.
[b] Such variances may increase the risks to life and
property.
[5] In reviewing any request for a variance, the Borough shall
consider but shall not be limited to the following:
[a] That there is good and sufficient cause.
[b] That failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant.
[c] That the granting of the variance will not result in any
unacceptable or prohibited increased flood heights,
additional threats to public safety, extraordinary
public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public or conflict with any other
applicable local or state ordinances and regulation.
[6] A complete record of all variance requests and related
actions shall be maintained by the Borough. In addition, a
report of all variances granted during the year shall be
included in the annual report to the Federal Insurance
Administration.
(c) Notwithstanding any of the above, however, all structures shall
be designed and constructed so as to have the capability of
resisting the hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and
pressures and effects of buoyancy of the one-hundred-year
flood.
(d) Other permit issuance requirements. Prior to the issuance of
any building permit, the Borough Code Enforcement Officer
shall review the application for permit to determine if all other
necessary governmental permits such as those required by
state and federal laws have been obtained, including those
required by Act 537, the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act;14
the Water Obstruction Act of 1913,15 and the Federal Water
Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, Section 404; and
33 U.S.C. § 1334. No permit shall be issued until this
determination has been made.
C. General regulations. In order to prevent excessive damage to buildings
and structures due to flooding conditions, the following provisions shall
apply to all proposed construction or development occurring in any of
14.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
15.Editor's Note: This Act was repealed by an Act of October 23, 1978, P.L. 204, No. 70. For
current statutory provisions, see 32 P.S. § 693.1 et seq.
§ 44-5 § 44-5
44:72
the floodplain districts designated in the Steelton Borough Zoning
Ordinance as amended:16
(1) Residential structures: Within any designated floodplain district,
the lowest floor, including basement of any new or improved
residential structures, shall be at least 1 1/2 feet above the onehundred-
year flood elevation (regulatory flood).
(2) Nonresidential structures.
(a) Within any designated floodplain district, the lowest floor,
including basement, shall be at least 1 1/2 feet above the onehundred-
year flood elevation (regulatory flood) or be designed
and constructed so that the space enclosed by such structure
shall remain either completely or essentially dry during any
flood up to that height.
(b) Any structure or part thereof which will not be completely or
adequately elevated shall be designed and constructed to be
completely or essentially dry in accordance with the standards
contained in the publication entitled "Floodproofing
Regulations" (United States Army Corps of Engineers, June
1972) or some other equivalent standards for that type of
construction.
(3) Fill. If fill is used, it shall:
(a) Extend laterally 15 feet beyond the building line from all
points.
(b) Consist of soil or small rock materials only. Sanitary landfills
shall not be permitted.
(c) Be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and
resistance to erosion, scouring or settling.
(d) Be no steeper than one vertical to two horizontal, unless
substantiating data justifying steeper slopes are submitted to
and approved by the Code Enforcement Officer.
(e) Be used only to the extent to which it does not adversely affect
adjacent properties.
(f) Under no circumstances be placed within the floodway portion
of any floodplain or floodprone area(s).
(4) Placement of buildings and structures. All buildings and structures
shall be constructed and placed on the lot so as to offer the
minimum obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to
have a minimum effect upon the flow and height of floodwater.
16.Editor's Note: See Ch. 120, Zoning, Art. VI, Floodplain Districts.
§ 44-5 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 44-5
44:73
(5) Anchoring.
(a) All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in
accordance with accepted engineering practices to prevent
flotation, collapse or other movement, thus reducing the threat
to life and property and decreasing the possibility of the
blockage of bridge openings and other restricted sections of
the watercourse.
(b) All air ducts, large pipes and storage tanks located at or below
the regulatory flood elevation shall be firmly anchored in
accordance with accepted engineering practices to prevent
flotation.
(6) Floors, walls and ceilings.
(a) Wood flooring used at or below the first floor level shall be
installed to accommodate a lateral expansion of the flooring,
perpendicular to the flooring grain, without incurring
structural damage to the building.
(b) Plywood used at or below the first floor level shall be of any
exterior or marine grade and of a water-resistant or waterproof
variety.
(c) Walls and ceilings in nonresidential structures shall have
sufficient wet strength and be so installed as to survive
inundation.
(d) Window frames, door frames, doorjambs and other
components shall be made of metal or other water-resistant
material.
(7) Paints and adhesives, where located at or below regulatory flood
elevation.
(a) Adhesives shall have a bonding strength that is unaffected by
inundation, i.e., marine or water-resistant quality.
(b) All wooden components such as doors, trim, cabinets, etc.,
shall be sealed with a marine or water-resistant quality or
similar product.
(c) Paints or other finishes shall be capable of surviving
inundation, i.e., marine or water-resistant quality.
D. Development which may endanger human life.
(1) The provisions of this section shall be applicable in addition to any
other applicable provisions of this chapter or any other chapter,
code or regulation.
(2) In accordance with the Pennsylvania Floodplain Management
Act,17 and the regulations adopted by the Department of
§ 44-5 § 44-5
44:74
Community Affairs as required by the Act, any new or substantially
improved structure which will be used for the production or
storage of any of the following materials or substances, or which
will be used for any activity requiring the maintenance of a supply
(more than 550 gallons or other comparable volume, or any amount
of radioactive substances) of any of the following materials or
substances on the premises, shall be subject to the provisions of
this section, in addition to all other applicable provisions:
(a) Acetone.
(b) Ammonia.
(c) Benzene.
(d) Calcium carbide.
(e) Carbon disulfide.
(f) Celluloid.
(g) Chlorine.
(h) Hydrochloric acid.
(i) Hydrocyanic acid.
(j) Magnesium.
(k) Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen.
(l) Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.).
(m) Phosphorus.
(n) Potassium.
(o) Sodium.
(p) Sulphur and sulphur products.
(q) Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides and
rodenticides).
(r) Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not
otherwise regulated.
(3) Within any Floodway District, any structure of the kind described in
Subsection D(2) above shall be prohibited.
(4) Where permitted within any Flood-Fringe District, any structure of
the kind described in Subsection D(2) above shall be:
17.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 44-5 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 44-5
44:75
(a) Elevated or designed and constructed to remain completely
dry up to at least 1 1/2 feet above the one-hundred-year flood.
(b) Designed to prevent pollution from the structure or activity
during the course of a one-hundred-year flood.
(c) Any such structure, or part thereof, that will be built below the
regulatory flood elevation shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the standards for completely dry
floodproofing contained in the publication entitled "Floodproofing
Regulations" (United States Army Corps of Engineers,
June 1972), or with some other equivalent watertight standard.
(5) Within any General Floodplain District, any structure of the kind
described in Subsection D(2) above shall be prohibited within the
area measured 50 feet landward from the top of the bank of any
watercourse.
(6) Except for a possible modification of the freeboard requirements
involved, no variance shall be granted for any of the other
requirements of this section.
E. Activities requiring special permits.
(1) The provisions of this section shall be applicable in addition to any
other applicable provisions of this chapter or any other ordinance,
code or regulation.
(2) Identification of activities requiring a special permit. In accordance
with the Pennsylvania Floodplain Management Act (Act 166 of
1978)18 and regulations adopted by the Department of Community
Affairs as required by the Act, the following obstructions and
activities are permitted only by special permit, if located partially
or entirely within any floodplain district:
(a) Hospitals, public or private.
(b) Nursing homes, public or private.
(c) Jails.
(d) New mobile home parks and mobile home subdivisions,
substantial improvements to existing mobile home parks and
for individual mobile homes to be located outside of parks.
(3) Application requirements. Applicants for special permits shall
provide five copies of the following items:
(a) A written request including a completed building permit
application form.
18.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 44-5 § 44-5
44:76
(b) A small scale map showing the vicinity in which the proposed
site is located.
(c) A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of
one inch being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
[1] North arrow, scale and date.
[2] Topography based upon the National Geodetic Vertical
Datum of 1929, showing existing and proposed contours at
intervals of two feet.
[3] All property and lot lines including dimensions and the size
of the site expressed in acres or square feet.
[4] The location of all existing streets, drives, other
accessways and parking areas, with information
concerning widths, pavement types and construction and
elevations.
[5] The location of any existing bodies of water or
watercourses, buildings, structures and other public or
private facilities, including railroad tracks and facilities
and any other natural and man-made features affecting or
affected by the proposed activity or development.
[6] The location of the flood plain boundary line, information
and spot elevations concerning the one-hundred-year flood
elevations, and information concerning the flow of water,
including direction and velocities.
[7] The location of all proposed buildings, structures, utilities
and any other improvements.
[8] Any other information which the municipality considers
necessary for adequate review of the application.
(d) Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other
improvements, clearly and legibly drawn at suitable scale
showing the following:
[1] Sufficiently detailed architectural or engineering
drawings, including floor plans, sections and exterior
building elevations, as appropriate.
[2] For any proposed building, the elevation of the lowest
floor, including basement, and as required, the elevation of
any other floor.
[3] Complete information concerning flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors
associated with the one-hundred-year flood.
§ 44-5 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 44-5
44:77
[4] Detailed information concerning any proposed
floodproofing measures.
[5] Cross-section drawings for all proposed streets, drives,
other accessways and parking areas, showing all rights-ofway
and pavement widths.
[6] Profile drawings for all proposed streets, drives and
vehicular accessways, including existing and proposed
grades.
[7] Plans and profiles of all proposed sanitary and storm sewer
systems, water supply systems and any other utilities and
facilities.
(e) The following data and documentation:
[1] Certification from the applicant that the site upon which
the activity or development is proposed is an existing
separate and single parcel, owned by the applicant or the
client he represents.
[2] Certification from a registered professional engineer,
architect or landscape architect that the proposed
construction has been adequately designed to protect
against damage from the one-hundred-year flood.
[3] A statement, certified by a registered professional
engineer, architect, landscape architect or other qualified
person, which contains a complete and accurate
description of the nature and extent of pollution that might
possibly occur from the development during the course of
a one-hundred-year flood, including a statement
concerning the effects such pollution may have on human
life.
[4] A statement certified by a registered professional
engineer, architect or landscape architect, which contains
a complete and accurate description of the effects the
proposed development will have on one-hundred-year
flood elevations and flows.
[5] A statement, certified by a registered professional
engineer, architect or landscape architect, which contains
a complete and accurate description of the kinds and
amounts of any loose buoyant materials or debris that may
possibly exist or be located on the site below the onehundred-
year flood elevation and the effects such
materials and debris may have on one-hundred-year flood
elevations and flows.
§ 44-5 § 44-5
44:78
[6] The appropriate component of the Department of
Environmental Resources' "Planning Module for Land
Development."
[7] Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan
meeting the requirements of the Department of
Environmental Resources to implement and maintain
erosion and sedimentation control.
[8] Any other applicable permits such as, but not limited to, a
permit for any activity regulated by the Department of
Environmental Resources under Section 302 of Act 166 of
1978.19
[9] An evacuation plan which fully explains the manner in
which the site will be safely evacuated before or during the
course of a one-hundred-year flood.
(4) Application review procedures. Upon receipt of an application for a
special permit by the Borough, the following procedures shall apply
in addition to all other applicable permit procedures which are
already established:
(a) Within three working days following receipt of the application,
a complete copy of the application and all accompanying
documentation shall be forwarded to the County Planning
Commission by registered or certified mail for its review and
recommendations. Copies of the application shall also be
forwarded to the Borough Planning Commission and Borough
Engineer for review and comment.
(b) If an application is received that is incomplete, the Borough
shall notify the applicant in writing, stating in what respects
the application is deficient.
(c) If the Borough decides to disapprove an application, it shall
notify the applicant, in writing, of the reasons for the
disapproval.
(d) If the Borough approves an application, it shall file written
notification, together with the application and all pertinent
information with the Department of Community Affairs, by
registered mail, within five working days after the date of
approval.
(e) Before issuing the special permit, the Borough shall allow the
Department of Community Affairs 30 days, after receipt of the
notification by the Department, to review the application and
the decision made by the Borough.
19.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.302.
§ 44-5 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 44-5
44:79
(f) If the Borough does not receive any communication from the
Department of Community Affairs during the thirty-day review
period, it may issue a special permit to the applicant.
(g) If the Department of Community Affairs should decide to
disapprove an application, it shall notify the Borough and the
applicant, in writing, of the reasons for the disapproval, and
the Borough shall not issue the special permit.
(5) Technical requirements for development requiring a special
permit. In addition to any other applicable requirements, the
following provisions shall also apply to the activities requiring a
special permit. If there is any conflict between any of the following
requirements and any otherwise applicable provision, the more
restrictive provisions shall apply.
(a) No application for a special permit shall be approved unless it
can be determined that the structure or activity will be located,
constructed and maintained in a manner which will:
[1] Fully protect the health and safety of the general public
and any occupants of the structure. At a minimum, all new
structures shall be designed, located and constructed so
that:
[a] The structure will survive inundation by waters of the
one-hundred-year flood without any lateral movement
or damage to either the structure itself, or to any of its
equipment or contents below the one-hundred-year
flood elevation.
[b] The lowest floor elevation, including basement, will be
at least 1 1/2 feet above the one-hundred-year flood
elevation.
[c] The occupants of the structure can remain inside for
an indefinite period of time and be safely evacuated at
any time during the one-hundred-year flood.
[2] Prevent any significant possibility of pollution, increased
flood levels or flows or debris endangering life and
property.
(b) All hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only
by professional engineers or others of demonstrated
qualifications, who shall certify that the technical methods
used correctly reflect currently accepted technical concepts.
Studies, analyses, computations, etc., shall be submitted in
sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical review by the
Borough and the Department of Community Affairs.
§ 44-5 § 44-5
44:80
§ 44-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provisions of this
chapter and/or the Borough's Building Code shall, upon conviction in a
summary proceeding, before any District Justice, be sentenced for each
such violation to pay a fine of not less than $10 plus costs and not more
than $300 plus costs, and in default thereof, to undergo imprisonment in
the county jail for a period not exceeding 30 days. Each day that a violation
continues after due notice has been served, in accordance with the terms
and provisions hereof, shall be deemed a separate offense.
§ 44-7. Effect; severability; repealer.
(6) Within any floodplain district, any structure of the kind described in
Subsection E(2) above, shall be prohibited within the area
measured 50 feet landward from the top of the bank of any
watercourse.
(7) Except for a possible modification of the freeboard requirement
involved, no variance shall be granted for any of the other
requirements of this section.
F. Existing structures in designated floodplain districts. Structures
existing in any designated floodplain districts prior to the enactment of
this chapter, but which are not in compliance with these provisions, may
continue to remain subject to the following:
(1) Existing structures located in a designated Floodway District or
area shall not be expanded or enlarged, unless the effect of the
proposed expansion or enlargement on flood heights is fully offset
by accompanying stream improvements.
(2) Any modification, alteration, reconstruction or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of less than
50% of its market value, shall be elevated and/or floodproofed to
the greatest extent possible.
(3) Any modification, alteration, reconstruction or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of 50% or
more of its market value, shall be undertaken only in full
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
A. Savings clause. Nothing in this chapter or in the BOCA Basic Building
Code hereby adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding
now pending in any court or any rights acquired or liability incurred or
any cause or causes of action accrued or existing under any act or
ordinance repealed hereby. No right or remedy of any character shall
be lost, impaired or affected by this chapter.
B. Validity. The invalidity of any section or provision of this chapter or the
BOCA Basic Building Code herein adopted shall not invalidate other
sections or provisions thereof.
§ 44-5 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 44-7
44:81
Chapter 47
CABLE RATES
§ 47-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Steelton Borough
Cable Rate Regulation Ordinance."
§ 47-2. Legal authority.
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the Federal Cable Television Consumer
Protection and Competition Act of 1992 and the Federal
Telecommunications Act of 1996, both of which amended the Federal
Communications Act of 1934. Section 623 of the Communications Act, 47
U.S.C. § 543, states that "any franchising authority may regulate the rates
for the provisions of cable services . . . but only to the extent provided under
this section." This chapter is also enacted pursuant to the rate regulations
adopted by the FCC contained in Subpart N entitled Cable Rate Regulation,
47 U.S.C. § 76.900 et seq.
§ 47-3. Definitions.
The following terms used in this chapter shall have, unless the context
clearly dictates otherwise, the following meanings:
ASSOCIATED EQUIPMENT — All equipment in a subscriber's home,
provided and maintained by the operator, that is used to receive the basic
service tier, regardless of whether such equipment is additionally used to
receive other tiers of regulated programming service and/or unregulated
service. Such equipment shall include, but is not limited to:
BASIC SERVICE — At a minimum, all signals of domestic television
broadcast stations provided to any subscriber (except a signal secondarily
transmitted by satellite regardless of how such signal is ultimately received
by the cable system), any public, educational, and governmental
programming required by the franchise to be carried on the basic tier, and
any additional video programming signals or service added to the basic tier
by the cable operator.
BOROUGH COUNCIL — The governing body of the Borough of Steelton.
C. Repealer. The Borough of Steelton's Building Code, Ordinance No. 78-1,
and any chapter or code provisions conflicting with the provisions
hereof, are hereby repealed insofar as they are inconsistent with the
Borough's Building Code Ordinance.
A. Converter boxes;
B. Remote control units; and
C. Inside wiring.
§ 44-7 § 47-3
47:82
CABLE OPERATOR or OPERATOR — Any person or group of persons:
CABLE SERVICE — The one-way transmission to subscribers of video
programming or other programming service and subscriber interaction, if
any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming
or other programming service.
CABLE SYSTEM — A facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths
and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is
designed to provide cable service which includes video programming and
which is provided to multiple subscribers within a community, but such term
does not include:
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
FRANCHISING AUTHORITY — A governmental or public entity that has
filed a Form 328 with the FCC and is certified by the FCC to regulate basic
service and associated equipment rates, oversee the operations of a cable
operator and its compliance with a franchise agreement.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, association, joint stock company,
trust, corporation or governmental entity.
SUBSCRIBER — Any person or entity who contracts with a cable operator
for, and lawfully receives, the video signals and applicable cable services
distributed by the cable system.
That provides cable service over a cable system and directly or through
one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in such cable system;
or
A.
Who otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement,
the management and operation of such a cable system.
B.
A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or
more television broadcast stations;
A.
B. A facility that serves subscribers without using any public right-of-way;
A facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to
the provisions of Title II of the Communications Act, except that such
facility shall be considered a cable system [other than for purposes of
Section 621(c) of the Communications Act] to the extent such facility is
used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers
unless the extent of that use is solely to provide interactive on-demand
services;
C.
An open video system that complies with Section 653 of the
Communications Act; or
D.
Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric
utility systems.
E.
§ 47-3 CABLE RATES § 47-4
47:83
§ 47-4. Franchising authority.
The Borough has submitted a completed FCC Form 328 with the FCC and is
certified by the FCC as a franchising authority to regulate basic service and
associated equipment rates in accordance with the applicable regulations of
the FCC.
§ 47-5. Adoption of regulations.
In addition to the regulations contained in this chapter, the rate regulations
of the FCC contained in Subpart N entitled Cable Rate Regulation, 47 C.F.R.
§ 76.900 et seq., as may be amended, are hereby adopted for the review
and determination of reasonable and lawful rates for basic service and
associated equipment.
§ 47-6. Presumption of no effective competition.
Only the rates of cable systems that are not subject to effective competition
may be regulated. In the absence of a demonstration by a cable operator
to the contrary, a cable system is presumed not to be subject to effective
competition.
§ 47-7. Appointment and powers of Compliance Officer.
§ 47-8. Duties of Compliance Officer.
The Compliance Officer shall be responsible for:
A. For the administration of this chapter, a Compliance Officer shall be
appointed by the Borough Council who shall meet such qualifications as
may be established by the Borough Council.
B. The Compliance Officer shall administer this chapter in accordance
with its literal terms.
A. Taking such actions on behalf of the Borough as may from time to time
be required to obtain or maintain the Borough's certification to regulate
basic service and associated equipment rates.
B. Notifying all cable operators serving the Borough when the Borough
has become certified by the FCC to regulate basic service and
associated equipment rates and has adopted this chapter.
C. Receiving, filing in the public records of the Borough, reviewing for
completeness, and if appropriate, placing on the Borough Council
agenda for consideration, rate regulatory forms and other filings by
cable operators required to be submitted pursuant to applicable federal
law and regulations.
D. Enforcing the provisions of this chapter and all decisions of the
Borough Council made hereunder to the fullest extent permitted by
§ 47-4 § 47-8
47:84
§ 47-9. Duties of cable operators.
§ 47-10. Review of basic service rates and associated equipment.
federal law and regulations, subject to the oversight and control of the
Borough Council.
E. Taking such other actions as may be necessary from time to time,
subject to the oversight and control of the Borough Council, to protect
the rights of the Borough to regulate basic service and associated
equipment rates to the fullest extent permitted by federal law and
regulations.
A. A cable operator shall file its schedule of rates for the basic service tier
and associated equipment within 30 days of receiving written
notification from the Borough that is has been certified as a franchising
authority to regulate rates. The cable operator shall include rate cards
and channel line-ups with its filing and include an explanation of any
discrepancy in the figures provided in these documents and its rate
filing.
B. A cable operator shall provide written notice to each subscriber of any
increase in the rates to be charged for the basic service tier or
associated equipment at least 30 days before any increase becomes
effective.
C. A cable operator shall submit to the Borough the rate regulatory forms
required by the FCC, including, but not limited to, FCC Form 1240 and
FCC Form 1205, on a periodic basis and in a timely fashion as required
by applicable federal law and regulations. The deadlines for submission
of such forms are dependent upon the cable operator's election to
employ the annual rate adjustment method or the quarterly rate
adjustment method. Should applicable federal law and/or regulations
be amended to alter the rate adjustment methods, then the cable
operator shall comply with such amendments.
D. A cable operator shall comply with all requests for information, orders
and decisions of the Borough. No cable operator shall, in any
information submitted to the Borough in making a rate determination
pursuant to an FCC rate regulatory form filing, make any
misrepresentation or willful material omission bearing on any matter
within the Borough's jurisdiction.
A. Upon receipt of FCC rate regulatory forms, including, but not limited
to, FCC Form 1240 and FCC Form 1205, from a cable operator
proposing any change in basic service and/or associated equipment
rates, the Compliance Officer shall review the forms to determine
whether the filing is complete. If the filing is incomplete, the
Compliance Officer shall notify the cable operator within the applicable
time period required by federal law and regulations and ask the cable
operator to submit such additional information as is necessary to make
§ 47-8 CABLE RATES § 47-10
47:85
§ 47-11. Enforcement.
In rendering its decisions, the Borough Council shall have the full authority
to order a cable operator to take any and all enforcement actions permitted
by applicable federal law and regulations, including, but not limited to, the
following:
the filing complete. The time period for review by the Borough shall
be extended for the cable operator to complete the filing in accordance
with applicable federal law and regulations.
B. Upon receipt of completed FCC rate regulatory forms from a cable
operator, the Compliance Officer shall make an initial determination as
to whether the proposed rate adjustments are reasonable and lawful
pursuant to applicable federal law and regulations. The Compliance
Officer may engage the services of an expert in cable rate regulation to
assist in making such initial determination.
C. Should the Compliance Officer make an initial determination that the
cable operator's proposed rates are unreasonable and unlawful, the
Compliance Officer shall place the issue on the Borough Council's
agenda for public consideration in the form of a rate-making
proceeding. The Borough Council shall provide a reasonable
opportunity for public comment and for consideration of the views of
interested parties.
D. Upon conclusion of the rate-making proceeding, the Borough Council
shall render a decision on whether the cable operator's proposed rates
are reasonable and lawful. The Borough Council shall issue a written
decision if it disapproves an initial rate for basic service and/or
associate equipment in whole or in part, disapproves a request for a
rate increase in whole or in part, or approves a request for a rate
increase in whole or in part over the objections of interested parties.
Public notice shall be given regarding any written decision, including
releasing the text of the written decision to the public.
E. As part of the rate-making proceeding, the Borough may require the
production of proprietary information to make a rate determination.
The Borough shall state a justification for each item of information
requested and, where related to an FCC form, indicate the question or
section of the form to which the request specifically relates. Upon
request by a cable operator, the parties to a rate proceeding shall have
access to such information subject to the Borough's procedures
governing nondisclosure by the parties. Public access to such
proprietary information shall be governed by applicable state and local
law.
A. Ordering a cable operator to implement a reduction in basic service or
associated equipment rates where necessary to bring rates into
compliance with the standards set forth in applicable federal law and
regulations.
§ 47-10 § 47-11
47:86
§ 47-12. Violations and penalties.
In the event that a cable operator does not comply with an order or decision
made pursuant to this chapter and directed specifically toward the cable
operator, the cable operator is subject to a fine of not more than $500 per
violation. Each day of continuous violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter shall constitute a separate violation.
Chapter 48
BURNING, OPEN
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 58. Property maintenance — See Ch. 82.
§ 48-1. Bonfires prohibited. [Amended 5-20-1976 by Ord. No. 76-4,
approved 5-20-1976]
It is hereby declared to be a nuisance to build fires or burn wastepaper,
pasteboard boxes and other waste material upon the streets, alleys,
highways, vacant lands or other public places as well as on private property,
except for outdoor cooking, within the Borough of Steelton.
§ 48-2. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-20-1976 by Ord. No.
76-4, approved 5-20-1976]
Any person who shall violate any provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be liable for a fine of not more than $300 or to
imprisonment in the county jail for a term of not more than 30 days, or both.
The continuation of such violation for each successive day shall constitute
a separate offense, and the person or persons allowing or permitting the
continuation of the violation may be punished as provided above for each
separate offense.
B. Prescribing a reasonable rate for basic service or associated equipment
after it determines that a proposed rate is unreasonable and unlawful.
C. Ordering a cable operator to refund to subscribers that portion of
previously paid rates determined to be in excess of the permitted tier
charge or above the actual cost of equipment, unless the operator has
submitted a cost-of-service showing which justifies the rate charged as
reasonable. Any such refund order shall be further subject to the
limitations contained in applicable federal law and regulations.
§ 47-11 BURNING, OPEN § 48-2
48:87
Chapter 49
CONDUCT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 35.
Curfew — See Ch. 51.
Littering — See Ch. 71.
Loitering — See Ch. 73.
Noise — See Ch. 75.
Conduct in parks and recreational
facilities — See Ch. 77.
§ 48-2 § 48-2
49:88
ARTICLE I
Firearms
[Adopted 1-22-1991 by Ord. No. 91-1, approved 1-22-1991]
§ 49-1. Discharge prohibited.
Except in necessary defense of person and property and except as provided
in § 49-3 of this article, it shall be unlawful for any person to use, fire or
discharge any gun or other firearm within the Borough of Steelton.
§ 49-2. Use of air rifles, bows and arrows and similar devices.
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any air rifle, air pistol,
spring gun, spring pistol, BB gun, bow and arrow or similar device or any
implement that is not a firearm but which impels a pellet of any kind with
a force that can reasonably be expected to cause bodily harm at any place
within the Borough of Steelton except as provided in § 49-3 of this article
and except on a target range which is properly constructed to trap or stop
the projectile as ascertained by the Chief of Police.
§ 49-3. Exceptions.
This article shall not apply to:
§ 49-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600 and, in
default of payment, to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days.
A. Members of any organization incorporated under laws of this
commonwealth engaged in target shooting upon the grounds or
property belonging to or under the control of such organization.
B. Any law enforcement officers when in the discharge of their official
duties.
§ 49-1 CONDUCT § 49-4
49:89

ARTICLE II
B.Y.O.B. Clubs
[Adopted 3-15-1993 by Ord. No. 93-2, approved 3-15-1993]
§ 49-5. (Reserved)
§ 49-6. (Reserved)
§ 49-7. (Reserved)
§ 49-8. (Reserved)
§ 49-9. (Reserved)
§ 49-10. Purpose.
The Borough Council of the Borough of Steelton hereby declares that the
purpose of this Article II is to regulate the hours of operation of a B.Y.O.B.
club in order to preserve the residential character of neighborhoods and
protect the right of its citizens to the quiet enjoyment of the same.
§ 49-11. Definitions.
The following words or phrases, unless the context clearly indicates
otherwise, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES — Any and all beverages, including malt
beverages, which contain alcohol, liquor or such other intoxicating
substances as are further defined in the Pennsylvania Liquor Code, 47 P.S.
§ 1-101 et seq.
CLUB — Any business facility such as a dance hall, club or association
not licensed by the Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board, wherein patrons 21
years of age and older may, after payment of an entry fee, cover charge
or membership fee, consume alcoholic beverages which said patrons have
carried onto the premises; also commonly referred to as "bring-your-ownbottle
clubs", provided that a facility which is rented for a limited period
of time, not to exceed 12 hours, by individual(s) or an organization for the
purpose of a private party in which alcoholic beverages are carried onto the
premises shall not be considered a "B.Y.O.B. club" under the terms of this
Article II.
RESIDENCE — A building or structure wholly or partially used for living
and sleeping space by human occupants.
RESIDENCE DISTRICTS — Those classes of residential districts specified
in Chapter 120, Zoning, of the Code of the Borough of Steelton, including
R-SU Residential District, Single-Family, Urban; R-TS Residential District,
Two-Family, Suburban; R-TU Residential District, Two-Family, Urban; and RMU
Residential District, Multifamily, Urban.
§ 49-5 CONDUCT § 49-12
49:91
§ 49-12. Time and place of operation.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons who own, operate, lease,
manage or control a B.Y.O.B. club to:
§ 49-13. Officers and organization to be held liable.
In the event that any of the unlawful activities specified herein are
conducted by or in the name of the corporation, partnership, joint venture,
trust, firm or association, in addition to entity liability, the officers, agents
or principals of said corporation, partnership, joint venture, trust, firm or
association shall be deemed in violation of this Article II as well as the
person or persons engaged in the unlawful activity.
§ 49-14. Separate offenses.
The unlawful activities specified herein shall constitute separate and
distinct offenses for each and every day in which said activities are
conducted.
§ 49-15. Liability insurance and certificate of occupancy.
Any and all B.Y.O.B. clubs to which this Article II applies shall, at all times,
comply with the following requirements. They shall:
A. Remain and/or to transact business between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and
8:00 a.m., prevailing time, of each day and at any time on Sundays, if
said B.Y.O.B. club is located in a residence district or within 500 feet of
a residence or church.
B. Conduct activities to which this Article II applies without possessing a
valid club permit.
A. Obtain broad form general liability coverage, $1,000,000 single limit
per occurrence, proof of which shall be filed with the Code Enforcement
Office.
B. Possess a valid certificate of occupancy issued by the Pennsylvania
Department of Labor and Industry and the Borough of Steelton, Codes
Enforcement Office, and prominently display said certificate as
required.
C. Obtain a zoning permit pursuant to Chapter 120 of the Code of the
Borough of Steelton, which permit shall state that the B.Y.O.B. club
engages in an activity which is permitted under the Borough of Steelton
Zoning Ordinance, and prominently display said permit as required.
D. Obtain a valid B.Y.O.B. club permit pursuant to § 49-16 of this Article II
and prominently display said permit as required.
E. Conspicuously post the hours of operation at the business premises
such that patrons are sufficiently apprised of the same.
§ 49-12 § 49-16
49:92
§ 49-16. Permit to operate; fees.
§ 49-17. Violations and penalties.
Any person, persons or entity violating the provisions of this Article II shall,
upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to a fine not exceeding $600 and,
upon failure to pay said fine, imprisonment not exceeding 30 days.
A. Any person or persons desiring to operate or continue to operate a
B.Y.O.B. club shall file with the Code Enforcement Officer an application
for a B.Y.O.B. club permit, which application shall include the following
information: the name and address of the B.Y.O.B. club; a statement
whether the business premises is leased or owned by the B.Y.O.B. club;
the name and address of the lessor of the business premises, if
applicable; the nature of the ownership of the B.Y.O.B. club, i.e.,
corporation, partnership, joint venture or association; the names and
addresses of the officers and/or agents of the B.Y.O.B. club; the names
and addresses of any and all persons who possess an ownership and/or
financial interest in the B.Y.O.B. club; and a notarized statement that
the B.Y.O.B. club complies with the requirements of § 49-15 herein.
B. The Code Enforcement Officer shall determine whether the B.Y.O.B.
club fully and completely complies with the provisions and
requirements of this Article II within 10 days following the date on
which the application is received. If the Code Enforcement Officer
determines that the applicant fully and completely complies with the
provisions hereof, he shall issue a B.Y.O.B. club permit; if the Code
Enforcement Officer determines that the applicant does not fully and
completely comply with the provisions hereof, he shall deny the
issuance of a B.Y.O.B. club permit and shall furnish written evidence of
the same to the applicant, together with the reason(s) for the denial.
C. The club shall pay an administrative fee of $100 for a B.Y.O.B. club
permit and $50 for each renewal thereof. Said B.Y.O.B. club permit shall
be effective for a period of one year following the date of issuance,
provided that, in the event that the B.Y.O.B. club fails to fully and
completely comply with the provisions hereof during the term the
B.Y.O.B. club permit was so issued, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
have the authority to revoke the B.Y.O.B. club permit due to the B.Y.O.B.
club's lack of compliance.
§ 49-16 CONDUCT § 49-17
49:93

ARTICLE III
Human Body Massage Establishments
[Adopted 7-18-1994 by Ord. No. 94-7, approved 7-18-1994]
§ 49-18. (Reserved)
§ 49-19. (Reserved)
§ 49-20. (Reserved)
§ 49-21. (Reserved)
§ 49-22. (Reserved)
§ 49-23. (Reserved)
§ 49-24. (Reserved)
§ 49-25. (Reserved)
§ 49-26. (Reserved)
§ 49-27. (Reserved)
§ 49-28. (Reserved)
§ 49-29. (Reserved)
§ 49-30. Findings; purpose.
The people and citizens of the Borough of Steelton, acting by and through
their duly elected governing body, this Borough Council, are aware that
the practice of body massage under certain circumstances can scientifically
promote physical well-being by relieving and relaxing muscle tension,
stimulating vascular circulation which enhances the disposition of waste
products generated by muscular exercise and assisting in the development
of muscle tone through a form of passive exercise. It is further recognized
that the physical contact involved in such practice can provide a source of
communication of disease for which the health and safety of the community
requires local government control and supervision. This Council further
recognizes that various businesses operating under the guise of practicing
body massage, sometimes called "massage parlors," are intended to
stimulate sexual and erotic reactions which this Council believes is contrary
to the morals and welfare of this Borough. In addition to regulating the
legitimate and bona fide practice of massage, this Borough Council intends
to prohibit and prevent the abuse of said practice for sexual and erotic
stimulation purposes.
§ 49-18 CONDUCT § 49-31
49:95
§ 49-31. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings ascribed to them by this section:
MASSAGE — Any method of pressure on, or friction against, or stroking,
kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating or stimulating of the
external soft parts of the body with the hands or with the aid of any
mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliance, with or without such
supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils, powder,
creams, lotions, ointments or other similar preparations commonly used in
this practice.
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment having a fixed place of
business where any person, partnership, corporation or association engages
in, carries on, or permits to be engaged in or carried on, the practice of
massage as is defined above, but shall exclude licensed hospitals, licensed
nursing homes, medical clinics and the offices and quarters of licensed
health profession practitioners.
MASSAGE TECHNICIAN — Any masseur (male) or masseuse (female) who
engages in the practice of massage for any consideration whatsoever, but
shall exclude persons licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to
practice healing arts (i.e., medicine, osteopathy, podiatry, physical therapy,
nursing, chiropractic) and barbers, beauticians and manicurists insofar as
they deal with the head, hands and feet.
PERSON — Any individual or any firm, partnership, corporation or other
association of individuals or group acting as a unit.
SEXUAL OR GENITAL AREA — Includes the genital organs, pubic area,
anus or perineum of any person; the penis or scrotum of any male person;
the vulva, vaginal cavity or breasts of any female person.
§ 49-32. Massage technician license required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct or carry on the
practice of massage in the Borough of Steelton without first having obtained
a massage technician license from the Borough Secretary.
§ 49-33. Massage establishment license required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain, operate or conduct a
massage establishment in the Borough of Steelton without first having
obtained a massage establishment license from the Borough Secretary.
§ 49-34. Application for massage technician license; fees; term;
renewal.
A. Each person seeking a massage technician license shall submit to the
Borough Secretary a written application containing the following:
(1) The name and residence address of the applicant.
§ 49-31 § 49-34
49:96
§ 49-35. Issuance of massage technician license.
Within 30 days after receiving a complete application for a massage
technician license, the Borough Secretary may issue said license to the
applicant unless said Secretary determines that the applicant is under the
age of 18 years or has been convicted of or has forfeited bond or bail
(2) The applicant's social security number and the motor vehicle
operator's license number, if any.
(3) The applicant's weight, height, color of hair and color of eyes.
(4) Written evidence that the applicant is at least 18 years of age.
(5) A statement of the applicant's each place and type of employment
for three years immediately preceding the date of application,
indicating precise dates and addresses.
(6) A statement of the applicant's each place of residence for three
years immediately preceding the date of the application, indicating
the precise dates and addresses.
(7) The applicant's statement of conviction of any crime or forfeiture of
bond or bail involving any criminal charge or violation of an
ordinance (except minor traffic violations) within five years
immediately preceding the date of the application, indicating the
precise charge, location, date and disposition.
(8) A photograph taken by the Steelton Borough Police Department.
(9) Fingerprints taken by the Steelton Borough Police Department.
(10) A licensed physician's certificate obtained within not more than 30
days immediately preceding the date of the application from a
physician acceptable to the Borough Secretary certifying that the
applicant is free from any contagious or communicable diseases
and that the physician based his or her conclusions, in part, upon a
recognized blood test for syphilis, a culture for gonorrhea, a
specific test or tests for tuberculosis and a specific test for HIV.
(11) The application shall be made under oath before a notary public or
other officer of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania authorized to
administer oaths.
B. Each applicant shall pay to the Borough of Steelton at the time of
submitting the application a nonrefundable filing fee of $50 for an
original application and a nonrefundable filing fee of $25 for each
renewal application.
C. A license issued hereunder shall have a life or term of one year from the
date of issue. An application for a renewal of said license for one year
may be filed at any time prior to the expiration of the then existing
license.
§ 49-34 CONDUCT § 49-35
49:97
on a charge of violating a criminal law or ordinance within five years
immediately preceding the filing of the application involving sexual
misconduct, dishonesty, fraud or deceit or is not free from a contagious or
communicable disease.
§ 49-36. Suspension and revocation of massage technician license.
§ 49-37. Application for massage establishment license; fees; term;
renewal.
A. A massage technician license may be suspended or revoked by the
Borough Secretary upon the occurrence of any of the following events:
(1) The application of such license contained a false statement or
statements.
(2) The massage technician has violated the provisions of this article.
(3) The massage technician contracts a contagious or communicable
disease.
(4) The massage technician is convicted of or has forfeited bond or bail
on a charge of violating a criminal law or ordinance in this or any
other jurisdiction involving sexual misconduct, dishonesty, fraud or
deceit.
B. The Borough Secretary shall serve the massage technician with written
notice of said suspension or revocation, specifying the reasons therefor,
before said suspension or revocation shall become effective. Service of
said notice shall be deemed effective if delivered to the person in
apparent charge of the massage establishment.
C. The massage technician shall have the right to a hearing on said
suspension or revocation, which hearing shall be held before the
Borough Council within 10 days after the service of the notice of such
suspension or revocation, whether or not the suspension or revocation
was effective immediately.
A. Each person seeking a massage establishment license shall submit to
the Borough Secretary a written application containing the following:
(1) A detailed statement indicating the exact nature of the massage to
be administered, the proposed location of the establishment and
the detailed plans therefor.
(2) Specific information on each individual, partner, limited partner,
corporate officer, corporate director, corporate stockholder owning
more than 3% of the issued and outstanding stock of a corporate
applicant, comprising the applicant, to include the following:
(a) Name and residence address.
§ 49-35 § 49-37
49:98
§ 49-38. Issuance of massage establishment license.
(b) Social security number and motor vehicle operator's license
number, if any.
(c) Height, weight, color of eyes and color of hair.
(d) A statement of each place and type of employment for three
years immediately preceding the date of application, indicating
the precise dates and addresses.
(e) A statement of each place of residence for three years
preceding the date of application, indicating precise dates and
addresses.
(f) A statement of conviction of any crime or forfeiture of bond or
bail involving any criminal charge or violation of an ordinance
(except minor traffic violations) within five years immediately
preceding the date of application, indicating the precise
charge, location, date and disposition.
(g) At the Borough Secretary's discretion, a photograph and/or
fingerprints taken by the Steelton Borough Police Department
or another approved law enforcement agency within or outside
Steelton Borough.
(3) The application shall be made under oath before a notary public or
other officer of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania authorized to
administer oaths.
(4) If the applicant is a corporation, a duly certified copy of its Articles
of Incorporation shall be submitted with the application.
(5) If the applicant is a partnership, a duly certified copy of the
partnership agreement shall be with the application.
B. Each applicant shall pay to the Borough of Steelton at the time of
submitting the application a nonrefundable filing fee of $100 for an
original application and a nonrefundable filing fee of $50 for each
renewal application. In addition, the applicant shall pay such other fees
as may be required under any other ordinance which may be applicable.
C. A license issued hereunder shall have a life or term of one year from the
date of issue of the final massage establishment license (Part II).20 An
application for a renewal of said license for one year may be filed at any
time prior to the expiration of the then existing license.
A. A massage establishment license shall consist of two parts, as follows:
(1) Part I: An indication that the persons involved in said application
meet the requirements of § 49-37 hereinabove and that the
20.Editor's Note: See § 49-38A(2).
§ 49-37 CONDUCT § 49-38
49:99
§ 49-39. Suspension and revocation of massage establishment
license.
proposed operation, if permitted, will not violate other applicable
ordinances of the Borough.
(2) Part II: The final license to be issued before occupancy and use of
said establishment.
B. Within 30 days after receiving a complete application, the Borough
Secretary may issue Part I21 of said massage establishment license to
the applicant unless said Secretary determines that:
(1) An individual comprising the applicant has been convicted of or has
forfeited bond or bail on a charge of violating a criminal law or
ordinance within five years immediately preceding the filing of the
application involving sexual misconduct, dishonesty, fraud or
deceit; or
(2) The operation, as proposed by the applicant, if permitted, would
not comply with all applicable ordinances of this Borough.
C. Within 10 days after receiving a written request from the applicant for
inspection of the completed establishment, the Borough Secretary shall
inspect said establishment and issue the final massage establishment
license (Part II) to the applicant, provided that a valid Part I of said
license has been issued less than one year before said issuance of the
final license, unless said Secretary determines that the establishment
does not comply with the requirements of § 49-40 hereinbelow.
A. A massage establishment license may be suspended or revoked by the
Borough Secretary upon the occurrence of any of the following events:
(1) The application for such license contained a false statement or
statements.
(2) The massage establishment licensee has violated the provisions of
this article.
(3) An individual comprising the massage establishment licensee has
been convicted of or has forfeited bond or bail on a charge of
violating a criminal law or ordinance in this or any other
jurisdiction involving sexual misconduct, dishonesty, fraud or
deceit.
B. The Borough Secretary shall serve the massage establishment licensee
with written notice of said suspension or revocation, specifying the
reason therefor, before said suspension or revocation shall become
effective. Service of said notice shall be deemed effective if delivered to
a person in apparent charge of the massage establishment.
21.Editor's Note: See § 49-38A(1).
§ 49-38 § 49-39
49:100
§ 49-40. Necessary facilities for massage establishment.
No massage establishment shall be issued a permit, nor operated,
established or maintained in the Borough unless an inspection by the
Borough Secretary, or his designee, reveals that the establishment complies
with each of the following minimum requirements:
C. The massage establishment licensee shall have the right to a hearing on
said suspension or revocation, which hearing shall be held before the
Borough Council within 10 days after the service of the notice of such
suspension or revocation, whether or not the suspension or revocation
was effective immediately.
A. Construction of rooms used for toilets, tubs, steam baths and showers
shall be made waterproof with approved waterproof materials and shall
be installed in accordance with the appropriate building code of the
Borough.
B. All massage tables, bathtubs, shower stalls, steam or bath areas and
floors shall have surfaces which may be readily disinfected.
C. Adequate bathing, dressing and locker facilities shall be provided for
the patrons to be served at any given time. In the event that male and
female patrons are to be served simultaneously, separate bathing,
dressing, locker and massage room facilities shall be provided.
D. The premises shall have adequate equipment for disinfecting and
sterilizing nondisposable instruments and materials used in
administering massages. Such nondisposable instruments and
materials shall be disinfected after use on each patron.
E. Closed cabinets shall be provided and used for the storage of clean
linens, towels and other materials used in connection with
administering massages. All soiled linens, towels and other materials
shall be kept in properly covered containers or cabinets, which
containers or cabinets shall be kept separate from the clean storage
areas.
F. Toilet facilities shall be provided in convenient locations. When
employees and patrons of different sexes are on the premises at the
same time, separate toilet facilities shall be provided for each sex. A
single water closet per sex shall be provided for each 20 or more
employees or patrons of that sex on the premises at any one time.
Urinals may be substituted for half of the water closets for the male
patrons after one water closet has been provided. Toilets shall be
designated as to the sex accommodated therein.
G. Lavatories or washbasins provided with both hot and cold running
water shall be installed in either the toilet room or a vestibule
immediately adjacent thereto. Lavatories or washbasins shall be
provided with soap and a dispenser and with sanitary towels.
§ 49-39 CONDUCT § 49-40
49:101
§ 49-41. Operating regulations.
H. The premises shall be equipped with a service sink for custodial
supplies.
I. The premises shall comply with all building and safety codes of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and this Borough.
A. All areas of the massage establishment, including appliances and
apparatus, shall be kept clean and operated in a sanitary condition.
B. Price rates for all services shall be prominently posted in the reception
area in a location available to all prospective customers.
C. All employees of a massage establishment, including the massage
technician, shall be clean and wear clean nontransparent outer
garments. A separate dressing room for each sex must be available on
the premises, and each dressing room shall contain a tub or shower in
good working order and individual lockers for each employee and
customer. Doors to such dressing rooms shall open inward and shall be
self-closing.
D. The massage establishment shall be stocked with clean, laundered
sheets and towels in sufficient quantity and which shall be laundered
after each use thereof and stored in a sanitary manner.
E. The sexual and genital area of patrons must be covered by towels,
cloths or undergarments when in the presence of an employee or a
massage technician.
F. All walls, ceilings, floors, pools, showers, bathtubs, steam rooms and all
other physical facilities shall be in good repair and maintained in a
clean and sanitary condition. Wet and dry heat rooms, steam or vapor
rooms or steam or vapor cabinets, shower compartments and toilet
rooms shall be thoroughly cleaned each day the business is in
operation. Bathtubs and showers shall be thoroughly cleaned after each
use. When carpeting is used on the floors, it shall be kept dry.
G. Oils, creams, lotions and other preparations used in administering
massages shall be kept in clean, closed containers or cabinets.
H. Eating in the massage work areas shall not be permitted. Animals,
except for Seeing Eye dogs, shall not be permitted in the massage work
areas.
I. Each massage technician shall wash his or her hands in hot running
water, using a proper soap or disinfectant before administering a
massage to each patron.
J. Each patron must bathe his or her entire body on the massage
establishment premises before submitting to massage by a massage
technician.
§ 49-40 § 49-41
49:102
§ 49-42. Prohibited activities.
It shall be unlawful:
§ 49-43. Display of licenses.
The license of a massage establishment shall be displayed and each
massage technician shall display his or her respective valid licenses in a
conspicuous place within the massage establishment in such manner that
the same may be readily seen by persons upon entering the establishment.
§ 49-44. Identification card.
K. Each massage establishment and each massage technician shall keep
and maintain at all times on the premises of said establishment a
written record of the patrons served, which record shall include the
name and address of the patron, the date and time (including duration)
of the massage operation, the type and nature of the massage
performed and the fee or other consideration charged. Said records
shall be maintained for not fewer than five years.
A. For a massage technician or any other person to perform a massage on
a person of the opposite sex.
B. For a massage technician or any other person knowingly to place his or
her hand or hands upon or to touch with any part of his or her body, to
fondle or caress in any other manner or to massage the sexual or
genital area of any other person.
C. For a massage technician or any other person to perform, offer or agree
to perform any act which would require the touching of the sexual or
genital area of any other person.
D. To employ any person under the age of 18 years in any capacity in and
at a massage establishment.
E. To permit any person under the age of 18 years to come to or remain on
the premises of any massage establishment whether as a patron, guest
or otherwise.
F. To employ a person to practice a massage without such person being
duly licensed as a massage technician.
A. The Borough Secretary shall provide each duly licensed massage
technician with an identification card containing the technician's
photograph, name, license number and license expiration date.
B. Each duly licensed massage technician shall wear and display said
identification card on the front of his or her outermost garment at all
times while on the premises of the massage establishment.
C. It shall be unlawful for any massage technician to violate the provisions
of Subsection B of this § 49-44.
§ 49-41 CONDUCT § 49-45
49:103
§ 49-45. Inspections.
§ 49-46. Licenses nontransferable.
All licenses issued hereunder are nontransferable. Said licenses are issued
only for a given geographical premises in the case of a massage
establishment license and to a specific person in the case of the massage
technician license.
§ 49-47. Deferred compliance.
§ 49-48. Violations and penalties.
A. The Borough Secretary or his designee shall, from time to time, make
inspections of each massage establishment for the purposes of
determining compliance with the provisions of this article. Such
inspection shall include the right to inspect the records required to be
maintained pursuant to § 49-41K hereinabove. In applying for and
accepting a massage establishment license, the licensee is deemed to
have agreed to such inspection without notice or legal process.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to prohibit or attempt to prohibit an
inspection as provided in Subsection A above.
A. The owner or operator of a massage establishment operating in this
Borough as of the effective date of this article may apply to the Borough
Secretary for and may be granted a grace period not to exceed six
months in order to comply with the requirements necessary for the
issuance of a final massage establishment license (Part II) pursuant to
§ 49-37 of this article.
B. With the sole exception of the foregoing provisions of Subsection A, all
other provisions of this article shall become effective upon enactment
hereof.
A. Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of
and liable for a summary offense and, upon conviction, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $600 and the costs of the action.
In default of payment of such fine and costs, such person may be
sentenced and committed to the Dauphin County Prison for a period not
exceeding 30 days.
B. Any person who is convicted of violating any part of § 49-41 of this
article shall suffer an automatic revocation of any license issued under
this article and shall be permanently disqualified from making
application for any license hereunder in the future.
§ 49-45 § 49-48
49:104
ARTICLE IV
Sexually Oriented Business Operations
[Adopted 6-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-7; approved 6-19-1995]
§ 49-49. Findings.
The Borough Council of the Borough of Steelton finds that sexually oriented
businesses are frequently used for unlawful sexual activities, including
prostitution and sexual liaisons of a casual nature. The concern over
sexually transmitted diseases is a legitimate health concern of the Borough
of Steelton which demands reasonable regulation of sexually oriented
businesses in order to protect the health and well-being of the citizens.
Permitting and/or licensing is a legitimate and reasonable means of
accountability to ensure that operators of sexually oriented businesses
comply with reasonable regulations and to ensure that operators do not
knowingly allow their establishments to be used as places of illegal sexual
activity or solicitation. There is convincing documented evidence that
sexually oriented businesses, because of their very nature, have a
deleterious effect on both the existing businesses around them and the
surrounding residential areas adjacent to them, causing increased crime
and the downgrading of property values. It is recognized that sexually
oriented businesses, due to their nature, have serious objectionable
operational characteristics, particularly when they are located in close
proximity to each other, thereby contributing to neighborhood blight and
downgrading the quality of life in the adjacent area. The Borough of
Steelton desires to minimize and control these adverse effects and thereby
protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizenry; protect the citizens
from increased crime; preserve the quality of life; preserve the property
values and character of surrounding neighborhoods and deter the spread
of neighborhood blight. It is not the intent of this article to suppress
any speech activities protected by the First Amendment, but to enact a
content-neutral ordinance which addresses the secondary effects of sexually
oriented businesses. It is not the intent of the Borough Council to condone
or legitimize the distribution of obscene material.
§ 49-50. Intent.
It is the purpose of this article to regulate sexually oriented businesses
to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the
Borough, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent
the continued deleterious location and concentration of sexually oriented
businesses within the Borough. The provisions of this article have neither
the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content
of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials.
Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this article to restrict or deny
access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First
Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually
oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor
effect of this article to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene
material.
§ 49-49 CONDUCT § 49-51
49:105
§ 49-51. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADULT ARCADE — Any place to which the public is permitted or invited
wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or
mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other
image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer
persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed
are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
ADULT BOOKSTORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE —
ADULT CABARET — A nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar commercial
establishment which regularly features:
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER — A commercial establishment
where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, videocassettes,
A commercial establishment which has a substantial or significant
portion of its stock-in-trade, and offers for sale or rental for any form of
consideration, any one or more of the following:
Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or
photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes or video
reproductions, slides or other visual representations distinguished
or characterized by their emphasis on matters depicting,
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas; or
(1)
Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use
in connection with specified sexual activities.
(2)
A.
A commercial establishment may have substantial or significant
portions of its stock-in-trade in other goods and/or services that do
not involve the offering for sale or rental of material distinguished
or characterized by its emphasis on matters depicting, describing or
relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and
still be categorized as an "adult bookstore" or "adult video store." Such
other business purposes will not serve to exempt such commercial
establishment from being categorized as an "adult bookstore" or "adult
video store" so long as one of its principal business purposes meets the
definition of an "adult bookstore" or "adult video store" set forth above.
B.
A. Persons who appear in the state of nudity;
Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified
anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities; or
B.
Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic
reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description
of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
C.
§ 49-51 § 49-51
49:106
slides or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are
characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas.
ADULT THEATER — A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar
commercial establishment which regularly features persons who appear
in a state of nudity or live performances which are characterized by the
exposure of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Steelton.
ESCORT — A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a
companion, guide or date for another person or who agrees or offers to
privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another
person.
ESCORT AGENCY — A person or business association who furnishes, offers
to furnish or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business
purposes for a fee, tip or other consideration.
NUDE MODEL STUDIO — Any place where a person who appears in a state
of nudity or displays specified anatomical areas is provided to be observed,
sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed or similarly depicted
by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration.
NUDITY or A STATE OF NUDITY — The appearance of a human bare
buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals or female breast.
PERMITTEE AND/OR LICENSEE — A person in whose name a permit and/
or license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well
as the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a permit and/
or license.
PERSON — An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
association or other legal entity.
SEMINUDE — A state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the
genitals, pubic region and areola of the female breast, as well as portions of
the body covered by supporting straps or devices.
SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER — A business or commercial enterprise
that, as one of its primary business purposes, offers for any form of
consideration:
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS — An adult arcade, adult bookstore or
adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motion picture theater, adult theater,
escort agency, nude model studio or sexual encounter center.
Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons
of the opposite sex; or
A.
Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the
same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or
seminudity.
B.
§ 49-51 CONDUCT § 49-51
49:107
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS — The male genitals in a state of sexual
arousal and/or the vulva or more intimate parts of the female genitals.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — Includes any of the following:
SUBSTANTIAL ENLARGEMENT OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS
— The increase in floor areas occupied by the business by more than 25%,
as the floor areas exist on date of enactment of this article.
TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED
BUSINESS — Includes any of the following:
§ 49-52. Classification.
Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows:
§ 49-53. Permit required; application.
The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks, anus or female breasts;
A.
Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy;
B.
C. Masturbation, actual or simulated; or
Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities
set forth in Subsections A through C above.
D.
A. The sale, lease or sublease of the business; or
The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the
business, whether by sale, exchange or similar means; or
B.
The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal device which
transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer
by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person
possessing the ownership or control.
C.
A. Adult arcades.
B. Adult bookstores or adult video stores.
C. Adult cabarets.
D. Adult motion picture theaters.
E. Adult theaters.
F. Escort agencies.
G. Nude model studios.
H. Sexual encounter centers.
§ 49-51 § 49-53
49:108
§ 49-54. Issuance of permit.
A. Any person who operates a sexually oriented business without a valid
permit issued by the Borough is guilty of a violation of Chapter 120,
Zoning.
B. An application for a permit to operate a sexually oriented business must
be made on a form provided by the Code Enforcement Officer of the
Borough. The application must be accompanied by a sketch or diagram
showing the floor plan and plot plan configuration of the premises,
including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The
sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared, but must be
drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the
interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches.
C. The applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of this
article, and the premises must be in compliance with this and all other
applicable Borough ordinances.
D. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an
individual, he or she must sign the application for a permit as applicant.
If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is other
than an individual, each individual who has a ten-percent or greater
interest in the business must sign the application for a permit as
applicant. If a corporation is listed as owner of a sexually oriented
business or as the entity which wishes to operate such a business, each
individual having a direct or indirect interest of 10% or greater in the
corporation must sign the application for a permit as applicant.
E. The fact that a person possesses other types of Borough permits does
not exempt the person from the requirement of obtaining a sexually
oriented business permit.
A. The Borough Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a permit to an
applicant within 30 days after receipt of an application unless he finds
one or more of the following to be true, in which event he shall deny the
permit within said thirty-day period:
(1) An applicant is under 18 years of age.
(2) An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably
necessary for issuance of the permit or has falsely answered a
question or request for information on the application form.
(3) The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business do not
meet the requirements of the Code and ordinances.
(4) The permit fee required by this article has not been paid.
(5) An applicant of the proposed establishment is in violation of or is
not in compliance with any of the provisions of this article.
§ 49-53 CONDUCT § 49-54
49:109
§ 49-55. Fee.
The annual fee for a sexually oriented business permit is $1,000.
§ 49-56. Inspection.
§ 49-57. Expiration of permit.
§ 49-58. Suspension of permit.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall suspend a permit for a period not to
exceed 30 days if he determines that a permittee or an employee of a
permittee has:
B. The permit, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or
persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date and the address of
the sexually oriented business. The permit shall be posted in a
conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented
business so that it may be easily read at any time.
A. An applicant or permittee shall permit representatives of the Police
Department, Fire Marshal, Code Enforcement Office or other Borough
departments or agencies to inspect the premises of a sexually oriented
business for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law, at any
time that the sexually oriented business is occupied or open for
business.
B. A person who operates a sexually oriented business or his or her agent
or employee violates Chapter 120, Zoning, if he or she refuses to permit
such lawful inspection of the premises at any time it is occupied or open
for business.
A. Each permit shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be
renewed only by making application as provided in § 49-54. Application
for renewal should be made at least 30 days before the expiration date
and, when made less than 30 days before the expiration date, the
pendency of the application will not prevent the expiration of the
permit. A decision to renew or deny shall be made within 30 days of
receipt of the application by the Borough.
B. Where the applicant certifies, under penalty of perjury, that no change
has occurred in the use, possession and/or physical structure of the
premises since the date of the issuance of the last permit, the applicant
shall be permitted to continue the operation of its business under the
exact provisions of said permit pending a decision by the Borough Code
Enforcement Officer on the renewal application. In the event that the
renewal application is denied, the applicant may continue to operate its
business under the exact conditions of the expired permit until said
denial is reviewed by the Court of Common Pleas of Dauphin County,
Pennsylvania, provided that the applicant appeals said denial within 30
days of the decision of the Borough.
§ 49-54 § 49-58
49:110
§ 49-59. Revocation of permit.
A. Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this article;
B. Engaged in excessive use of alcoholic beverages while on the sexually
oriented business premises;
C. Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business
premises as authorized by this article;
D. Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the sexually oriented
business premises; or
E. Failed to man managers' stations and/or maintain viewing rooms as set
forth in § 49-62.
A. The Code Enforcement Officer shall revoke a permit if a cause of
suspension set forth in § 49-58 occurs and the permit has been
suspended within the preceding 12 months.
B. The Code Enforcement Officer shall revoke a permit if he determines
that:
(1) A permittee gave false or misleading information in the material
submitted to the Borough during the application process;
(2) A permittee or an employee of a permittee has knowingly allowed
possession, use or sale of controlled substances on the premises;
(3) A permittee or an employee of a permittee has knowingly allowed
prostitution on the premises;
(4) A permittee or an employee of a permittee knowingly operated the
sexually oriented business during a period of time when the
permittee's permit was suspended;
(5) A permittee or an employee of a permittee has knowingly allowed
any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation,
masturbation or other explicit sexual conduct to occur in or on the
permitted premises.
C. When the Code Enforcement Officer revokes a permit, the revocation
shall continue for one year, and the permittee shall not be issued a
sexually oriented business permit for one year from the date revocation
became effective.
D. After denial of an application or denial of a renewal of an application or
suspension or revocation of a permit, the applicant or licensee or
permittee shall have the right to appeal said action and to seek prompt
judicial review of such action in a court of competent jurisdiction, as
provided by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Chapter
120, Zoning, and/or other applicable laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
§ 49-58 CONDUCT § 49-60
49:111
§ 49-60. Transfer of permit.
A permittee shall not transfer his or her permit to another person. A
permittee shall not operate a sexually oriented business under the authority
of a permit at any place other than the address designated in the
application.
§ 49-61. Location of sexually oriented businesses.
The location of sexually oriented businesses shall comply with the
provisions of Chapter 120, Zoning, Article III, Regulations Applicable in
All Districts, § 120-10, Use Regulations, Subsection S, Sexually Oriented
Businesses.
§ 49-62. Exhibition of sexually explicit films or videos.
A. A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented
business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises in a
viewing room of less than 150 square feet of floor space a film or
videocassette or other video or other image production or reproduction
which is distinguished or characterized by its emphasis on matters
depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas, shall comply with the following
requirements:
(1) All viewing rooms shall be open to an adjacent public area of the
premises.
(2) The application for a permit to operate a sexually oriented business
shall be accompanied by a floor plan and plot plan diagram of the
premises showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one or
more manager's stations, the location of all viewing rooms and
adjacent open public areas, partitions and doors and the location of
all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the
premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A manager's
station may not exceed 32 square feet of floor area. The diagram
shall also designate the place at which the permit will be
conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared
diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall
not be required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the
north or to some designated street or object and should be drawn
to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show
the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the
premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. The Code
Enforcement Officer may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal
applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously
submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has
not been altered since it was prepared.
(3) The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the
applicant.
§ 49-60 § 49-62
49:112
(4) No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station
may be made without the prior approval of the Code Enforcement
Officer or his designee.
(5) It is the duty of the owners and operators of the premises to ensure
that at least one employee is on duty and situated in each
manager's station at all times that any patron is present inside the
premises.
(6) The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner
that there is an unobstructed view from the public area adjacent to
the viewing room and from the manager's station to every area of
the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any
purpose, excluding rest rooms. Rest rooms may not contain video
reproduction or viewing equipment. If the premises has two or
more manager's stations designated, then the interior of the
premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an
unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron
is permitted access for any purpose, other than rest rooms, from
each of the manager's stations. The view required in this
subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager's
station and the public areas adjacent to viewing rooms.
(7) It shall be the duty of the owners and operators and it shall also be
the duty of any agents and employees present on the premises to
ensure that the view area specified in Subsection A(6) remains
unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or
other materials at all times and to ensure that no patron is
permitted access to any area of the premises which has been
designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the
application filed pursuant to § 49-53.
(8) No viewing rooms may be occupied by more than one person at any
time. No connections or openings to an adjoining viewing room
shall be permitted.
(9) The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of
sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are
permitted access at an illumination of not less than one footcandle
as measured at the floor level.
(10) It shall be the duty of the owners and operators and it shall also be
the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises to
ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at all
times that any patron is present in the premises.
B. A person having a duty under Subsections (1) through (10) of
Subsection A is guilty of a violation of the Chapter 120, Zoning, if he or
she knowingly fails to fulfill that duty.
§ 49-62 CONDUCT § 49-63
49:113
§ 49-63. Exemptions.
It is a defense to prosecution under §§ 49-54 and 49-61 that a person
appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated:
§ 49-64. Injunction.
A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented
business without a valid permit or in violation of this article is subject to an
action in equity or a suit for injunction as well as citations for violations of
Chapter 120, Zoning.
§ 49-65. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of and
liable for a summary offense and, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay
a fine not exceeding $600 and the costs of the action. In default of payment
of such fine and costs, such person may be sentenced and committed to
Dauphin County Prison for a period not exceeding 30 days.
A. By a proprietary school, licensed by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, or a college, junior college or university supported
entirely or partly by taxation;
B. By a private college or university which maintains and operates
educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college,
junior college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or
C. In a structure:
(1) Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no
other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for
viewing.
(2) Where, in order to participate in a class, a student must enroll at
least three days in advance of the class.
(3) Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any one
time.
§ 49-63 § 49-65
49:114
Chapter 51
CURFEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 35.
Conduct — See Ch. 49.
Loitering — See Ch. 73.
Noise — See Ch. 75.
Parks and recreational facilities — See Ch. 77.
§ 51-1. Title.
This Chapter 51 shall be known and may be cited as the "Curfew
Ordinance."
§ 51-2. Purpose; findings.
A. This is a Curfew Ordinance prescribing, in accordance with prevailing
community standards, regulations for the conduct of minors on streets
at night, for the protection of younger children in the Borough from
each other and from other persons on the streets during the nighttime
hours, for the enforcement of parental control and responsibility for
their children, for the protection of the public from nocturnal mischief
by minors and for the reduction of the incident of juvenile criminal
activity, all for the good of minors, for the furtherance of family
responsibility and for the public good, safety and welfare.
B. Findings.
(1) The Borough Council finds that a curfew is a very real local need,
necessary as a significant factor and tool to minimize juvenile
delinquency in light of the Borough of Steelton's local situation and
facts, including the following: The Borough is located in the
southwest portion of Dauphin County and is bounded by the
Susquehanna River and the adjacent municipalities of Lower
Swatara Township, Swatara Township and the Borough of
Highspire. While containing residential, commercial and industrial
areas, the Borough is essentially a residential community
containing distinct areas of concentrated residential development.
There is a general community sense of the need of cessation, at the
proper time, of outdoor activities of minors on the streets, this
sense being reflected in the curfew hours declared by this Chapter
51 which takes into consideration also the danger hours for
nocturnal crime and for accumulations of minors with potential
risks incident to immaturity.
(2) The Borough Council finds that the Borough of Steelton is not
overcrowded. The population density, as reflected through a
§ 49-65 CURFEW § 51-2
51:115
§ 51-3. Definitions; word usage.
compilation derived from the Borough of Steelton Comprehensive
Plan, is 5.33 persons per acre. The total area is 1,216.22 acres.
Of this, 180.23 acres are devoted to residential land use, 21.12
acres are devoted to commercial use, 705.82 acres are devoted
to industrial use and 309.05 acres are devoted to other use.
Population density is concentrated principally on the eastern side
of the Borough from the northern Borough line to the southern
Borough line. Recreational areas are provided in most of the
densely compact residential areas; however, these facilities are
generally closed for usage at times when the activities which this
Chapter 51 attempts to prevent occur by minors who are running
the streets.
(3) The Borough Council finds that there are 1,084 minors residing in
the Borough of Steelton. The Borough of Steelton has two
elementary schools serving 873 minors. There is also a juniorsenior
high school directly adjacent to the eastern Borough line
serving 580 minors from the Borough itself.
(4) The Borough Council further finds that the Borough of Steelton
population (1980 federal census and 1986 school census
compilation) is 6,484. There are approximately 2,250 households in
the Borough. The residential areas of the Borough are principally
stable family communities. Parental responsibility for the
whereabouts of children is the norm. As parental control increases,
the likelihood of juvenile delinquency decreases and there is a need
for the nocturnal curfew for the minors which will achieve, under
local conditions, the purposes hereinbefore stated.
A. For the purposes of the Curfew Chapter, the following terms, phrases,
words and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Steelton, Dauphin County, Pennsylvania,
with administrative offices at 123 North Front Street, Steelton,
Pennsylvania, 17113.
MINOR — Any person under the age of 18 or, in the equivalent phrasing
often herein employed, any person 17 or fewer years of age.
PARENT — Any person having legal custody of a minor:
REMAIN — To stay behind, to tarry and to stay unnecessarily upon the
streets, including the congregating of groups (or of interacting minors)
(1) As a natural or adoptive parent;
(2) As a legal guardian;
(3) As a person who stands in loco parentis; or
As a person to whom legal custody has been given by order of
court.
(4)
§ 51-2 § 51-3
51:116
§ 51-4. Curfew established.
It shall be unlawful for any person 17 or fewer years of age (under 18) to
be or remain in or upon the streets within the Borough of Steelton at night
during the period ending 6:00 a.m. and beginning:
totaling four or more persons in which any minor involved would not be
using the streets for ordinary or serious purposes such as mere passage
or going home. To implement that thought with additional precision
and precaution, numerous exceptions are expressly defined in § 51-5 so
that this is not a mere prohibitory or presence-type curfew ordinance.
More and more exceptions become available with increasing years
and advancing maturity as appropriate in the interest of reasonable
regulation which is intended by use of the meaningful phrase "be
or remain" found constitutional in Baker v. Borough of Steelton, 17
Dauph. 17 (1912), a decision properly classified in Thistlewood v, Trial
Magistrate for Ocean City, 204 A.2d 688, 691 (MD 1964) as relating to
a curfew ordinance of the remaining type.
STREET — A way or place, of whatsoever nature, open to the use of
the public as a matter of right for purposes of vehicular travel or, in
case of a sidewalk thereof, for pedestrian travel. The term "street"
includes the legal right-of-way, including but not limited to the cartway
of traffic lanes, the curb, the sidewalks, whether paved or unpaved, and
any grassplots or other grounds found within the legal right-of-way of
a street. The term "street" applies irrespective of what it is called or
formally named, whether "alley," "avenue," "court," "road" or otherwise.
TIME OF NIGHT — Referred to herein is based upon the prevailing
standard of time, whether Eastern standard time or Eastern daylight
saving time, generally observed at that hour by the public in the
Borough, prima facie the time then observed in the Borough
administrative offices and police station.
YEAR OF AGE — Continues from one birthday, such as the 17th, to
(but not including the day of) the next, such as the 18th birthday,
making it clear that 17 or fewer years of age is herein treated as
equivalent to the phrase "under 18 years of age," the latter phrase in
practice, unfortunately, having confused a number of persons into the
mistaken thought that eighteen-year-olds might be involved. Similarly,
for example, 15 or fewer years of age means "under 16 years of age."
B. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense
include the future, words in the plural number include the singular and
words in the singular number include the plural. The word "shall" is
always mandatory and not merely directory.
A. At 10:00 p.m. for minors up to and including age 15.
B. At 11:00 p.m. for minors 16 or more years of age.
§ 51-3 CURFEW § 51-5
51:117
§ 51-5. Exceptions.
In the following exceptional cases, a minor on a Borough street during the
nocturnal hours for which § 51-4 is intended to provide the maximum limits
of regulation (and a clear general guide for minors, their parents and their
fellow citizens) shall not, however, be considered in violation of the Curfew
Ordinance:
A. When accompanied by a parent of such minor.
B. When accompanied by an adult authorized by a parent of such minor to
take said parent's place in accompanying said minor for a designated
period of time and purpose within a specified area.
C. When exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United
States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of
speech and the right of assembly. Such minor shall evidence the bona
fides of such exercise by first delivering to communications center
personnel at the Borough Municipal Building at 123 North Front Street,
where and by whom high-priority messages to the Chief of Police are
regularly received, a written communication, signed by such minor and
countersigned, if practicable, by a parent of such minor with their home
address and telephone number, addressed to the Chief of Police of the
Borough, specifying when, where and in what manner said minor will
be on the streets at night (during hours when the Curfew Ordinance is
otherwise applicable to said minor) in the exercise of a First
Amendment right specified in such communication.
D. In case of reasonable necessity but only after such minor's parent has
communicated to the Borough police station personnel the facts
establishing such reasonable necessity relating to specified streets at a
designated time for a described purpose, including points of origin and
destination. A copy of such communication or of the police record
thereof duly certified by the Chief of Police to be correct, with an
appropriate notation of the time it was received and of the names and
address of such parent and minor, shall be admissible evidence.
E. When the minor is on the sidewalk of the place where such minor
resides or on the sidewalk of either next-door neighbor not
communicating an objection to the police officer.
F. When returning home by a direct route from (and within 30 minutes of
the termination of) a school activity or an activity of a religious or other
voluntary association of which prior notice, indicating the place and
probable time of termination, has been given, in writing, to and duly
filed for immediate reference by the Chief of Police or the officer
assigned by him on duty at the police station, thus encouraging (here as
in other exceptional situations) conduct on the part of minors involved
in such activities and striking a fair balance for any somewhat
conflicting interests.
§ 51-5 § 51-5
51:118
G. When authorized by special permit from the Chief of Police carried on
the person of the minor thus authorized, as follows: When necessary
nighttime activities of a minor may be inadequately provided for by
other provisions of this Chapter 51, then recourse may be had to the
Chief of Police of the Borough, either for a regulation as provided in
Subsection H or for a special permit, as the circumstances warrant.
Upon the Chief of Police's finding of necessity for the use of the streets
to the extent warranted by a written application (as judicially approved
in People v. Walton, 161 P.2d 498, 502-503, Cal App. 1945), signed by a
minor and by a parent of such minor, if feasible, stating: the name, age
and address of such minor; the name, address and telephone number of
a parent thereof; the height, weight, sex, color of eyes and hair and
other physical characteristics of such minor; the necessity which
requires such minor to remain upon the streets during the curfew hours
otherwise applicable; and the street or route and the beginning and
ending of the period of time involved by date and hour, the Chief of
Police may grant a permit, in writing, for the use by such minor of such
streets at such hours as, in the Chief's opinion, may reasonably be
necessary. In an emergency, this may be handled by telephone or other
effective communication, with a corresponding record being made
contemporaneously, either to the Chief of Police or, if unavailable, to the
police officer authorized by the Chief of Police to act on his behalf in an
emergency, at the police station.
H. When authorized by regulation issued by the Chief of Police in other
similar cases of reasonable necessity, similarly handled but adapted to
necessary nighttime activities of more minors than can readily be dealt
with on an individual special permit basis. Normally, such regulation by
the Chief of Police permitting use of the streets should be issued
sufficiently in advance to permit appropriate publicity through news
media and through other agencies, such as the schools, and shall define
the activity, the scope of the use of the streets permitted, the period of
time involved, not to extend more than 30 minutes beyond the time for
termination of such activity, and the reason for finding that such
regulation is reasonably necessary to implement the purposes of this
Curfew Chapter.
I. When the minor carries a certified card of employment, renewable each
calendar month when the current facts so warrant, dated or reissued
not more than 45 days previously, signed by the Chief of Police and
briefly identifying the minor, the addresses of his home and of his place
of employment and his hours of employment.
J. When the minor is, with parental consent, in a motor vehicle. This
contemplates normal travel. From excess of caution, this clearly
exempts bona fide interstate movement through the Borough of
Steelton. This also exempts interstate travel beginning or ending in the
Borough of Steelton.
K. When the minor is 17 years of age, if and when the Chief of Police shall
have determined, by formal rule first reported to and approved by the
§ 51-5 CURFEW § 51-5
51:119
§ 51-6. Parental responsibility.
It shall be unlawful for a parent having legal custody of a minor knowingly
to permit or by inefficient control to allow such minor to be or remain upon
any Borough street under circumstances not constituting an exception to or
otherwise beyond the scope of the Curfew Ordinance. The term "knowingly"
includes knowledge which a parent should reasonably be expected to have
concerning the whereabouts of a minor in that parent's legal custody.
It is intended to continue to keep neglectful or careless parents up to
a reasonable community standard of parental responsibility through an
objective test. It shall, afortiori, be no defense that a parent was completely
indifferent to the activities or conduct or whereabouts of such minor.
§ 51-7. Police procedures.
A policeman of the Borough, upon finding or having attention called to
any minor on the streets in prima facie violation of the Curfew Ordinance,
normally shall take the minor to the Borough police station, where a parent
shall immediately be notified to come for such minor, whereupon they
shall be interrogated. This is intended to permit ascertainment, under
constitutional safeguards, of relevant facts and to centralize responsibility
in the officer there and then on duty for accurate, effective, fair, impartial
and uniform enforcement and recording, thus making available experienced
supervisory personnel, the best of facilities and access to information and
records. In the absence of convincing evidence, such as a birth certificate,
a policeman on the street shall in the first instance use his best judgment in
determining age.
Borough Council, spread upon its minutes and so reported in the press,
finding the facts as to the extent (minimal) of juvenile delinquency in
such age group permitting such rule, currently, in the best interests
of said minor and of the Borough, finding that the Curfew Ordinance
should be relaxed, then the Chief of Police, by such formal rule,
covering a period of time designated therein or until rescission thereof
not exceeding one year from the date thereof, may take appropriate
action excepting designated minors, minors in a defined group or area
or all minors (as the current facts may warrant) 17 years of age at the
date or attaining 17 years of age during the period that such formal rule
is and remains in effect.
L. Each of the foregoing exceptions and their several limitations, such as
provisions for notification, are severable as hereinafter provided but
here reemphasized; and additional, also severable, exceptions,
broadening with the progress toward maturity of minors enrolled
respectively in elementary, junior high and high schools, will be
considered by the Borough Council as warranted by future experience
illuminated by the views of student government associations, school
personnel, citizens, associations, ward, precinct and neighborhood
spokesmen, parents, officers and persons in authority concerned
positively with minors as well as with juvenile delinquency.
§ 51-5 § 51-7
51:120
§ 51-8. Violations and penalties.
Prevailing community standards and the real internalization thereof or
interpersonal sanctions therefor that in practice count for much as to when
minors should be off the streets, reflected in this Curfew Ordinance, are
hereby undergirded with the following legal sanctions:
A. Police procedures shall constantly be refined in the light of experience
and may provide, inter alia, that the policeman may deliver to a parent
thereof a minor under appropriate circumstances, for example, a minor
of tender age near home whose identity and address may readily be
ascertained or are known.
B. In any event, such policeman shall, within 24 hours, file a written report
with the Chief of Police or shall participate to the extent of the
information for which he is responsible in the preparation by himself
and the officer involved in such case and in the filing of such report
within 24 hours.
C. When a parent, immediately called, has come to take charge of a minor
and the appropriate information has been recorded, the minor shall be
released to the custody of such parent. If the parent cannot be located
or fails to take charge of the minor, then the minor shall be released to
the juvenile authorities, except to the extent that, in accordance with
police regulations, approved in advance by juvenile authorities, the
minor may temporarily be entrusted to a relative, neighbor or other
person who will, on behalf of a parent, assume the responsibility of
caring for the minor pending the availability or arrival of a parent.
D. In the case of a first violation by a minor, if the parent comes for the
child, said parent shall be given a written notice of said violation with a
warning that any subsequent violation will result in full enforcement of
the Curfew Ordinance, including enforcement of parental responsibility
and of applicable penalties, and said parent shall, upon receipt of said
notice, sign a written receipt therefor; if the parent does not come for
the child, the Chief of Police shall, by certified mail, send the aforesaid
written notice to the parent.
A. If, after the warning notice pursuant to § 51-7 of a first violation by a
minor, a parent violates § 51-6 (in connection with a second violation by
said minor), this shall be treated as a first offense by the parent. For
such first parental offense, a parent shall be fined $25 and, for each
subsequent offense by a parent, the fine shall be increased by an
additional $25, e.g., $50 for the second, $75 for the third offense. The
District Justice, upon finding a parent guilty, shall sentence the parent
to pay such fine and the costs of prosecution and, upon refusal to pay
such fine and costs, to be imprisoned in the jail of Dauphin County for a
period not exceeding 30 days. Every day that a violation of this chapter
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 51-7 CURFEW § 51-8
51:121
§ 51-9. Construal of provisions.
Severability is intended throughout and within the provisions of the Curfew
Ordinance. If any provision, including, inter alia, any exception, part, phrase
or term or the application thereof to any person or circumstances is held
invalid, the application to other persons or circumstances shall not be
affected thereby and the validity of the Curfew Ordinance in any and
all other respects shall not be affected thereby. From excess of caution,
the Chief of Police is authorized to give advisory opinions, in writing or
immediately reduced to writing, which shall be binding and shall be
adhered to by the police, until the chapter is amended in such respect,
interpreting terms, phrases, parts or any provisions. Normally, such
advisory opinions shall be in response to good faith, signed letters
addressed to him at the Borough administration building, questioning as
ambiguous, as having a potentially chilling effect on constitutional rights
specifically invoked or as otherwise invalid, in all three categories with
respect to proposed conduct definitely described. This administrative
remedy must be exhausted prior to presenting to any court a question in
any of said three categories. The Borough Council does not intend a result
that is absurd, impossible of execution or unreasonable. It is intended that
the Curfew Ordinance be held inapplicable in such cases, if any, where
its application would be unconstitutional. A constitutional construction is
intended and shall be given. The Borough Council does not intend to violate
the constitution of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or the Constitution
of the United States of America.
§ 51-10. Continuing evaluation.
The Borough Council will continue its evaluation and updating of the
Curfew Ordinance.
B. Any minor who shall violate any of the provisions of the Curfew
Ordinance more than three times shall be reported by the Chief of
Police to a society or organization whose purpose it is to take charge of
incorrigibles and delinquents, and proceedings shall then be taken,
under the Juvenile Act, 42 Pa.C.S.A. § 6301 et seq., before the Juvenile
Court for the treatment, supervision and rehabilitation of such minor.
C. A like procedure, before the juvenile authorities, shall be followed in
any case where the imposing of a fine or fines upon a parent shall not be
effective or where for any other reason the provisions of the Curfew
Ordinance cannot be made effective by the imposing of penalties under
this § 51-8.
A. Accordingly, there shall be compiled and informally reported to the
Borough Council through effective channels (such as the normal
monthly distribution by the Borough Secretary to each Councilman, the
Chief of Police and the Borough Solicitor of noteworthy material) all
exceptional cases hereunder of reasonable necessity, the notices of
school and other activities, the Chief of Police's special permits and the
§ 51-8 § 51-10
51:122
Chapter 54
ELECTRICAL STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Office of Code Enforcement — See Ch. 2.
Building construction — See Ch. 44.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 58.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 82.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 108.
§ 54-1. Title.
This chapter, together with the National Electrical Code, 1981 Edition,
adopted herein, shall be known and may be cited as the "Electrical Code of
the Borough of Steelton."
§ 54-2. Adoption of standards; applicability.
Chief's regulations hereinbefore authorized and the Chief's advisory
opinions, for consideration by the appropriate committee and by the
Borough Council in further updating and continuing evaluation of the
Curfew Chapter.
B. For the same reasons, as well as for the implementation beyond these
legal aspects of the basic purposes hereof, the Chief of Police and
relevant committees of the Borough Council through their respective
Chairmen in coordinated efforts shall work with existing, any may
organize, voluntary groups and shall stimulate volunteer leadership in
programs of research and of action dealing constructively on
neighborhood and local bases with juvenile delinquency and the
prevention, control or containment thereof in all its ramifications and
with practicable steps toward the good life and a better life for minors
17 or fewer years of age and with the working of the Curfew Ordinance,
community-wise and in individual cases, as one much needed legal tool
toward that end as well as for continuing present protection of minors
and of other persons and of property and other persons and of property
and other interest important to the welfare of the people of the Borough
of Steelton.
A. National Electrical Code. There is hereby adopted in its entirety, by the
Borough of Steelton, copies of which are on file in the office of the
Borough, that certain electrical code known as the "National Electrical
Code, 1981 Edition (NFPA 70-1981)" as amended through the effective
date of adoption of this chapter and as published by the National Fire
Protection Association save and except such portions as are hereinafter
deleted, modified or amended.
§ 51-10 ELECTRICAL STANDARDS § 54-2
54:123
§ 54-3. Administration and enforcement.
B. Application. The provisions set forth in this chapter and in the National
Electrical Code, 1981 Edition, adopted herein, shall take effect 31 days
from the date of enactment of this chapter or any amendment thereto
and shall apply throughout the entire Borough.
A. Office of Code Enforcement. All the provisions of the Code Enforcement
Ordinance of the Borough are hereby adopted with this chapter.22 The
administration and enforcement of this chapter and of the National
Electrical Code herein adopted shall be carried out by the Office of
Code Enforcement of the Borough in accordance with the procedures
established by the Code Enforcement Ordinance of the Borough and by
the National Electrical Code adopted herein. Said Code Enforcement
Ordinance provides for certain powers and duties of a Code
Enforcement Officer, for the creation of a Code Hearing Board and for
procedures relative to applications, fees, permits, inspections, appeals,
penalties and other matters.
B. Inspections. A service, rough wire and final electrical inspection are
required where applicable by the Code Enforcement Officer and/or by
an approved electrical inspection agency; in the event the inspection is
performed by an approved electrical inspection agency a copy of the
approval shall be submitted to the Code Enforcement Officer not later
than 15 days after completion of the installation of the electrical work.
The payment of all electrical inspection fees and charges by the Code
Enforcement Officer or by an approved electrical inspection agency
shall be borne by the applicant. [Amended 1-20-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-1, approved 1-20-2004]
(1) Whenever the inspection by an approved electrical inspection
agency shows that the provisions of the Borough Electrical Code
have not been complied with, the approved electrical inspection
agency shall inform the Code Enforcement Officer of the violations.
In the event of such information being supplied to the Code
Enforcement Officer concerning violations or in the event the Code
Enforcement Officer performing the inspection himself or herself
determines that there are violations, the Code Enforcement Officer
shall then notify the applicant of the violations and how to abate the
violations to achieve compliance with the Borough's Electrical
Code. Failure to abate the violations after a reasonable length of
time shall be sufficient reason for notification of the electric utility
company to disconnect or refuse to connect or supply electrical
power to the structure.
(2) Concealing work. Work in connection with an electrical wiring
system shall not be covered or concealed until it has been
inspected, approved and permission to do so has been granted by
the Code Enforcement Officer. When such work has been covered
22.Editor's Note: See Ch. 2, Code Enforcement.
§ 54-2 § 54-3
54:124
§ 54-4. Flood control regulations.
§ 54-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provisions of this
chapter and/or the Borough's Electrical Code shall, upon conviction in a
summary proceeding before any District Justice, be sentenced for each such
violation to pay a fine of not less than $10 plus costs and not more than $300
plus costs and, in default thereof, to undergo imprisonment in the county jail
for a period not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation continues after
due notice has been served in accordance with the terms and provisions
hereof shall be deemed a separate offense.
§ 54-6. Effect; severability; repealer.
or concealed before inspection and approval, it shall be exposed for
inspection.
(3) Inspection of existing electrical wiring and apparatus. In order to
provide safety against existing hazards or defective electrical
wiring and apparatus, the Code Enforcement Officer and/or his
authorized representative, including an approved electrical
inspection agency, shall, when requested by proper authority or
when public interest so requires, cause inspections to be made of
any structure in the Borough to ensure that the existing electrical
wiring and apparatus are not defective or unsafe. The Code
Enforcement Officer shall notify the owner of the structure of any
unsafe or defective conditions that are found and shall require the
owner to abate or correct the unsafe or defective condition in
accordance with the Borough's Electrical Code within a reasonable
length of time.
A. General. The following sections shall apply to all construction of an
electrical system and to existing electrical systems when 50% or more
of the electrical system is modified, altered, reconstructed or replaced,
occurring in any of the floodplain districts designated in the Steelton
Borough Zoning Ordinance, as amended.23
B. All electric water heaters, electric furnaces, electric air-conditioning
and ventilating systems and other critical electrical installations shall
be permitted only at elevations of 1 1/2 feet or more above the
regulatory flood elevation.
C. No electrical distribution panels shall be allowed at an elevation less
than three feet above the level of the one-hundred-year flood elevation.
D. Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be
dropped from above.
23.Editor's Note: See Ch. 120, Zoning, Art. VI, Floodplain Districts.
§ 54-3 ELECTRICAL STANDARDS § 54-6
54:125
Chapter 58
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Office of Code Enforcement — See Ch. 2.
Fire Department — See Ch. 11.
Open burning — See Ch. 48.
Housing standards — See Ch. 80.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 82.
§ 58-1. Title.
This chapter, together with the Building Officials and Code Administrators
(BOCA) Basic Fire Prevention Code, 1981 Edition, adopted herein, shall be
known and may be cited as the "Fire Prevention Code of the Borough of
Steelton."
§ 58-2. Adoption of standards; applicability.
A. Savings clause. Nothing in this chapter or in the National Electrical
Code hereby adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding
now pending in any court or any rights acquired or liability incurred or
any cause or causes of action accrued or existing under any act or
ordinance repealed hereby. No right or remedy of any character shall
be lost, impaired or affected by this chapter.
B. Validity. The invalidity of any section or provision of this chapter or the
National Electrical Code hereby adopted shall not invalidate other
sections or provisions thereof.
C. Repealer. Section 44-4D of the Building Code of the Borough of Steelton
and any ordinance or code provisions conflicting with the provisions
hereof are hereby repealed insofar as they are inconsistent with the
Borough's Electrical Code Ordinance.
A. Basic Fire Prevention Code. There is hereby adopted in its entirety, by
the Borough of Steelton, copies of which are on file in the office of the
Borough, that certain fire code known as the "BOCA Basic Fire
Prevention Code, 1981 Edition," as amended through the effective date
of adoption of this chapter, and as published by the Building Officials
and Code Administrators International, Inc., save and except portions
as are hereinafter deleted, modified, or amended.
B. Application. The provision set forth in this chapter and in the BOCA
Basic Fire Prevention Code, adopted herein, shall take effect 31 days
from the date of enactment of this chapter or any amendment thereto
and shall apply throughout the entire Borough.
§ 54-6 § 58-3
58:126
§ 58-3. Administration and enforcement by Office of Code
Enforcement.
All the provisions of the Code Enforcement Ordinance of the Borough are
hereby adopted with this chapter.24 The administration and enforcement of
this chapter, and of the BOCA Basic Fire Prevention Code herein adopted,
shall be carried out by the Chief of the Fire Department with the assistance
of the Code Enforcement Officer of the Borough in accordance with the
procedures established by the Code Enforcement Ordinance of the Borough
and by the BOCA Basic Fire Prevention Code adopted herein. Said Code
Enforcement Ordinance provides for certain powers and duties of a Code
Enforcement Officer, for the creation of a Code Hearing Board and for
procedures relative to applications, fees, permits, inspections, appeals,
penalties and other matters.
§ 58-4. Modifications and amendments.
A. Deletions. The following sections and subsections of the BOCA Basic
Fire Prevention Code, herein adopted, are hereby deleted in their
entirety:
(1) Section F-105.5.1, Penalty for violations.
(2) Section F-900.2, Permit required.
(3) Section F-1300.2, Permit required.
(4) Section F-1500.1, Permits and plans.
(5) Section F-1600.2, Permit required.
(6) Section F-1700.2, Permit required.
B. Amendments. The following sections and subsections of the BOCA
Basic Fire Prevention Code are hereby amended to read as follows:
(1) Section F-100.1, Title, is amended to read as follows:
F-100.1 Title: These regulations shall be known as the "Fire
Prevention Code of the Borough of Steelton," hereinafter referred
to as the Fire Prevention Code or "this code."
(2) Section F-102.1, Enforcement officer, is amended to read as
follows:
F-102.1 Enforcement officer: It shall be the duty and
responsibility of the Chiefs of the Fire Department under the
direction of the Code Enforcement Officer to enforce the
provisions of this code herein provided. The designated
enforcement officer of this code is herein referred to as the Fire
Official.
24.Editor's Note: See Ch. 2, Code Enforcement.
§ 58-3 FIRE PREVENTION § 58-4
58:127
§ 58-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provisions of this
chapter and/or the Borough's Fire Prevention Code shall, upon conviction
in a summary proceeding before any District Justice, be sentenced for each
such violation to pay a fine of not less than $10 plus costs and not more
than $300 plus costs and, in default thereof, to undergo imprisonment in
the county jail for a period not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation
continues after due notice has been served in accordance with the terms
and provisions hereof, shall be deemed a separate offense.
§ 58-6. Effect; severability; repealer.
(3) Section F-103.7, Payment of fees, is amended to read as follows:
F-103.7 Payment of fees: A permit shall not be issued until the
permit fee prescribed in the Code Enforcement Ordinance has
been paid.
(4) Section F-104.0, Board of Appeals, is amended to read as follows:
F-104.0 Board of Appeals: Any and all appeals from the
determinations of the Fire Official shall be appealed pursuant
to provisions of § 2-15C(1) of the Code Enforcement Ordinance,
relating to appeals and hearings by the Code Hearing Board.25
(5) Section F-105.4, Notice of violation, is amended to read as follows:
F-105.4 Notice of violation: Whenever the Fire Official observes
an apparent or actual violation of a provision of this code or other
code or ordinance in the Borough, the Fire Official shall prepare a
written notice of violation describing the condition deemed unsafe
and specifying time limits for the required repairs or
improvements to be made to render the building, structure or
premises safe and secure. The notice of violations shall be served
personally to the responsible owner, occupant, operator or other
person in charge or served by certified mail with a return receipt
requested or where such responsible person in charge cannot be
found, service may be made by posting a notice in or about the
structure or premises or by publishing such notice in a newspaper
of general circulation for a period of three consecutive days or
served by any other method authorized under the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
A. Savings clause. Nothing in this chapter or in the BOCA Basic Fire
Prevention Code, hereby adopted, shall be construed to affect any suit
or proceeding now pending in any court or any rights acquired or
liability incurred or any cause or causes of action accrued or existing
25.Editor's Note: See Ch. 2, Code Enforcement.
§ 58-4 § 58-6
58:128
Chapter 60
(RESERVED)
Chapter 62
FOOD AND BEVERAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
under any act or ordinance repealed hereby. No right or remedy of any
character shall be lost, impaired or affected by this chapter.
B. Validity. The invalidity of any section or provision of this chapter or the
BOCA Basic Fire Prevention Code herein adopted shall not invalidate
other sections or provisions thereof.
C. Repealer. The Borough of Steelton's Fire Prevention Code, Ordinance
No. 71-7 and any ordinance or code provisions conflicting with the
provisions hereof are hereby repealed insofar as they are inconsistent
with the Borough's Fire Prevention Code Ordinance.
§ 58-6 (RESERVED) § 58-6
60:129

ARTICLE I
Regulations for Employees
[Adopted 11-8-1954, approved 11-9-1954]
§ 62-1. Definitions and word usage.
§ 62-2. Employment of persons with infectious or contagious
diseases prohibited.
No proprietor shall hereafter work or keep in his employ any employee
who is suffering from trachoma, active tuberculosis of the lungs, open skin
tuberculosis, infectious or contagious syphilis, gonorrhea, open external
cancer or barber's itch, or other infectious or contagious disease; and any
such employee who at the time of the passage of this article, is suffering
from any of the above named diseases shall at once be excluded from such
employment in such public eating or drinking place or such public food
merchandising establishment.
§ 62-3. Health certificate required.
Every employee of any public eating or drinking place or of any public food
merchandising establishment shall obtain a certificate from a registered
doctor of medicine, certifying that such employee is free from the diseases
A. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
EMPLOYEE — Any person employed or permitted to work in the
proprietor's business who, in any manner whatsoever, handles or comes
in contact with any food, food products or drink served to, sold or
provided for the public, and the proprietor or any member of the
proprietor's family, who handles said food, food products or drink.
PROPRIETOR — Any person, partnership, association or corporation
conducting or operating within the Borough of Steelton a public eating
or drinking place or a public food merchandising establishment.
PUBLIC EATING OR DRINKING PLACE — Any place within the
Borough of Steelton where food or drink is served to or provided for
the public, with or without charge, including, among others, hotels,
restaurants, cafes, cafeterias, boardinghouses, ice cream parlors, soft
drink fountains and bars or taverns.
PUBLIC FOOD MERCHANDISING ESTABLISHMENT — Any
establishment within the Borough of Steelton where food and food
products are sold to the public for consumption off the premises of
the seller, including, among others, grocery, delicatessen, candy, meat,
poultry, seafood and bakery shops, stores, markets or stands.
B. Wherever appropriate, words used in this article in the singular may
include the plural or the plural may be read as the singular; and the
masculine may include the feminine.
§ 62-1 FOOD AND BEVERAGE ESTABLISHMENTS § 62-3
62:131
mentioned in § 62-2; and no employee shall be employed or permitted to
work in such public eating or drinking place or public food merchandising
establishment in the Borough of Steelton without having first obtained such
certificate. Said certificates or certificate shall be in the form prescribed by
the Board of Health of the Borough of Steelton. All such certificates shall
be filed with the said Board of Health within five days from the date of
said medical examination, and shall be filed on January 1 and July 1 of each
year. Further, all such certificates shall be valid for a period of six months,
except that when employment begins at a time between January 1 and July
1, the certificate shall be filed within five days from the date of said medical
examination, and shall be valid from the date of issue until the first day of
January or the first day of July next succeeding, whichever shall be first.
Any certificate may be revoked at any time prior thereto when such action
is deemed advisable by the said Board of Health.
§ 62-4. Chest X ray required.
In addition to the certificate of health provided for in § 62-3, every employee
of any public eating or drinking place or any public food merchandising
establishment shall cause to have made a chest X-ray examination, and no
employee shall be employed or permitted to work in such public eating or
drinking place or public food merchandising establishment in the Borough
of Steelton without having first obtained such X ray. Proof that such X-ray
examination was negative shall be in the form prescribed by the Board of
Health. Such forms shall be filed with the Board of Health as soon after Xray
examination as is practical. Further, all such X-ray examinations shall
be valid for a period of one year. Any employee may be required to have
made additional chest X-ray examinations whenever such action is deemed
advisable by the Board of Health.
§ 62-5. Precautions against typhoid.
No proprietor shall work or permit any employee to work in any public
eating or drinking place or in any food merchandising establishment
conducted or operated by him, if such employee or employer shall have
had typhoid fever, for a period of 60 days after the attending physician
has certified that he has completely recovered, or if such employee or
employer has been exposed to typhoid fever, for a period of 30 days after
such exposure, or if such employee or employer is a carrier of typhoid fever,
after a notice that such employee is such carrier has been served, in writing,
upon him by a physician or the public health authorities.
§ 62-6. Wearing of health badge required.
Every employee of any public eating or drinking place or of any public food
merchandising establishment shall wear or display at a conspicuous place
on his clothing, at all times while engaged in the duties of his employment,
a badge which shall be issued by the aforesaid Board of Health, upon the
payment of a fee of $0.25 to cover the cost thereof, evidencing that such
employee is a holder of a health certificate, as required by § 62-3, and that
§ 62-3 § 62-6
62:132
such employee had caused to be made a chest X-ray examination within the
preceding year which was negative, as required by § 62-4.
§ 62-7. Proprietor responsible.
No proprietor shall work or permit any employee to work in any public
eating or drinking place or in any public food merchandising establishment
conducted or operated by him without wearing or displaying the badge
required by § 62-6.
§ 62-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-20-1976 by Ord. No.
76-4, approved 5-20-1976]
Any person, partnership, association or corporation or any officer, agent,
servant or employee thereof violating any of the provisions of this article
shall, upon conviction thereof before any District Justice, be sentenced to
pay a fine of not less than $10 nor more than $300, and costs of prosecution,
to be collected as other fines and costs are by law collectible, and in default
in payment of said fine and costs, shall undergo imprisonment in the local
or Dauphin County jail for a period not exceeding 30 days.
§ 62-6 FOOD AND BEVERAGE ESTABLISHMENTS § 62-8
62:133

ARTICLE II
Inspection Fees
[Adopted 3-15-1971 by Ord. No. 71-5, approved 3-15-1971]
§ 62-9. Annual fee.
The proprietor of each public eating or drinking place within the Borough of
Steelton shall pay to the Borough for the inspection of the premises by the
Health Officer of said Borough, to be licensed under the provisions of the
Act of May 23, 1945, P.L. 926, as amended,26 the sum of $5 annually.
26.Editor's Note: 35 P.S. § 655.1 et seq.
§ 62-9 FOOD AND BEVERAGE ESTABLISHMENTS § 62-9
62:135
Chapter 66
(RESERVED)
Chapter 67
FAIR HOUSING PRACTICES
§ 67-1. Public policy.
The opportunity for an individual to obtain facilities of housing without
discrimination because of race, color, religious creed, ancestry, use of guide
dogs because of blindness of the user, age, sex or national origin is hereby
recognized as and declared to be the public policy of the Borough of
Steelton, which shall be enforceable as set forth in this chapter.
§ 67-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated, unless a different meaning appears from the context:
COMMERCIAL HOUSING — Housing accommodations held or offered for
sale or rent by a real estate broker, salesman or agent or by any other
person pursuant to authorization of the owner; by the owner himself; or by
legal representatives, but shall not include any personal residence offered
for rent by the owner or by his broker, salesman, agent or employee.
HOUSING ACCOMMODATIONS — Any building or structure or portion
thereof which is used or occupied or is intended, arranged or designed to
be used or occupied as the home residence or sleeping place of one or more
individuals, groups or families, whether or not living independently of each
other; and any vacant land offered for sale or lease for commercial housing.
PERSON — One or more individuals, partnerships, associations,
organizations, corporations, legal representatives, trustees in bankruptcy
or receivers. The term also includes, but is not limited to, any owner, lessor,
assignor, builder, manager, broker, salesman, agent, employee and lending
institution.
PERSONAL RESIDENCE (RENT) — A building or structure containing living
quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than two
individuals, two groups or two families living independently of each other
and used by the owner thereof as a bona fide residence for himself and any
members of his family forming his household, when referring to housing
accommodations held or offered for rent.
PERSONAL RESIDENCE (SALE) — A building or structure containing living
quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than two
individuals, two groups or two families living independently of each other
and used by the owner thereof as a bona fide residence for himself and any
members of his family forming his household, when referring to housing
accommodations held or offered for sale.
§ 62-9 § 67-3
66:136
§ 67-3. Prohibited acts.
No person shall:
A. Refuse to sell, lease, finance or otherwise deny or withhold commercial
housing from any person because of the race, color, religious creed,
ancestry, sex or national origin of any prospective owner, occupant or
user of such commercial housing or refuse to lease commercial housing
to any person due to use of a guide dog because of the blindness of the
user.
B. Refuse to lend money, whether or not secured by mortgage or
otherwise, for the acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, repair or
maintenance of commercial housing or otherwise withhold financing of
commercial housing from any person because of the race, color,
religious creed, ancestry, sex or national origin of any present or
prospective owner, occupant or user of such commercial housing.
C. Discriminate against any person in the terms or conditions of selling or
leasing any commercial housing or in furnishing facilities, services or
privileges in connection with the ownership, occupancy or use of any
commercial housing because of the race, color, religious creed,
ancestry, sex or national origin of any present or prospective owner,
occupant or user of such commercial housing; or discriminate against
any person in the terms of leasing any commercial housing or in
furnishing facilities, services or privileges in connection with the
occupancy or use of any commercial housing due to use of a guide dog
because of the blindness of the user.
D. Discriminate against any person in the terms or conditions of any loan
of money, whether or not secured by mortgage or otherwise, for the
acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, repair or maintenance of
commercial housing because of the race, color, religious creed,
ancestry, sex or national origin of any present or prospective owner,
occupant or user of such commercial housing.
E. Print, publish or circulate any statement or advertisement relating to
the sale, lease or acquisition of any commercial housing or the loan of
money, whether or not secured by mortgage or otherwise, for the
acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, repair or maintenance of
commercial housing which indicates any preference, limitation,
specification or discrimination based upon race, color, religious creed,
ancestry, sex or national origin; or print, publish or circulate any
statement or advertisement relating to the lease of any commercial
dwelling which indicates any preference, limitation, specification or
discrimination based upon use of a guide dog because of the blindness
of the user.
F. Make any inquiry, elicit any information, make or keep any record or
use any form of application containing questions or entries concerning
race, color, religious creed, ancestry, sex or national origin in
connection with the sale or lease of any commercial housing or loan of
§ 67-3 FAIR HOUSING PRACTICES § 67-3
67:137
§ 67-4. Violations and penalties; other remedies.
§ 67-5. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph or part of this chapter or the application
thereof to any person or circumstance shall, for any reason, be adjudged
by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not
affect, impair or invalidate the remainder of this chapter nor the application
of such clause, sentence, paragraph or part to other persons or
circumstances, but shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence,
paragraph or part thereof and to the persons or circumstances directly
involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been
rendered. It is hereby declared to be the intent that this chapter would have
been adopted had such provisions not been included or such persons or
circumstances been expressly excluded from their coverage.
Chapter 69
INSPECTION LICENSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code enforcement — See Ch. 2.
Building construction — See Ch. 40.
Conduct — See Ch. 49.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 54.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 58.
Plumbing — See Ch. 80.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 82.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 108.
Storage of vehicles on private property — See
Ch. 111.
Zoning — See Ch. 120.
any money, whether or not secured by mortgage or otherwise, for
the acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, repair or maintenance of
commercial housing; to make any inquiry, elicit any information, make
or keep any record or use any formal application containing questions
or entries concerning the use of a guide dog because of the blindness
of the user in connection with the lease of any commercial housing.
A. Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $300
and costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of such fine and
costs, to imprisonment for not more than 30 days.
B. In addition to the penalties set forth in Subsection A above, either the
Borough of Steelton or any person claiming to be aggrieved by an
alleged occurrence of an act prohibited by this chapter may apply for an
order in a court of competent jurisdiction to compel compliance with or
to restrain any violation of any provision of this chapter or to secure a
temporary injunction or restraining order to prevent the rental or sale
of the housing accommodations in violation of this chapter.
§ 67-3 § 67-5
69:138
§ 69-1. Purpose.
The Borough of Steelton has determined through its records and other
sources of information that owners and occupants of residential rental,
commercial, industrial and institutional properties are failing to maintain
such properties in violation of the Borough's Housing, Building, Safety,
Dwelling, Electrical, Property Maintenance, and Fire Prevention Codes and
Ordinances. The purpose of this chapter is to implement the policy of the
Borough of Steelton to protect and promote the public health, safety, and
welfare of its citizens, by requiring annual inspections by the Borough
Code Enforcement Office of residential rental, commercial, industrial and
institutional properties, the issuance of licenses for said properties and
requiring said properties to meet the applicable codes and ordinances.
§ 69-2. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the
purposes of this chapter, have the meanings indicated as follows:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Steelton, Dauphin County, Pennsylvania.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The Code Enforcement Officer of the
Borough of Steelton, who is charged with the administration and
enforcement of this chapter.
COMMERCIAL — Those properties used primarily for commercial or
industrial purposes.
DISRUPTIVE CONDUCT — Any act by an occupant of a residential rental
unit, a commercial property or an institutional property involving public
drunkenness, consumption of an alcoholic beverage in public (unless on
premises licensed for same), public urination or defecation, unlawful
deposit of trash or litter on public or private property, damage to or
destruction of public or private property, the obstruction of public roads,
streets, highways or sidewalks, interference with emergency or police
services, unreasonable noise as defined by Chapter 75 hereof, indecent
exposure or any other act defined as disorderly conduct in the Pennsylvania
Crimes Code or any act prohibited by the Code of the Borough of Steelton,
Pennsylvania, or which otherwise injures the health, safety or welfare of
the residents of the Borough residing in a neighborhood or vicinity of the
premises. It is not necessary that such conduct, action, incident or behavior
constitute a criminal offense, nor that criminal charges be filed against any
person in order for said person to have perpetrated, caused or permitted
the commission of disruptive conduct, as defined herein; provided, however,
that no disruptive conduct will be deemed to have occurred unless a Code
Enforcement Officer or a police officer shall investigate and make a
determination that such did occur, and keep written records, including a
disruptive conduct report, of such occurrences. The occupant and the owner
and, if applicable, the manager shall be notified of any such occurrences, in
writing.[Amended 7-5-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-7; approved 7-5-2005]
§ 67-5 INSPECTION LICENSES § 69-2
69:139
DWELLING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms located within a building
and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or
intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating by one family.
This definition includes a mobile home.
FAMILY — One or more persons, related by blood, genetics, adoption or
marriage, living and cooking together as a single housekeeping unit, or a
number of persons living and cooking together as a single housekeeping
unit though not related by blood, adoption, genetics or marriage.[Amended
7-5-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-7; approved 7-5-2005]
INSTITUTIONAL PROPERTY — Any property utilized as an establishment
to house or serve groups of people, such as day-care centers, hospitals,
nursing homes, orphanages, schools and universities.
OCCUPANCY — The purpose for which a building or portion thereof is
utilized or occupied.
OCCUPANT — Any individual living or sleeping in a building, or having
possession of a space within a building.
OWNER — Any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal
or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records
of the state, county or municipality as holding title to the property; or
otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian of the
estate of any such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate
of such person if authorized by law to take possession of real property or if
ordered to take possession of real property by a court.
PERSON — An individual, corporation, partnership or any other group
acting as a unit.
PROPERTY, PREMISES — A lot, plot or parcel of real property including any
structures thereon.
§ 69-3. Duties of owners and/or managers of property.
A. It shall be the duty of every owner to:
(1) Keep and maintain all residential rental, commercial, and
institutional properties in compliance with all applicable Borough
codes and ordinances, including but not limited to Chapter 58, Fire
Prevention, Chapter 82, Property Maintenance, and Chapter 120,
Zoning, hereof, and all applicable state laws and regulations.
(2) Keep and maintain all property and premises in good and safe
condition.
(3) Be aware of, and act to eliminate, disruptive conduct on all
premises.
(4) Employ policies to actually manage the units under his/her control
in compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 69-2 § 69-3
69:140
§ 69-4. Duties of occupants.
It shall be the duty of every occupant of residential rental, commercial, and
institutional properties to:
(5) Pay or ensure payment of all real estate taxes, sewer rates, and
trash collection fees to ensure that such above utilities are
provided.
(6) Obtain and maintain a residential rental, commercial, industrial
and institutional inspection license as provided for herein.
(7) By March of each year, schedule through the Borough Code
Enforcement Office, a date and time for an inspection to occur in
relation to the property for that calendar year.
(8) Pay the annual scheduled fee as prescribed by the Borough.
B. If the owner has appointed a manager of the property, the manager
shall be jointly responsible to fulfill all of the obligations set forth in
Subsection A above. No owner may relieve himself of the responsibility
to perform the duties set forth in Subsection A by appointing a
manager.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or operate or cause to be
rented either as owner or manager any residential rental unit within the
Borough without having a residential inspection license as required by
this chapter.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain a commercial or
institutional property within the Borough without having a commercial
or institutional inspection license as required by this chapter.
E. It shall be the responsibility of every owner and every manager to
display the inspection license in the residential rental unit, the
commercial establishment, or the institutional establishment.
A. Maintain the cleanliness and sanitary conditions of the property;
properly dispose of trash; to care for and clean after household pets.
[Amended 7-5-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-7; approved 7-5-2005]
B. Conduct themselves and require the persons, including but not limited
to, guests, invitees, or licensees, on the premises and within their
property with their consent to conduct themselves in an manner that
will not disturb the peaceful enjoyment of adjacent or nearby properties
by people occupying the same.
C. Not engage in, nor tolerate, nor permit others on the premises, or
within their dwelling units to cause damage to public property or
private property (without permission of the owner of said private
property), or to engage in disruptive conduct, or violate the
Pennsylvania Criminal Code or other laws of the Commonwealth of
§ 69-3 INSPECTION LICENSES § 69-4
69:141
§ 69-5. Licensing.
Pennsylvania or the codes or ordinances of the Borough of Steelton.
[Amended 7-5-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-7; approved 7-5-2005]
D. Not to allow dwelling units to be occupied by more than one family
without the permission of the owner and registration with the Borough,
nor allow guests or invitees to stay in the dwelling unit for more than 30
days without permission of the owner and registration with the
Borough. [Amended 7-5-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-7; approved
7-5-2005]
E. Comply with all applicable Borough codes and ordinances, including
but not limited to, Chapters 58, Fire Prevention, Chapter 82, Property
Maintenance, and Chapter 120, Zoning, hereof and with all applicable
laws and regulations of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
F. Use the trash and recyclable collection services provided by the
Borough's contracted hauler, to the extent applicable.
A. Application for license.
(1) Within 30 days of the adoption and effective date of this chapter,
the owner/manager of a residential rental property, commercial
property, or institutional property shall submit an application to the
Code Enforcement Officer for an inspection license. An application
for an inspection license shall also be submitted upon the transfer
of title to an affected property.
(2) The application for inspection license shall be on the form provided
by the Code Enforcement Officer requiring the name, address, and
telephone number of the owner or manager (if applicable), the
address of the property to be inspected, and the fee to be paid for
such inspection.
(3) The initial license shall be valid until March 31, 2006. By March 31
of each calendar year after 2006, the owner, and if applicable, the
manager of each property shall continue to apply for an annual
inspection license which shall be valid from April 1 until March 31
of the following calendar year.
B. Issuance of license. The Code Enforcement Officer shall issue an
inspection license on a form provided therefor if after receipt of the
application and fee provided for in Subsection A above, the owner
submits a complete and accurate listing for the premises by March 31
of each year, and after inspection of the premises has been completed
including, but not limited to, inspection to determine compliance with
Chapter 52, Fire Prevention, Chapter 82, Property Maintenance, and
Chapter 120, Zoning, the Code Enforcement Officer determines it is
appropriate to issue said license.
§ 69-4 § 69-5
69:142
§ 69-6. Fees. [Amended 7-5-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-7; approved
7-5-2005]
Each owner shall pay an annual fee to the Borough of Steelton upon
the filing of the information required in this chapter for the proper
administration of these provisions. The fee schedule is as follows:
C. Denial or revocation of license. The Code Enforcement Officer shall
deny or may revoke an inspection license if the owner does not provide
his or her name, address and telephone number, does not pay the
annual inspection fee, or is not current on all real estate taxes, sewer
fees or trash collection fees, or does not correct a code violation within
the time frame required by the Code Enforcement Officer.
D. Notice of denial or non-renewal of inspection license. The Code
Enforcement Officer shall forward written notice to the owner if the
Code Enforcement Officer has determined that an inspection license
will be denied, or revoked. Written notice shall identify the property,
indicate the grounds upon which the denial, nonrenewal or revocation
is based, including the factual circumstances and citation to the code or
ordinance provision with which there has been noncompliance or
violation, the actions which must be taken to correct any violations,
nonconformities, or illegalities, and the time within which they must be
corrected (if correctable), and shall inform the owner of his/her right to
appeal such determination to the Code Appeals Board.
E. Reinstatement of inspection license. The Code Enforcement Officer may
reinstate an inspection license if the owner or manager corrects the
reason for the revocation of the inspection license and has paid the
inspection license reinstatement fee, said fee to be established initially
by this chapter and thereafter pursuant to a resolution of the Borough
Council.
F. Each inspection license shall be displayed by owner in a common area
of the property.
A. Residential rental units.
(1) One unit: $70.
(2) Each additional unit: $20.
(3) Reinspection necessitated by noncode compliance in inspection:
$25.
(4) One free reinspection (not necessitated by failure in previous
inspection) in each current calendar year; any additional
reinspection in each current calendar year shall be $20 per
reinspection.
B. Commercial, industrial and institutional units.
(1) Each building or portion thereof: $70.
§ 69-5 INSPECTION LICENSES § 69-6
69:143
§ 69-7. Appeals.
An appeal from any decision of the Code Enforcement Officer shall be
taken to the Borough Code Hearing Board. Such appeal shall be made in
writing within 10 working days after such decision has been made and
provided to owner or occupant in writing. The appeal shall be verified
by an affidavit, shall state the grounds therefor, and shall be filed with
the Borough Secretary. The appeals shall be held in accordance with the
provisions of Chapter 2, Code Enforcement, § 2-15D(1) and E. The appeal
shall be accompanied by the appeal fee which shall be established from time
to time by this chapter or resolution of Borough Council.
§ 69-8. Violations and penalties.
(2) Reinspection necessitated by noncode compliance in inspection:
$25.
(3) Commercial, industrial, or institutional establishments which have
multiple business: a fee of $100 for each separate business over
two.
A. It shall be a violation of this chapter to commit or permit any other
person to commit any of the following acts:
(1) To permit the occupancy of a residential rental, commercial,
industrial, or institutional premises without obtaining an inspection
license where required by this chapter.
(2) To refuse to permit inspections required under this chapter.
(3) To fail to perform the duties established by § 69-3 or 69-4 of this
chapter, as applicable.
(4) To place any false information on or to omit relevant information
from an application for an inspection license.
(5) To fail or refuse to comply with any other provision of this chapter.
B. Penalties and remedies.
(1) Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be guilty of a summary offense and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $500 and not more
than $1,000 and the cost of prosecution for each and every offense,
and in default of payment thereof, shall be sentenced to
imprisonment in Dauphin County Prison for not more than 30 days.
Each violation and each day of violation shall constitute a separate
offense.
(2) In addition to prosecution the persons violating this chapter, the
Code Enforcement Officer, Solicitor, or any other duly authorized
agent of the Borough may bring such civil or equitable actions,
seeking civil or equitable remedies, in any appropriate court of
§ 69-6 § 69-8
69:144
Chapter 71
LITTERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 82.
Solid waste — See Ch. 92.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 94.
§ 71-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMMERCIAL HANDBILL — Any printed or written matter, leaflet or
pamphlet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced literature which
advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity or thing or which
directs attention to any business or mercantile establishment or which
directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical performance or an
event of any kind for which an admission fee is charged.
LITTER — Any putrescible animal and vegetable waste, commonly known as
garbage; any putrescible and nonputrescible solid waste, including rubbish
and refuse, such as ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned
automobiles and solid market and industrial waste, paper, wrappings,
cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding,
crockery, trash and similar materials.
NONCOMMERCIAL HANDBILL — Any printed or written matter, circular,
leaflet, pamphlet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or
copies of any matter of literature not included in the aforesaid definition of
a commercial handbill.
§ 71-2. Prohibited acts.
No person, association, firm or corporation shall do or permit to be done
any of the following acts:
record of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, against any personal
property, real or personal, to effect the provisions of this chapter.
The remedies and procedures of this chapter are not intended to
supplant or replace the remedies provided to the Borough in its
other codes or ordinances including, but not limited to, Chapter 58,
Fire Prevention, Chapter 82, Property Maintenance, and Chapter
120, Zoning, hereof.
A. Throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk, park or other
public place, including ponds, lakes or other bodies of water or other
public place, within the Borough, except in a public receptacle or in
§ 69-8 LITTERING § 71-2
71:145
authorized private receptacles for collection by authorized refuse
collectors.
B. Sweep or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the
Borough any accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any
public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying
property, including residences and places of business, shall keep the
sidewalk in front of their premises free of litter.
C. Throw or deposit, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, litter upon
any street or other public place within the Borough or upon private
property.
D. Drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the Borough unless
such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any load, contents
or litter from being blown or deposited upon any street, alley or other
public place.
E. Deposit dirt on any public street from the wheels of vehicles leaving
construction sites unless such dirt is removed by 5:00 p.m. of the day on
which the dirt was deposited.
F. Throw or deposit commercial or noncommercial handbills in or upon
any sidewalk, street or other public place or hand out, distribute or sell
any commercial handbills or place the same in or upon any vehicle in
any public place, provided that it shall not be unlawful on any sidewalk,
street or other public place to distribute, without charge, any
noncommercial handbill to any person willing to accept it.
G. Throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or noncommercial handbill
in or upon private premises which are inhabited, except by handing or
transmitting any such handbill directly to the owner, occupant or other
person then present in or upon such private premises.
H. Post of affix any notice, poster or other paper or device, calculated to
attract the attention of the public, to any lamppost, public utility pole or
tree or upon any public structure or building, except as may be
authorized or required by law.
I. Throw, deposit or permit the accumulation of litter on private premises,
both business and residential, within the Borough, whether owned by
such person or not. The owner or person in control of the private
premises may maintain authorized private receptacles for collection in
such a manner that litter would be prevented from being carried or
deposited by the elements on any street, sidewalk or other public place
or upon any private property. The owners of shopping centers are
hereby required to install and maintain trash receptacles on the
pedestrian walkways within said shopping center. These receptacles
shall be placed at a maximum of 30 feet apart unless the Borough
Council or any officer or employee designated thereby for the purpose
determines this distance is not practicable. The receptacles shall be
clearly designated as trash receptacles and the Borough Council or any
§ 71-2 § 71-2
71:146
§ 71-3. Clearing of litter; notice; failure to comply.
§ 71-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm, association or corporation that violates any provision
of this chapter or fails to correct, within the time hereinabove set forth,
the conditions for which complaint is made by the Borough shall, upon
conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than $300; and each day's
failure to comply with any such provision shall constitute a separate
violation. It shall not be necessary for the Borough to give notice pursuant
to the provisions of § 71-3 above in order to obtain a conviction for any of
the prohibited acts in § 71-2 above.
Chapter 73
LOITERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Conduct — See Ch. 49.
Curfew — See Ch. 51.
Parks — See Ch. 77.
officer or employee designated thereby for the purpose shall have the
authority to determine the adequacy of such receptacles in terms of
their type and number.
J. Throw or deposit litter upon any open or vacant private premises or any
inhabited premises, whether owned by such person or not.
A. The Borough Council or any officer or employee designated thereby for
the purpose is hereby authorized and empowered to notify the owner
and/or occupant of any open or vacant private premises or any occupied
or unoccupied private or business premises within the Borough, or the
agent of such owner or occupant to properly dispose of litter located on
such property. Such notice shall be by certified mail, addressed to said
owner and/or occupant at his last known address or served personally
by the Borough Council or any officer or employee designated thereby
for the purpose upon such owner or occupant.
B. Upon failure, neglect or refusal of any owner or occupant so notified to
properly dispose of litter within three days after receipt of the written
notice provided for in Subsection A above, or three days after the date
of such notice in the event that the same is returned unserved, the
Borough Council or any officer or employee designated thereby for the
purpose is hereby authorized and empowered to order the correction of
such violation, using Borough funds or Borough personnel to
accomplish such correction, and may charge the costs thereof to the
violator. Collection of such costs by the Borough may be made by lien or
otherwise as authorized by law.
§ 71-2 LOITERING § 71-4
73:147
§ 73-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
LOITERING — Remaining idle essentially in one location; lingering;
spending time idly; loafing or walking aimlessly in one vicinity or
neighborhood; or hanging around.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any place to which the public has access, including any
public street or public sidewalk, the front of and the area immediately
adjacent to any school, parking lot, store, restaurant, tavern or other place
of business.
§ 73-2. Prohibited acts.
No person shall loiter in a public place in such a manner as to:
§ 73-3. Request to leave.
Whenever the presence of any person in any public place is causing or is
likely to cause any of the conditions enumerated in § 73-2 of this chapter,
any police officer may order that person to leave that place. Any person who
shall refuse to leave after being ordered to do so by a police officer shall be
guilty of a violation of this section.
§ 73-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $300 and/or
to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days.
A. Create or cause to be created a danger of a breach of the peace.
B. Create or cause to be created any annoyance to any person or persons.
C. Obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles.
D. Obstruct, molest or interfere with any person lawfully in any public
place as defined in § 73-1 of this chapter. This shall include the making
of unsolicited remarks of an offensive, disgusting or insulting nature or
which are calculated to annoy or disturb the person to or in whose
hearing they are made.
§ 71-4 § 73-4
73:148
Chapter 75
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 37.
Conduct — See Ch. 49.
Curfew — See Ch. 51.
Parades — See Ch. 76.
§ 75-1. Intent and purpose.
The Steelton Borough Council, finding excess levels of sound are
detrimental to the physical, mental and social well-being of the people as
well as to their comfort, living conditions, general welfare and safety and
being therefore a public health and welfare hazard, hereby declares it to be
necessary to provide for the greater control and more effective regulation
of excessive sound and the sources of excessive sound within the Borough
of Steelton.
§ 75-2. Short title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Steelton Noise Control Ordinance."
§ 75-3. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning.
A-WEIGHTED SOUND LEVEL — The sound pressure level in decibels as
measured on a sound level meter using the A-weighting network. The level
so read is designated dB(A).
AMBIENT NOISE — The all-encompassing noise associated with a given
environment being usually a composite of sounds from many sources near
and far.
CONSTRUCTION OPERATION — The erection, repair, renovation,
demolition or removal of any building or structure; and the excavation,
filling, grading and regulation of lots in connection therewith.
DECIBEL dB — A unit for measuring the sound pressure level, equal to
20 times the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the pressure of the
sound measured to the reference pressure, which is 20 micropascals (20
micronewtons per square meter).
EMERGENCY — Any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or
imminent physical trauma or property damage.
§ 73-4 NOISE § 75-3
75:149
EMERGENCY WORK — Any work performed for the purpose of preventing
or alleviating the physical trauma or property damage threatened or caused
by an emergency.
IMPULSIVE SOUND — Sound of short duration, usually less than one
second, with an abrupt onset and rapid decay. Examples of impulsive sound
include explosions, drop forge impacts and the discharge of firearms.
MUFFLER or SOUND DISSIPATIVE DEVICE — A device designed or used
for decreasing or abating the level of sound escaping from an engine or
machinery system.
NOISE — Any sound which annoys or disturbs humans or which causes or
tends to cause an adverse psychological or physiological effect on humans
or is plainly audible across boundary lines.
NOISE DISTURBANCE — Any sound which endangers or injures the safety
or health of humans or animals; annoys or disturbs a reasonable person of
normal sensitivities; endangers or injures personal or real property; or is in
excess of the sound levels by zoning districts established in § 75-5.
PERSON — Any individual, association, partnership or corporation, and
includes any officer, employee, department, agency or instrumentality of a
state of any political subdivision of a state. Whenever used in any clause
prescribing and imposing a penalty, person includes the individual
members, partners, officers and managers, or any of them, of partnerships
and associations and as corporations, the officers and managers thereof or
any of them.
POWERED MODEL VEHICLE — Any self-propelled airborne, waterborne, or
landborne plane, vessel or vehicle which is not designed to carry persons,
including, but not limited to, any model airplane, boat, car or rocket.
PROPERTY LINE (BOUNDARY) — Any imaginary line drawn through the
points of contract lands, apartments, condominiums, townhouses and
duplexes owned, rented or leased by different persons, a demarcation or
a line of separation of properties and, also, for any two or more buildings
sharing common grounds, the line drawn midway between any two said
buildings. All areas devoted to public right-of-way shall be deemed to be
across the property line. For the purpose of this regulation, the property
line includes all points on a plane formed by projecting the property line in
a manner deemed appropriate by the enforcing officer.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any street, avenue, boulevard, highway,
sidewalk, alley or similar place which is owned or controlled by a
governmental entity.
PUBLIC SPACE — Any real property or structures thereon which are owned
or controlled by a governmental entity.
REAL PROPERTY — All land, whether publicly or privately owned, whether
improved or not improved, with or without structures, exclusive of any
areas devoted to public right-of-way.
§ 75-3 § 75-3
75:150
SOUND — An oscillation in pressure, particle displacement, particle
velocity or other physical parameter, in a medium with internal forces that
causes compression and rarefaction of the medium or the superposition
of such prorogated oscillation which evokes an auditory sensation. The
description of sound may include any characteristics of such sound,
including duration, intensity and frequency.
SOUND LEVEL — The weighted sound pressure level obtained by the use
of a sound level meter and frequency weighting network, such as A, B or
C, as specified in American National Standards Institute specifications for
sound level meters (ANSI S1.4-1971, or the latest revision thereof). If the
frequency weighting employed is not indicated, the A-weighting shall apply.
SOUND LEVEL METER — An instrument which includes a microphone,
amplifier, RMS detector, integrator or time average, output meter and any
applicable weighting network used to measure sound pressure levels which
meets or exceeds the requirements for a Type I or Type II sound level
meter as specified in ANSI Specifications S1.4-1971. The manufacturer's
published indication of compliance with such specifications shall be prima
facie evidence of such compliance.
ZONING DISTRICTS — The land use established by Chapter 120, Zoning, of
the Code of the Borough of Steelton and all subsequent amendments.
§ 75-4. Prohibited acts.
A. Noise disturbance prohibited. No person shall make, continue or cause
to be made or continued any noise disturbance, nor shall any person
suffer, allow or permit any noise disturbance to be made or continued
from or at any property, whether real or personal.
B. Specific prohibitions. The following acts and the causing thereof are
declared to be noise disturbances and therefore in violation of this
chapter:
(1) Radios, television sets, musical instruments and similar devices
operating, playing or permitting the operation or playing of any
radio, television, phonograph, drum, musical instrument, sound
amplifier, automobile radio, automobile stereo or high-fidelity
equipment or similar device which produces, reproduces or
amplifies sound:
(a) At any time in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance
across a property line (boundary) or between the hours of 9:00
p.m. and 8:00 a.m. so as to be plainly audible across a property
line (boundary);
(b) In such a manner as to create a noise disturbance across a
property line (boundary) or at 50 feet from such device,
whichever is less, when the device is operated in or on a motor
vehicle or hand carried on a public right-of-way or public
space; or
§ 75-3 NOISE § 75-4
75:151
(c) In such a manner as to create a noise disturbance to any
person other than the operator of the device when operated by
any passenger or a common carrier.
(2) Yelling and shouting, engaging in loud or raucous yelling, shouting,
hooting, whistling or singing on the public streets between the
hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. or at any time or place in such a
manner as to create a noise disturbance.
(3) Construction. Operating or permitting the operation of any tools or
equipment used in construction operation, drilling or demolition
work:
(a) Between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day
on weekdays and Saturdays or at any time on Sundays or legal
holidays, such that the sound therefrom creates a noise
disturbance across a residential real property line (boundary),
except for emergency work.
(b) At any other time such that the sound level at or across a real
property line (boundary) exceeds 85 dB(A) for a period of one
hour.
(c) This section shall not apply to the use of domestic power tools
subject to § 75-4B(4).
(4) Domestic power tools. Operating or permitting the operation of any
mechanically powered saw, drill, sander, grinder, lawn or garden
tool, snowblower or similar device used outdoors in residential
areas (see Table I, § 75-5A) between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00
a.m. so as cause a noise disturbance across a residential property
line (boundary).
(5) Loading and unloading. Loading, unloading, opening, closing or
other handling of boxes, crates, containers, building materials,
garbage cans or similar objects between the hour of 9:00 p.m. and
8:00 a.m. the following day in such a manner as to cause a noise
disturbance across a residential property line (boundary). This
section shall not apply to municipal or utility services in or about
the public right-of-way.
(6) Animals and birds. Owning, possessing, harboring or controlling
any animal or bird which howls, barks, meows, squawks or makes
other sounds continuously and/or incessantly for a period of 10
minutes or makes such noise intermittent for 1/2 hour or more to
the disturbance of any person at any time of the day or night
regardless of whether the animal or bird is situated in or upon
private property; provided, however, that at the time the animal or
bird is making such noise, no person is trespassing or threatening
to trespass upon private property in or upon which the animal or
bird is situated or for any other legitimate cause which teased or
provoked the animal or bird.
§ 75-4 § 75-4
75:152
§ 75-5. Sound level by zoning districts.
(7) Powered model vehicles. Operating or permitting the operation of
powered model vehicles so as to create a noise disturbance across
a residential property line (boundary) between the hours of 9:00
p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
(8) Vehicle, motorboat or aircraft repairs and testing. Repairing,
rebuilding or testing any motor vehicle, motorcycle, motorboat or
aircraft in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance across a
residential real property line (boundary).
C. Prima facie violation. The noise from any of the aforesaid prohibited
acts that disturbs two or more residents who are in general agreement
as to the times and duration of the noise and who reside in separate
residences (including apartments and condominiums) located across a
property line (boundary) from the property on which the source of the
noise is generated shall be prima facie evidence of a noise disturbance.
A. Maximum permissible sound levels by zoning districts. No person shall
operate or cause to be operated any source of sound in such a manner
as to create a sound level which exceeds the limits set forth in the
zoning designations category in Table I when measured at or across the
property line (boundary) from the noise source. Any sound source,
whether stationary or nonstationary, including motor vehicles, that
produces sound in excess of those levels shall constitute a noise
disturbance.
Table I
Sound Level By Zoning Districts
Zoning Districts of The
Property on Which the
Source of the Noise Is
Located
Sound Level
Limit, dB(A) 8:00
a.m. to 9:00 p.m.
Sound Level
Limit, dB(A) 9:00
p.m. to 8:00 a.m.
Residential (Zoning
Districts R-TS, R-SU, R-TU,
R-MU)
57 52
Commercial (Zoning
Districts C-C, C-N, C-H)
67 62
Manufacturing (Zoning
Districts M-H)
77 77
B. When exceeded. The sound level limits set forth in Table I shall be
exceeded when any one or more of the following occur:
(1) The sound at any one point in time exceeds any of the established
zone limits in Table I by a measured sound level of 15 dB(A);
§ 75-4 NOISE § 75-5
75:153
§ 75-6. Exemptions.
The following sounds are exempted from the provisions of this chapter:
(2) The sound exceeds any of the established zone limits in Table I by a
measure sound level of 10 dB(A) for a cumulative of one minute or
more out of any ten-minute period; or
(3) The sound exceeds, except in the Manufacturing District, any of the
established zone limits in Table I by a measured sound level of
three dB(A) continually for a period of five minutes or a total of five
minutes out of any ten-minute period.
C. Ambient sound. In the event that the background ambient sound levels
in an area of suspected noise disturbance exceed the levels set forth in
Table I, the sound level of the intrusive sound source shall be measured
with the ambient background sound level being substituted as the Table
I sound level limit.
D. Where measured. For the purpose of this section, sound shall be
measured at or beyond the property line (boundary) of the property on
which the noise source is located.
E. Measuring instrument. All sound measurements shall be made on a
sound level meter calibrated in the manner required by the
manufacturer's specifications.
F. Exemptions from sound level limits. The provisions of this § 75-5 shall
not apply to:
(1) Activities covered by the following § 75-4B(3) (construction),
§ 75-4B(4) (domestic power tools) or any emergency signaling
device used because of an emergency.
(2) Interstate railway locomotives and train cars.
A. Amplified announcements. Electronically amplified announcements at
athletic events.
B. Blasting. Blasting, under permit by the Code Enforcement Officer and
Fire Chief.
C. Concerts, etc. Band concerts, block parties, church carnivals or other
performances or similar activities publicly or privately sponsored and
presented in any public or private space outdoors shall be exempt from
the provisions of this chapter provided that:
(1) Such activities do not produce sound 15 dB(A) in excess of the
sound levels set forth in Table I of § 75-5 of this chapter.
(2) Such activities do not occur between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and
8:00 a.m.
§ 75-5 § 75-6
75:154
§ 75-7. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 76
PARADES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 75.
Parks and recreational facilities — See Ch. 77.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 94.
§ 76-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Parade Ordinance of
the Borough of Steelton."
§ 76-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Steelton.
(3) Authorization to hold the functions was preapproved by the
Borough Council.
D. Emergency work. Sounds caused by the performance of emergency
work or by the ordinary and accepted use of emergency apparatus and
equipment.
E. Municipal and utility services. Sounds resulting from the repair or
replacement of any municipal or utility installation in or about the
public right-of-way; utility services shall include the Borough trash
collection program through its contracted bid.
F. School and public activities. Sounds not electronically amplified,
created by organized school-related programs, activities, athletic and
entertainment events or other public programs, activities or events.
A. Authority for enforcement. This chapter shall be enforced by the
Steelton Police Department.
B. Penalties. Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof in a summary proceeding, be sentenced to pay a fine
of not more than $600 for each and every offense, to be collected as
other fines and costs are by law collectible, or shall be imprisoned for
not more than 90 days or both. Each day during which any person
violates any provision of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 75-6 PARADES § 76-2
76:155
BOROUGH SECRETARY — The Secretary of the Borough of Steelton,
Steelton, Pennsylvania.
CHIEF OF POLICE — The Chief of Police of the Borough of Steelton.
COUNCIL — The Council of the Borough of Steelton.
PARADE — Any parade, march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant or
procession of any kind or any similar display in or upon any street, park or
other public place in the Borough.
PARADE PERMIT — A permit as required by this chapter.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind; provided, however, that the Borough
of Steelton shall not be a "person" for the purposes of this chapter.
§ 76-3. Permit required; exceptions.
§ 76-4. Permit applications.
A person seeking issuance of a parade permit shall file an application with
the Borough Secretary on forms provided by such officer.
A. No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any parade
unless a parade permit shall have been obtained from the Borough
Secretary.
B. Exceptions. This chapter shall not apply to:
(1) Funeral processions.
(2) Wedding processions.
(3) Students going to and from school or classes or participating in
educational activities, provided that such conduct is under the
immediate direction and supervision of the proper school
authorities. This exception does not apply to parades organized by
a school or any body thereof more than 24 hours prior to
occurrence.
(4) A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions,
specifically the Borough of Steelton.
C. Waiver by Council. The Borough Council of the Borough of Steelton may
waive, or direct the Borough Secretary to waive, any of the provisions of
this chapter relating to permit fees, application or other time deadlines,
insurance or alternate permits in relation to parades sought to be
conducted on any street, park or other public place except Front Street
(Route 230) in the Borough. No such waiver shall be permitted in
relation to parades sought to be conducted on Front Street (Route 230).
[Added 9-20-1993 by Ord. No. 93-7]
§ 76-2 § 76-4
76:156
A. Filing period. An application for a parade permit shall be filed with the
Borough Secretary not fewer than 60 days nor more than 90 days
before the date on which it is proposed to conduct the parade.
B. Contents. The application for a parade permit shall set forth the
following information:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to
conduct such parade.
(2) If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of or by an
organization, the name, address and telephone number of the
headquarters of the organization and of the authorized and
responsible heads of such organization.
(3) The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be
the parade chairman and who will be responsible for its conduct.
(4) The date when the parade is to be conducted.
(5) The route to be traveled, the starting point and the termination
point.
(6) The approximate number of persons who and animals and vehicles
which will constitute such parade, the type of animals and a
description of the vehicles.
(7) The hours when such parade will start and terminate.
(8) A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a
portion of the width of the streets proposed to be traveled.
(9) The location by streets of any assembly areas for such parade.
(10) The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at any
such assembly area or areas.
(11) If the parade is designed to be held by and on behalf of or for any
person other than the applicant, the applicant for such permit shall
file with the Borough Secretary a communication, in writing, from
the person proposing to hold the parade authorizing the applicant
to apply for the permit on his or her behalf.
(12) Any additional information which the Borough Secretary shall find
reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit
should be issued.
C. Late applications. The Borough Council, where good cause is shown
therefor, shall have the authority to consider any application hereunder
which is filed fewer than 60 days before the date such parade is
proposed to be conducted.
D. Permit fee. [Amended 4-17-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-1, approved
4-17-2000]
§ 76-4 PARADES § 76-4
76:157
§ 76-5. Standards for permit issuance.
The Borough Secretary shall issue a permit as provided for hereunder
when, from a consideration of the application and from such other
information as may otherwise be obtained, he finds that:
(1) Each application shall be accompanied by an initial fee, payable to
the Borough, in the amount of $756.52.
(a) $25 for an application processing fee.
(b) $288 for provision of four Borough employees to provide
cleanup after the parade at the rate of $18 per hour for four
hours.
(c) $443.52 for the provision of four Borough police officers to
provide police services for a standard parade at the rate of
$27.72 per hour for four hours.
(2) If the length of the parade is such that additional officers or
cleanup personnel are required, the fee will increase according to
the hourly rate indicated above. The applicant will be billed for an
additional expense. In the event that the time required for the
activities of cleanup by Borough personnel or involvement of police
officers is less than the hours set forth above, the Borough will
recompute the cost and refund to the applicant the amount by
which the minimum payment required above exceeds the actual
expense and remit it to the applicant within 30 days of the
conclusion of the parade.
E. Insurance. Each person filing an application for a parade permit shall
provide the Borough with a certificate of insurance evidencing that said
person maintains insurance which will protect that person and the
Borough of Steelton from claims for damages for personal injury,
including accidental death, as well as claims for property damages
which may arise from the conduct of the parade. The amounts of such
insurance shall be as follows:
(1) Public liability insurance in an amount of not less than $1,000,000
for injuries, including accidental death, to any one person and
property damage insurance in an amount of not less than
$1,000,000. The certificate of insurance shall name the Borough of
Steelton as an additional insured and shall be provided by an
insurance company authorized to do business in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and acceptable to the Borough.
A. The conduct of the parade will not so substantially interrupt the safe
and orderly movement of traffic within the Borough of Steelton on and
contiguous to the proposed route so as to create a real and present
danger to the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the Borough
of Steelton.
§ 76-4 § 76-5
76:158
§ 76-6. Time limit for decision; notice of disapproval.
The Borough Secretary shall act upon the application for a parade permit
within 15 days after the filing thereof. If the Borough Council disapproves
the application, the Borough Secretary shall send, by certified mail, within
15 days after the day upon which the application was filed, a notice of his
action stating with specificity the reasons for his denial of the permit. Said
notice shall also advise the applicant of his or her right to file an appeal
and shall also advise him or her of the procedure for filing an appeal by
providing him or her with a copy of § 76-7, Appeals.
§ 76-7. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the denial of a parade
permit to the Borough Council. The appeal shall be taken by sending a
letter to the Borough Secretary requesting that the Borough Council hear
an appeal of the decision to deny a parade permit. The letter must be sent
by certified mail or delivered to the Borough building of the Borough of
Steelton at 123 North Front Street, Steelton, Dauphin County, Pennsylvania,
and must be received by the Borough Secretary within 10 days from the
date on which the applicant received notice of the denial of the application
for a parade permit. The Borough Council must render a decision on said
appeal, in writing, within 10 days of receipt of the appeal.
B. The conduct of the parade will not create a real and present danger to
the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the Borough of Steelton
by preventing fire-fighting equipment, ambulances, rescue vehicles
and/or police vehicles from being able to reach any property in the
Borough of Steelton.
C. The conduct of such parade will not require the diversion of so great a
number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance service to
portions of the Borough other than that to be occupied by the proposed
line of march and areas contiguous thereto.
D. The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly points
of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police
protection of or ambulance services to areas contiguous to such
assembly areas.
E. The conduct of such parade will not interfere with the movement of firefighting
equipment en route to a fire.
F. The conduct of the parade is not reasonably likely to cause injury to
person or property, to provoke disorderly conduct or to create a
disturbance.
G. The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of
termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en route.
H. The parade is not designed to be held purely for private profit.
§ 76-5 PARADES § 76-8
76:159
§ 76-8. Alternate permits.
Where the Borough Secretary, after applying the standards set forth in
§ 76-5 above, shall find that the application for issuance of a permit for
a parade on the date, at the time and over the route requested by the
application must be denied, he may, in addition to advising the applicant of
the denial of the application, also issue an alternate permit which authorizes
the conduct of the parade on a date, at a time or over a route different
from that named by the application. The alternate permit shall be sent to
the applicant by certified mail, together with the letter required by § 76-5
above. Whenever the Borough Secretary shall issue an alternate permit, the
letter sent to the applicant, in addition to conforming to the requirements
of § 76-5 above, shall also advise the applicant that, if the applicant wishes
to accept the alternate permit, the applicant must mail or deliver a letter
to the Borough Secretary of the Borough of Steelton at 123 North Front
Street, Steelton, Pennsylvania 17113, in which the applicant accepts the
alternate permit and, further, advising the applicant that this letter must be
received within 10 days after receipt by the applicant of the letter sent to
the applicant pursuant to § 76-5 above. The applicant shall also be advised
that, unless the applicant accepts the alternate permit within 10 days, the
alternate permit will be void and of no effect. Finally, the applicant shall
also be advised that the applicant may either accept the alternate permit
or pursue an appeal of the denial of a parade permit for the date, time
and route requested by the applicant by following the procedure set forth
in § 76-7 above. An alternate parade permit issued pursuant to this section
shall be issued pursuant to the standards set forth in § 76-5 above and, if
accepted by the applicant in the manner provided above, shall have the
effect of a parade permit under this chapter.
§ 76-9. Notice to officials.
Immediately upon the issuance of a parade permit, the Borough Secretary
shall send a copy thereof to the following:
§ 76-10. Contents of permit.
Each parade permit shall state the following information:
A. The Mayor.
B. The Council.
C. The Borough Solicitor.
D. The Fire Chief.
E. The Director of Public Works.
A. The starting time.
B. The portions of the streets to be traveled that may be occupied by the
parade.
§ 76-8 § 76-10
76:160
§ 76-11. Duties of permittee.
§ 76-12. Interference; parking on route.
§ 76-13. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined in an amount not exceeding
$1,000 or, upon default of payment of such fine, be imprisoned for a period
not exceeding 30 days. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such
hereunder.
Chapter 77
C. The maximum length of the parade in mile or fractions thereof.
D. Such other information as the Borough Secretary shall find necessary to
the enforcement of this chapter.
A. A permittee hereunder shall comply with all permit directions and
conditions and with all applicable laws.
B. The parade chairman or other person heading or leading such activity
shall carry the parade permit upon his person during the conduct of the
parade.
A. Interference. No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct or impede
or interfere with any parade assembly or with any person, vehicle or
animal participating or used in a parade.
B. Driving through parade. No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the
vehicles or persons comprising a parade when such vehicles or persons
are in motion and are conspicuously designed as a parade.
C. Parking on a parade route. The Borough Secretary shall have the
authority, when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking
of vehicles along a highway or part thereof constituting a part of a route
of a parade. The Borough Secretary shall post signs to such effect, and
it shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any
vehicle in violation thereof. No person shall be liable for parking on a
street unposted, in violation of this chapter.
D. Animals and fowl on a parade route. No person being the owner of or
having control of any animals, wild or domestic, geese, ducks, turkeys,
chickens or other fowl, reptiles or other nonhuman pets shall bring onto
or permit to remain on any parade route such animals, fowl, reptiles or
other nonhuman pets unless same are or used in the parade; provided,
however, that nothing contained herein shall prohibit the use of a guide
or support animal because of blindness, deafness or physical handicap
of the user. [Added 6-16-1997 by Ord. No. 97-3]
§ 76-10 PARKS AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES § 76-13
77:161
PARKS AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 35.
Animals — See Ch. 37.
Open burning — See Ch. 48.
Littering — See Ch. 71.
Loitering — See Ch. 73.
§ 77-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
COMMISSION — The Steelton-Highspire Recreation Commission.
PARK or PARKS — Unless specifically limited, shall be deemed to include all
parks, playgrounds, recreation areas, tennis courts, recreation structures
and facilities, and also entrances and approaches thereto, and all other
land or property or structures (under the jurisdiction of the Commission)
now or hereafter owned or acquired by the Borough of Steelton for park or
recreational purposes.
PERSON — Any natural person, corporation, organization of persons,
company, association or partnership.
RULES AND REGULATIONS — Any rules and regulations hereby or
hereafter promulgated by the Commission or Borough Council under the
authority herein conferred.
§ 77-2. Hours. [Amended 5-20-1996 by Ord. No. 96-3, approved
5-20-1996]
All parks shall be opened daily to the public at such hours as the Borough
Council may, from time to time, designate, but in no event shall any person
be permitted to be in attendance in any park between 8:00 p.m. and 8:00
a.m., unless special permission is granted by the Borough Council of the
Borough of Steelton.
§ 77-3. Prohibited conduct.
A. No person in attendance at a park shall:
(1) Injure, deface, remove, cut or damage any of the trees, plants,
shrubs, turf, buildings, structures, signs or fixtures or any other
property of the Borough of Steelton located within the park.
(2) Litter any area of the park with garbage, paper, bottles, cans or
other waste material nor dispose of the same in any way except in
receptacles designated for such purpose.
§ 76-13 § 77-3
77:162
(3) Kindle or maintain any fire in the park except in fireplaces or areas
specially designated for that purpose and located by authority of
the Commission or Borough Council.
(4) Remove any bench, seat, table or other appliance without
permission of the Commission or Borough Council.
(5) Injure, deface, destroy or remove any notice, rule or regulation
posted at any place within the park by authority of the Commission
or Borough Council; nor shall any notice or placard be posted
within the park other than by authority of said Commission or
Borough Council.
(6) Set up with any booth, table or stand for the sale of any article or
service whatsoever within the limits of the park without the
permission of the Commission or Borough Council; distribute, sell,
service or rent any services or commodity or solicit for any purpose
without permission of the Commission or Borough Council.
(7) Operate, stop or park any vehicle, bicycle or other means of
conveyance, except in areas where permitted or designated by
proper authority of the Commission or Borough Council, or operate
the same in a reckless or negligent manner or in excess of any
posted speed limit or in such a manner as to become a nuisance to
other area users.
(8) Operate commercial vehicles, unless providing authorized services.
(9) Bring onto the premises, possess or consume any alcoholic
beverage or illegal drug of any kind; no person shall enter the park
in an intoxicated state or otherwise be under the influence of
alcohol or illegal drugs.
(10) Carry or discharge any firearms, slingshots, firecrackers, fireworks
or other missile-propelling instruments or explosives or arrows or
other dangerous weapons which have such properties as to cause
annoyance or injury to any person or property, unless permission
has been granted by the Commission or Borough Council in
designated areas; police officers in the performance of their duties
will be exempt from these provisions.
(11) Play ball, street hockey, golf, horseshoes, engage in archery, camp,
engage in finding buried objects with special detectors or
participate in any other form of recreation, sporting endeavor or
pastime, except in those areas which may be designated, from time
to time, for that purpose by the Commission or Borough Council.
Only tennis is permitted on the tennis courts, and any other activity
is specifically prohibited.
(12) Disrobe or change clothing, except in buildings or facilities made
available for the purpose.
§ 77-3 PARKS AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES § 77-3
77:163
§ 77-4. Reservation for specific uses.
(13) Disturb the peace by any conduct so as to annoy any other person
using the park for recreational purposes.
(14) Operate a snowmobile, minibike, motorcycle or any vehicle,
recreational or otherwise, except on designated roads, trails or
areas set aside for their use.
(15) Use threatening, abusive, insulting, profane or obscene language
or words.
(16) Commit any disorderly or immoral acts.
(17) Hold any public meeting or rally (with more than five persons) or
engage in any marching or driving as members of a military,
political or other organization without permission of the
Commission or Borough Council, which requires a statement of
information, including the name of the organization, its purpose,
number of persons expected to be invited, expected duration and
name(s) of person(s) in charge.
(18) Disobey a proper order of a police officer or code enforcement
officer or disobey or disregard or fail to comply with any rule or
regulation, warning, prohibition, instruction or direction given by
an authorized person and posted or displayed by sign, notice,
bulletin, card or poster, or when notified or informed as to its
existence by the Commission or Borough Council or an authorized
person.
(19) Hunt for, capture or kill, or attempt to capture or kill, or aid or
assist in the capturing or killing of, in any manner, any wild bird or
wild animal of any description, either game or otherwise, and to
that end, it is unlawful for any person to carry onto or possess in
any park a shotgun or rifle or pistol or firearm of any make or kind
unless specific permission is granted for a designated area by
authority of the Commission or Borough Council of the Borough of
Steelton.
(20) Bring onto or permit to remain on the premises any animals, wild
or domestic, geese, ducks, turkeys, chickens or other fowl, reptiles
or other nonhuman pets without specific permission from the
Borough Secretary; provided, however, that nothing contained
herein shall prohibit the use of a guide or support animal because
of blindness, deafness or physical handicap of the user. [Amended
6-16-1997 by Ord. No. 97-4]
A. The use of all parks shall be on a first-come, first-served basis, unless
otherwise reserved:
(1) By annual permission granted by the Commission or Borough
Council for the scheduling of various league games, etc.
§ 77-3 § 77-4
77:164
§ 77-5. Authorization to promulgate additional rules.
The Commission is authorized to establish additional rules and regulations
as deemed necessary and with approval of the Borough Council.
§ 77-6. Authority to close facilities.
Recreation facilities which become hazardous for public use, due to
weather, water, fire or unforeseeable conditions, may be closed only at the
discretion of the Commission or Borough Council.
§ 77-7. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the police officers and code enforcement
officers charged with enforcement of the provisions of this chapter and of
rules and regulations promulgated by the Commission.
§ 77-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not more
than $300 and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to imprisonment
for a term not to exceed 90 days.
§ 77-9. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances which are inconsistent herewith are
hereby repealed.
§ 77-10. Severability.
If any sentence, clause, section or part of this chapter is for any reason
found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality,
illegality or invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the remaining
provisions, sentences, clauses, sections or parts of this chapter. It is hereby
declared as the intent of the Borough Council of the Borough of Steelton
that this chapter would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal
(2) For school or college athletic games, practice, contests or
exhibitions.
(3) For regularly scheduled school district or municipal recreation
programs.
(4) By permission granted by the Commission or Borough Council for a
specific requested use.
B. Use of the tennis courts. All persons desiring to use the tennis courts
must first secure from the Recreation Commission or Borough office a
permit for such use. Permits will be issued for such fees as established
from time to time by resolution of the Borough Council. No permit shall
be transferable from one person to another.
§ 77-4 PARKS AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES § 77-10
77:165
or invalid sentence, clause, section or part thereof had not been included
herein.
§ 77-11. When effective.
This chapter shall become effective immediately upon adoption.
Chapter 79
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Food and beverage establishments — See Ch.
62.
Noise — See Ch. 75.
Street obstructions — See Ch. 94, Art. III.
§ 79-1. Definitions; word usage.
§ 79-2. License required.
No person shall engage in peddling in the Borough of Steelton without first
having taken out a license as herein provided.
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PEDDLER — Any transient person who shall engage in peddling, as
herein defined.
PEDDLING — Engaging in peddling, canvassing, soliciting or taking
of orders, either by sample or otherwise, for any goods, wares or
merchandise, upon any of the streets or sidewalks or from house to
house within the Borough of Steelton, provided that the word
"peddling" shall not apply to farmers selling their own produce; to
the sale of goods, wares and merchandise donated by the owners
thereof, the proceeds whereof are to be applied to any charitable or
philanthropic purpose; or to any manufacturer or producer in the sale
of bread and bakery products, meat and meat products, or milk or milk
products.
PERSON — Any natural person, association, partnership, firm or
corporation.
B. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural and the masculine
shall include the feminine and the neuter.
§ 77-10 § 79-3
79:166
§ 79-3. Application procedure. [Amended 5-20-1976 by Ord. No.
76-4, approved 5-20-1976]
Every person desiring to engage in peddling in the Borough of Steelton
shall first make application to the Borough Secretary for a license. If such
person shall also be required to obtain a license from any county officer, he
shall, when making such application, exhibit a valid county license. Upon
such application, such person shall give his name; his address, his previous
criminal record, if any; the name of the person for whom he works, if any;
the type of goods, wares and merchandise he wishes to peddle; the length
of time for which he wishes to be licensed; the type of vehicle he uses, if
any; and the number of helpers he has. Where a person makes application
for himself and one or more helpers, all applicable personal information
specified above shall be given for each helper, and an individual license
shall be required for each helper. No license issued under this chapter shall
be transferable from one person to another.
§ 79-4. Fee. [Amended 12-30-1974 by Ord. No. 74-12, approved
12-30-1974; 9-21-1992 by Ord. No. 92-4, approved 9-21-1992]
No license shall be issued under this chapter until the proper fee, as follows,
shall be paid to the Borough:
§ 79-5. Issuance of license; display; limitations.
Upon making application therefor and paying the proper fee, as herein
specified, a license shall be issued to every peddler. Such license shall
contain the information required to be given upon the application therefor.
Every peddler shall at all times when engaged in peddling in the Borough
carry such license upon his person, and shall exhibit such license, upon
request, to all police officers, Borough officials and citizens. No peddler
shall engage in selling any product not mentioned upon such license, nor
shall any person having a foot peddler's license operate from or with any
horse-drawn or motor vehicle.
§ 79-6. Time restrictions.
No person licensed as a peddler under this chapter shall engage in peddling
at any time on Sunday, or upon any other day of the week before 8:00 a.m.
or after 6:00 p.m., prevailing time.
A. Peddler operating from a horse-drawn or motor vehicle, or on foot: $15
per day; $100 per month; $500 per year.
B. Each and every additional peddler employed by or with a foot peddler
or peddler operating from a horse-drawn or motor vehicle: $15 per day;
$100 per month; $500 per year.
§ 79-3 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 79-7
79:167
§ 79-7. Hawking, crying and use of horns and loudspeakers
prohibited.27
No person licensed as a peddler under this chapter shall hawk or cry his
wares upon any of the streets or sidewalks of the Borough, nor shall be use
any loudspeaker or horn or any other device for announcing his presence by
which the public is annoyed.
§ 79-8. Selling from vehicles restricted.
No person licensed as a peddler under this chapter shall park any vehicle
upon any of the streets or alleys of the Borough in order to sort, rearrange
or clean any of his goods, wares or merchandise; nor may any such person
place or deposit any refuse upon any of such streets or alleys; nor may any
such person maintain or keep a street or curbstone market by parking any
vehicle upon any street or alley in the Borough for longer than necessary in
order to sell therefrom to persons residing in the immediate vicinity.
§ 79-9. Suspension of license. [Amended 5-20-1976 by Ord. No.
76-4, approved 5-20-1976]
The Borough Secretary of the Borough of Steelton is hereby authorized
to suspend any license issued under this chapter when it deems such
suspension to be beneficial to the public health, safety or morals or for
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, or for giving false
information upon any application for a license hereunder.
§ 79-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-20-1976 by Ord. No.
76-4, approved 5-20-1976]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $300 and
costs of prosecution and, in default of payment thereof, to imprisonment for
not more than 30 days.
Chapter 80
PLUMBING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code enforcement — See Ch. 2.
Building construction — See Ch. 44.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 82.
Sewers — See Ch. 90.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 108.
27.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 75, Noise.
§ 79-7 § 80-1
80:168
§ 80-1. Title.
This chapter, together with the Building Officials and Code Administrators
(BOCA) Basic Plumbing Code, 1981 Edition, adopted herein, shall be known
and may be cited as the "Plumbing Code of the Borough of Steelton."
§ 80-2. Adoption of standards; applicability.
§ 80-3. Administration and enforcement.
All the provisions of the Code Enforcement Ordinance of the Borough are
hereby adopted with this chapter.28 The administration and enforcement of
this chapter and of the BOCA Basic Plumbing Code herein adopted shall be
carried out by the Office of Code Enforcement of the Borough in accordance
with the procedures established by Chapter 2, Code Enforcement, of the
Code of the Borough of Steelton and by the BOCA Basic Plumbing Code
adopted herein. Said Chapter 2, Code Enforcement, provides for certain
powers and duties of a Code Enforcement Officer, for the creation of a Code
Hearing Board and for procedures relative to applications, fees, permits,
inspections, appeals, penalties and other matters.
§ 80-4. Modifications and amendments.
A. BOCA Basic Plumbing Code. There is hereby adopted in its entirety, by
the Borough of Steelton, copies of which are on file in the office of the
Borough, that certain plumbing code known as the "BOCA Basic
Plumbing Code, 1981 Edition," as amended through the effective date
of adoption of this chapter and as published by the Building Officials
and Code Administrators International, Inc., save and except portions
as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended.
B. Application. The provision set forth in this chapter and in the BOCA
Basic Plumbing Code adopted herein shall take effect 31 days from the
date of enactment of this chapter or any amendment thereto and shall
apply throughout the entire Borough.
A. Deletions. The following sections and subsections of the BOCA Basic
Plumbing Code, herein adopted, are hereby deleted in their entirety:
(1) Section P-102.0, Validity.
(2) Section P-106.0, Demolition of Structures.
(3) Section P-109.0, Plumbing Official.
(4) Section P-110.0, Duties and Powers of the Plumbing Official.
(5) Section P-111.0, Application for Permit.
(6) Section P-112.0, Permits.
28.Editor's Note: See Ch. 2, Code Enforcement.
§ 80-1 PLUMBING § 80-4
80:169
(7) Section P-113.0, Conditions of Permit.
(8) Section P-114.0, Fees.
(9) Section P-115.0, Inspection.
(10) Section P-117.0, Violations.
(11) Section P-118.0, Stop Work Order.
(12) Section P-121.0, Emergency Measures.
(13) Section P-112.0, Means of Appeal.
(14) Section P-1503.9, Maximum flow rates and pressure conditions.
(15) Appendix "D", Recommended Sewage Disposal Treatment Systems.
B. Amendments. The following sections and subsections of the BOCA
Basic Plumbing Code are hereby amended to read as follows:
(1) Section P-100.1, Title, is amended to read as follows:
P-100.1 Title: These regulations shall be known as the
"Plumbing Code of the Borough of Steelton," hereinafter referred
to as the Plumbing Code or "this code."
(2) Section P-104.1, Continuation, is amended to read as follows:
P-104.1 Continuation: The legal use and occupancy of any
structure existing before the adoption of this code or for which it
had been heretofore approved may be continued without change,
except as may be specifically covered in this code or deemed
necessary by the Plumbing Official for the general safety and
welfare of the occupants and the public.
(3) The following definitions, contained in Section P-201.0, Definitions
of Plumbing Terms, are amended to read as follows:
Plumbing Official: The Code Enforcement Officer.
(4) Section P-303.2, Public systems available, is amended to read as
follows:
P-303.2 Public sewer available: A public water supply system
or public sewer system shall be deemed available to premises
used for human occupancy, if such premises are within 300 feet,
measured along a street, alley or easement, of the public water
supply or sewer system, and a connection conforming with the
standards set forth in this code may be made thereto.
(5) Section P-308.3, Freezing, is amended to read as follows:
§ 80-4 § 80-4
80:170
P-308.3 Freezing: Water service piping and sewers shall be
installed below recorded frost penetration, but not less than three
feet below grade for water piping and three feet below grade for
sewers. In climates with freezing temperatures, plumbing piping
in exterior building walls or areas subjected to freezing
temperatures shall be adequately protected against freezing by
insulation or heat or both.
(6) Section P-404.1.2, Water service pipe, is amended to read as
follows:
P-404.1.2 Water service pipe: Water service pipe shall be
copper pipe or copper tubing Type K, conforming to the standard
listed in Table P-404.1.2. All pipe or tubing, when used
underground for water service and when installed outside of the
building, shall have a minimum working pressure of 160 pounds
per square inch at 73.4° F. All joints and connections underground
shall be a flared joint made with approved fittings.
(7) Section P-404.2.3, Building sewer pipe, is amended to read as
follows:
P-404.2.3 Building sewer pipe: Building sewer pipe shall be
cast iron, conforming to the standard listed in Table P-404.2.3.
(8) Section P-602.3.1, Prohibited fittings, is amended to read as
follows:
P-602.3.1 Prohibited fittings: A tee branch shall not be used
as a drainage fitting. A fitting or connection which has an
enlargement chamber or recess with a ledge or shoulder, or
reduction in pipe area shall not be used. Running threads, bands
shall not be used. Drainage or vent piping shall not be drilled or
tapped unless otherwise permitted by the plumbing official.
(9) Section P-1001.3, Prohibited traps, is amended to read as follows:
P-1001.3 Prohibited traps: The following traps are prohibited:
1. Traps which depend upon moving parts to maintain their
seal.
2. Bell traps.
3. Crown vented traps.
4. Separate fixture traps which depend on interior partitions
for their seal.
5. "S" traps, except where specifically approved by the Code
Enforcement Officer.
(10) Section P-1702.1, New, altered, extended or repaired systems, is
amended to read as follows:
§ 80-4 PLUMBING § 80-4
80:171
§ 80-5. Flood control regulations.
P-1702.1 New, altered, or repaired systems: New plumbing
systems, and parts of existing systems, which have been altered,
extended or repaired shall be tested as prescribed hereinafter to
disclose leaks and defects, except that testing may be waived in
the following cases:
1. In any case which does not include addition to, replacement,
alteration or relocation of any water supply, drainage or vent
piping.
2. In any case where plumbing equipment may be set up
temporarily for exhibition purposes.
3. One- and two-family dwellings. If tested, Section P-1702.0
shall be used.
C. Additions. The following new sections shall be added to the BOCA Basic
Plumbing Code:
Registration of Plumbers: In order to prevent damage to the
Borough streets and the Borough water and sewer systems from not
being repaired, all plumbers engaged in the practice of plumbing
within the Borough shall apply for and obtain a license from the
Borough. A copy of liability insurance policy shall be submitted to the
Borough. The fee shall be in accordance with the fee schedule stated
in Chapter 2, Code Enforcement. The Borough may suspend or revoke
any license and the privilege of having a license upon violation of
or nonconforming with any provision of this chapter and the BOCA
Basic Plumbing Code, 1981 Edition, adopted herein, and for any other
conduct evidencing similar unfitness for the position.
A. General. The following sections shall apply to all construction of a
plumbing system occurring in any of the floodplain districts designated
in the Steelton Borough Zoning Ordinance, as amended.29
B. Water heaters, furnaces and other mechanical equipment or apparatus
shall be permitted only at elevations above the regulatory flood.
C. Water supply systems and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
preclude infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges
from the systems into floodwaters.
D. All gas and oil supply systems shall be designed to preclude the
infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the
systems into floodwaters. Additional provisions shall be made for the
drainage of these systems in the event that floodwater infiltration
occurs.
29.Editor's Note: See Ch. 120, Zoning, Art. VI, Floodplain Districts.
§ 80-4 § 80-5
80:172
§ 80-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provisions of this
chapter and/or the Borough's Plumbing Code shall, upon conviction in a
summary proceeding before any District Justice, be sentenced for each such
violation to pay a fine of not less than $10 plus costs and not more than $300
plus costs and, in default thereof, to undergo imprisonment in the county jail
for a period not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation continues after
the notice has been served in accordance with the terms and provisions
hereof shall be deemed a separate offense.
§ 80-7. Effect; severability; repealer.
Chapter 82
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code enforcement — See Ch. 2.
Building construction — See Ch. 44.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 54.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 58.
Inspection licenses — See Ch. 69.
Littering — See Ch. 71.
Plumbing — See Ch. 80.
Sewers — See Ch. 90.
Solid waste — See Ch. 92.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 94.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 108.
Storage of vehicles on private property — See
Ch. 111.
E. No part of any on-site sewage disposal system shall be constructed
within any designated floodplain districts.
A. Savings clause. Nothing in this chapter or in the BOCA Basic Plumbing
Code hereby adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding
now pending in any court or any rights acquired or liability incurred or
any cause or causes of action accrued or existing under any act or
ordinance repealed hereby. No right or remedy of any character shall
be lost, impaired or affected by this chapter.
B. Validity. The invalidity of any section or provision of this chapter or the
BOCA Basic Plumbing Code herein adopted shall not invalidate other
sections or provisions thereof.
C. Repealer. Section 44-4E of the Building Code of the Borough of Steelton
and any ordinance or code provisions conflicting with the provisions
hereof are hereby repealed insofar as they are inconsistent with the
Borough's Plumbing Code Ordinance.
§ 80-5 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 82-1
82:173
§ 82-1. Title.
This chapter, together with the 2000 International Property Maintenance
Code, adopted herein, shall be known and may be cited as the "Property
Maintenance Code of the Borough of Steelton."
§ 82-2. Adoption of standards; applicability.
§ 82-3. Administration and enforcement.
§ 82-4. Modifications and amendments.
A. The 2000 International Property Maintenance Code. There is hereby
adopted in its entirety by the Borough of Steelton, copies of which are
on file in the office of the Borough, that certain property maintenance
code known as the "2000 International Property Maintenance Code" as
amended through the effective date of the adoption of this chapter and
as published by the International Code Council, Inc.; save and except
portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended.
B. Application. The provisions set forth in this chapter and in the 2000
International Property Maintenance Code adopted herein shall take
effect upon the date of enactment of this chapter or any amendment
thereto and shall apply throughout the entire Borough.
A. All the provisions of Chapter 2, Code Enforcement, of the Code of the
Borough of Steelton are hereby adopted with this chapter. The
administration and enforcement of this chapter and of the 2000
International Property Maintenance Code herein adopted shall be
carried out by the Office of Code Enforcement of the Borough in
accordance with the procedures established by the Code Enforcement
Ordinance of the Borough and by the 2000 International Property
Maintenance Code adopted herein. Said Chapter 2, Code Enforcement,
provides for certain powers and duties of a Code Enforcement Officer,
for the creation of a Code Hearing Board and for procedures relative to
applications, fees, permits, inspections, appeals, penalties and other
matters.
B. The Office of Code Enforcement shall annually inspect in full, all
residential rental property structures and all commercial, industrial
and institutional properties. The Borough may prescribe reasonable
fees for the services of its Code Enforcement Officers in making said
inspections, such fees to be established from time to time by resolution
of the Borough Council of the Borough of Steelton. [Amended
2-7-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-1, approved 2-7-2005]
A. Deletions. The following sections and subsections of the 2000
International Property Maintenance Code herein adopted are hereby
deleted in their entirety:
(1) Section 103, Department of Property Maintenance Inspection.
§ 82-1 § 82-4
82:174
(2) Section 104, Duties and powers of the Code Official.
(3) Section 105.1, Modifications.
(4) Section 106, Violations.
(5) Section 107, Notices and Orders.
(6) Section 108, Unsafe Structures and Equipment.
(7) Section 109, Emergency Measures.
(8) Section 110, Demolition.
(9) Section 111, Means of Appeal.
(10) Section 302.7.1, Gates.
(11) Section 302.8, Motor vehicles.
(12) Section 302.9, Defacement of property.
(13) Section 303.3, Premises identification.
(14) Section 303.14, Insect screens.
(15) Section 305.2.1, Rubbish storage facilities.
(16) Section 305.3.1, Garbage facilities.
(17) Section 502.4, Employees' facilities.
(18) Section 502.4.1, Drinking facilities.
(19) Section 503.3, Location of employee toilet facilities.
(20) Section 602.3, Heat supply.
(21) Section 602.4, Occupiable work spaces.
(22) Section 602.5, Room temperature measurement.
B. Amendments. The following sections and subsections of the 2000
International Property Maintenance Code are hereby amended to read
as follows:
(1) Section 101.1 Title, is amended to read as follows:
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the "Property
Maintenance Code of the Borough of Steelton," hereinafter
referred to as the "Property Maintenance Code" or "this code."
(2) Section 102.3, Application of other codes, is amended to read as
follows:
§ 82-4 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 82-4
82:175
102.3 Other regulations. Where provisions of this code are
found to be in conflict with a provision in any building or zoning
ordinance, or in any other ordinance of the Borough of Steelton
existing on the effective date of this code, or in any regulation
issued under the authority of such ordinances, the provision which
establishes the higher standard for the protection of health, safety
and welfare shall prevail.
(3) The following definition, contained in Section 202, General
Definitions, is amended to read as follows, and Section 103.1,
Officer, is amended to read as follows:
CODE OFFICIAL — The Code Enforcement Officer of the
Borough, who is charged with the administration and enforcement
of this code, or any duly authorized representative.
(4) Section 302.4, Weeds, is amended to read as follows:
302.4 Noxious weeds, grass or other vegetation. No person,
firm or corporation owning or occupying any property within the
Borough of Steelton shall permit any grass or weeds or any
vegetation whatsoever, not grown for human consumption or
planted for some useful or ornamental purpose, to grow or remain
upon such premises so as to exceed a height of eight inches or
to throw off any unpleasant or noxious odor or to conceal any
filthy deposit or to create or produce pollen. Any grass, weeds
or other vegetation growing upon any premises in the Borough
in violation of any of the provisions of this section is hereby
declared to be a nuisance and detrimental to the health, safety,
cleanliness and comfort of the inhabitants of the Borough. The
Council of the Borough of Steelton, or any officer or any employee
of the Borough designated thereby for the purpose, including the
Borough Code Enforcement Officer, is hereby authorized to give
notice by personal service or by registered mail to the owner or
occupant, as the case may be, of any premises whereon grass,
weeds or other vegetation is growing and remaining in violation
of the provisions of this section and directing and requiring such
occupant to remove, trim or cut such grass, weeds or vegetation so
as to conform to the requirements of this section within five days
after issuance of said notice. In case such premises are occupied
and the owner thereof cannot be found, then such notice may be
served by posting a copy thereof in at least two conspicuous places
on said premises for a period of three days, requiring cutting
within these three days. In case any person, firm or corporation
shall neglect, fail or refuse to comply with such notice, the
Borough or its agents may remove, trim or cut such grass, weeds
or vegetation, and the costs thereof, together with any additional
penalty authorized by law, may be collected by the Borough from
such person, firm or corporation in the manner provided by law.
§ 82-4 § 82-4
82:176
(5) Section 303.4, Structural members, is amended to read as follows:
303.4 Structural members. The supporting structural members
of every building shall be maintained structurally sound, not
showing any evidence of deterioration which would render them
incapable of carrying the imposed loads.
(6) Section 402.2, Common halls and stairways, is amended to read as
follows:
402.2 Common halls and stairways. Every common hall and
stairway in every building other than one- and two-family
dwellings shall be adequately lighted at all times with an
illumination of at least a sixty-watt light bulb every 25 feet
maximum. Such illumination shall be provided throughout the
normally traveled stairs and passageways and at entrances and
exits of the building.
(7) Section 404.3, Minimum ceiling heights, is amended to read as
follows:
404.3 Minimum ceiling heights. Habitable rooms shall have
a clear ceiling height over the minimum area required by this
code at not less than seven feet (2.13 meters). In attics or top
half-stories, the ceiling height shall be not less than seven feet
(2.13 meters) over not less than 1/3 of the minimum area required
by this code when used for sleeping, study or similar activity. In
calculating the floor area of such rooms, only those portions of the
floor area of the room having a clear ceiling height of five feet
(1.52 meters) or more may be included.
(8) Section 404.4.3, Water closet accessibility, is amended by the
deletion therefrom of the second sentence requiring every bedroom
in a dwelling unit to have access to at least one water closet and
lavatory located on the same story as the bedroom or an adjacent
story.
(9) Section 506.1, General, is amended in its entirety to read as
follows:
506.1 Connection to sewer line. Every structure used for
residential and/or nonresidential purpose within 300 feet of a
public sewer line shall be connected to such line in accordance
with the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the
ordinances of the Borough.
(10) Section 602.2, Residential occupancies, is amended to read as
follows:
§ 82-4 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 82-4
82:177
602.2 Residential buildings. Every dwelling unit and guest
room shall be provided with heating facilities capable of
maintaining a room temperature of 68° F. (20° C.) at a point three
feet (0.91 meters) above the floor and three feet (0.91 meters)
from an exterior wall in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet
rooms. The furnace shall be placed in operation at the beginning
of the heating season.
(11) Section 605.2, Receptacles, is amended in its entirety to read as
follows:
605.2 Outlets required. Where there is electric service available
to a structure, every habitable room of a dwelling unit and every
guest room shall contain at least two separate and remote
baseboard or wall-type electric convenience outlets. A ceiling or
wall-type electric light fixture may be installed in addition to the
two required outlets. In a kitchen, three separate and remote walltype
electric convenience outlets or two such convenience outlets
and one ceiling or wall-type electric light fixture shall be provided.
Every public hall, water closet compartment, bathroom, laundry
room or furnace room shall contain at least one electric light
fixture. In addition to the electric light fixture in every bathroom
and laundry room, there shall be provided at least one electric
outlet. The outlet in the bathroom must be installed on a groundfault
circuit.
C. Additions. The following new sections and subsections shall be added to
the 2000 International Property Maintenance Code:
(1) A new definition is added to Section 202, General Definitions, to
read as follows:
CELLAR — That portion of a building which is partly or
completely below grade, and having at least 1/2 its height below
grade.
(2) A new definition is added to Section 202, General Definitions, to
read as follows:
PUBLIC NUISANCE — Includes the following:
1. The physical condition, or use of any premises regarded as a
public nuisance at common law; or
2. Any physical condition, use or occupancy of any premises or its
appurtenances considered an attractive nuisance to children,
including, but not limited to, abandoned wells, shafts,
basements, excavations and unsafe fences or structures; or
3. Any premises which have unsanitary sewerage or plumbing
facilities; or
§ 82-4 § 82-4
82:178
4. Any premises designated as unsafe for human habitation or
use; or
5. Any premises which are manifestly capable of being a fire
hazard, or are manifestly unsafe or unsecure as to endanger
life, limb or property; or
6. Any premises from which the plumbing, heating and/or
facilities required by this code have been removed, or from
which utilities have been disconnected, destroyed, removed
or rendered ineffective, or the required precautions against
trespassers have not been provided; or
7. Any premises which are unsanitary, or which are littered with
rubbish or garbage, or which have an uncontrolled growth of
weeds; or
8. Any structure or building that is in a state of dilapidation,
deterioration or decay; faulty construction; overcrowded; open,
vacant or abandoned; damaged by fire to the extent as not
to provide shelter, in danger of collapse or failure and is
dangerous to anyone on or near the premises.
(3) A new section, Section 404.8, is added to read as follows:
404.8 Occupancy of cellars. No cellar shall be occupied as
a dwelling unit or habitable room. This section shall not be
construed to prohibit workrooms, playrooms or other recreation
rooms in cellars. In the event that a cellar is used as a workroom,
playroom or other recreation room, it must comply with the
following requirements:
1. The floors and walls shall be impervious to leakage of
underground and surface runoff water and protected
against dampness. The floors shall be constructed of
materials which are easy to keep in a clean and sanitary
condition.
2. There shall be adequate lighting and ventilation and a safe
and unobstructed means of egress.
(4) A new section, Section 404.9, is added to read as follows:
404.9 Posted occupant load. Every room constituting a place
of assembly shall have the occupant load of the room posted in
a conspicuous place near the main exit from the room. Approved
signs shall be maintained in a legible manner by the owner or
an authorized agent. Signs shall be durable and shall indicate the
number of occupants permitted for each room use. All posting
signs shall be furnished by the owner and shall be of permanent
design. They shall not be removed or defaced and, if lost, removed
or defaced, shall be immediately replaced.
(5) A new section, Section 601.3, is added to read as follows:
§ 82-4 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 82-4
82:179
§ 82-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-19-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-5, approved 11-19-2001]
601.3 Discontinuance of required services and removal of
required appurtenances. No owner, operator or occupant shall
cause any service which is required under this code to be
removed, shut off or discontinued in any occupied dwelling let or
occupied by him except for such temporary interruption as may be
necessary while actual repairs are in process or during temporary
emergencies.
(6) Section 604.1, Facilities required, is amended by the addition
thereto of the following: "Every structure used for a residential
and/or nonresidential purpose which is located within 300 feet of
power lines shall be supplied with electric service. All electrical
equipment, wiring and appliances shall be installed and maintained
in a safe manner in accordance with the requirements of the
Borough Electrical Code."30
(7) Section 704.1, Smoke detectors, shall be amended by the addition
thereto of the following:
704.1 Early detection devices. Early detection devices shall
be installed by the owner in the sleeping area of every existing
apartment, boarding or rooming unit in accordance with NFPA
Standard No. 72. Early detection devices shall be installed in oneand
two-family dwellings upon sale or transfer of the property in
accordance with NFPA Standard No. 72.
(8) A new section, Section 704.4, is added, to read as follows:
704.4 Fire-extinguishing equipment. All hand-operated
auxiliary fire-extinguishing equipment shall be of an approved size
and type suitable to the occupational use of the building and shall
be installed in corridors or other locations, visible and readily
accessible to the occupants of the building in accordance with
NFPA No. 10, listed in Appendix B. In hotels, dormitories and
apartment houses, at least one fire extinguisher shall be provided
on each floor at the stairway landing and in the corridor at each
elevator or bank of elevators.
A. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provisions of this
chapter and/or the Borough's Property Maintenance Code shall, upon
conviction and summary proceeding before any District Justice, be
sentenced for each such violation to pay a fine of not less than $50 and
not more than $100 for the first offense, $300 for the second offense,
and $500 for each subsequent offense, plus all court costs, and, in
default thereof, to undergo imprisonment in the county jail for a period
not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation continues after due
30.Editor's Note: See Ch. 54, Electrical Standards.
§ 82-4 § 82-5
82:180
§ 82-6. Effect; severability; repealer.
Chapter 84
REAL ESTATE REGISTRATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Inspection licenses — See Ch. 69.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 82.
Taxation — See Ch. 102.
§ 84-1. Legislative intent.
This chapter is passed to provide for the uniform and equitable distribution
of the tax levies of the Borough of Steelton upon the inhabitants of the
aforesaid Borough of Steelton and to promote the health, safety, morals and
general welfare of the inhabitants of the aforesaid Borough of Steelton.
§ 84-2. Definitions.
The following words or phrases when used in this chapter shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section:
notice has been served in accordance with the terms and provisions
hereof shall be deemed a separate offense.
B. In addition to the enforcement of a violation of the provisions of this
chapter and/or the Borough's Property and Maintenance Code pursuant
to the summary proceedings above authorized, the Borough may
proceed to enforce the provisions of this chapter and/or the Borough's
Property and Maintenance Code through an action at law or in equity.
A. Saving clause. Nothing in this chapter or in the 2000 International
Property Maintenance Code hereby adopted shall be construed to affect
any suit or proceeding now pending in any court or any rights acquired
or liability incurred or any cause or causes of action accrued or existing
under any act or ordinance repealed hereby. No right or remedy of any
character shall be lost.
B. Validity. The invalidity of any section or provision of the chapter or the
2000 International Property Maintenance Code hereby adopted shall
not invalidate other sections or provisions thereof.
C. Repealer. The "Property Maintenance Code of the Borough of Steelton,"
Ordinance No. 82-9, as amended by Ordinance 98-6, Ordinance 2000-3
and any ordinance or code provisions conflicting with the provisions
hereof are hereby repealed insofar as they are inconsistent with this
chapter.
§ 82-5 REAL ESTATE REGISTRATION § 84-2
84:181
BUSINESS UNIT — A parcel of real estate, with or without improvements
located thereon, utilized by any person or persons for any commercial
motive or purpose.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms used for living and sleeping
purposes, arranged for occupancy by one family or by one person.
LANDLORD — A person who holds the legal or equitable title to any parcel
of real estate located in the Borough of Steelton or who holds the equitable
or legal title to any improvements on real estate or any building located in
the Borough of Steelton.
PERSON — Includes any individual, partnership, association, firm or
corporation.
TENANT — A person who has the use, either by himself or with others, of a
dwelling unit or a business unit owned by a person other than himself.
§ 84-3. Information to be reported.
After the effective date of this chapter and within 30 days from the passage
thereof, each landlord shall report to the Secretary of the Borough of
Steelton, on a report form to be supplied by the aforesaid Secretary, the
following information:
§ 84-4. Report required upon acquisition of real estate; fee.
A. A list of the dwelling units and business units owned by the landlord,
located within the Borough limits, whether occupied or not occupied.
B. The address of each dwelling unit and business unit.
C. A brief description of each dwelling unit and business unit.
D. The names of the tenant or tenants utilizing the aforementioned
dwelling unit or business unit, if any.
E. Whether or not said dwelling unit or business unit is inhabited or
utilized by tenants.
A. After the effective date of this chapter, any person who acquires the
legal or equitable title to any parcel of real estate or to any
improvement on real estate or any building located in the Borough of
Steelton, by agreement of sale, by deed or by any other means, shall,
within 30 days thereafter, report to the Secretary of the aforesaid
Borough the information and data set forth in § 84-3 above, and on the
forms to be provided by the Secretary of the Borough of Steelton.
B. Each person making a report as required above shall pay an
administrative filing fee of $2 to the Borough of Steelton at the time of
filing of each required report. [Added 5-1-1995 by Ord. No. 95-5,
approved 5-1-1995]
§ 84-2 § 84-5
84:182
§ 84-5. Report required upon change of use or occupancy.
[Amended 11-15-1999 by Ord. No. 99-5, approved 11-15-1999]
After the effective date of this chapter, each and every landlord owning
property within the Borough of Steelton shall report to the Secretary of the
Borough of Steelton, on a form provided by the Secretary of the Borough
of Steelton, on February 27, annually, and thereafter when it occurs, any
change in the use or occupancy of any dwelling unit or business unit owned
by the aforesaid landlord. Such reported change shall include the name
or names of new tenants of such dwelling unit or business unit and shall
include the date when such change was effected. In case of a landlord who
is an owner of a hotel, inn or boardinghouse, such landlord shall not be
required to report a person as a tenant until that person has resided in such
landlord's establishment for a period of 60 days, except that all tenants shall
be reported on February 27, annually. In such event that a dwelling unit or
business unit was used or utilized by a tenant and then becomes vacant, this
change shall also be reported to the Secretary. All reports required by this
section shall be made within 10 days after a landlord has knowledge that
such a unit has become vacant.
§ 84-6. Duties of Borough Secretary.
The Secretary of the Borough of Steelton, under the authority of this
chapter, shall have the following duties:
A. To maintain on file in the Borough offices the names of the landlords
owning dwelling units and business units in the aforesaid Borough of
Steelton, said list to include the names of the current tenants of said
dwelling units and business units.
B. To maintain a supply of forms for landlords to use in making reports to
the Secretary of the Borough of Steelton, as required by §§ 84-3, 84-4
and 84-5.
C. To notify the Chief of Police and the Fire Chief of the Borough of
Steelton of the address and description of any dwelling unit or business
unit that is vacant, unoccupied and not in use.
D. To report to the proper officer of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or
of the Borough of Steelton when a number of tenants in any dwelling
unit or business unit exceeds the number of tenants or inhabitants
permitted by any ordinance of the Borough of Steelton or by any law of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
E. To notify the Code Enforcement of the Borough of Steelton when a
landlord reports a change of use pursuant to § 84-5 of this chapter so
that the Code Enforcement Office may schedule and make such
inspections as may be provided by the codes and ordinances of the
Borough. [Added 2-7-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-1, approved
2-7-2005]
§ 84-5 REAL ESTATE REGISTRATION § 84-7
84:183
§ 84-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-20-1976 by Ord. No.
76-4, approved 5-20-1976]
Any landlord who violates any of the provisions of this chapter or who
furnishes false information to the Borough or who uses a false name or
address in any report required by this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof
before any District Justice of the Borough, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $300 and costs of prosecution and, in default of payment thereof,
to suffer imprisonment in the Dauphin County jail for not more than 30 days.
Chapter 86
RECYCLING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Solid waste — See Ch. 92.
§ 86-1. Title.
The title of this chapter shall be "Recycling," and the same may be cited in
that manner.
§ 86-2. Authority.
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the Municipal Waste Planning,
Recycling and Waste Reduction Act, Act of July 28, 1988 (P.L. 556, No. 101),
53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
§ 86-3. Purposes and goals.
The purposes and goals of this chapter are to:
A. Require waste reduction and recycling as a means of managing solid
waste, conserving resources and supplying energy.
B. Protect the public health, safety and welfare from the short-and longterm
dangers of collection, transportation, processing and storage of
solid waste.
C. Utilize, wherever feasible, the capabilities of private enterprise in
accomplishing the desired objectives of an effective, comprehensive
solid waste management program.
D. Establish and implement with the Borough a recycling program to
return valuable materials to productive use to conserve energy and to
protect capacity at waste processing and disposal facilities.
E. Recycle at least 25% of all solid waste and source-separated recyclable
materials generated in this Borough on and after January 1, 1997.
§ 84-7 § 86-3
86:184
§ 86-4. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALUMINUM CANS — Empty, all-aluminum beverage and food containers.
AUTHORIZED COLLECTOR — Person, persons, firm, firms, corporation,
association, partnership or other legal entity certified by the Borough of
Steelton to collect municipal waste and/or source-separated recyclable
materials in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
BIMETALLIC CANS — Empty food or beverage containers consisting of
steel cylinder and aluminum top or bottom. Also included in this definition
are traditional steel or tin cans which consist predominantly of steel and
coated with tin.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Steelton, Dauphin County, Pennsylvania.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Those properties used primarily for
commercial or industrial purposes and those multiple dwelling residential
buildings containing four or more dwelling units.
COMMUNITY ACTIVITIES — Church, school, civic, service group,
municipal functions and all other such functions within a mandated
municipality to which more than 200 persons per day attend.
CORRUGATED PAPER — Structural paper material with an inner core
shaped in rigid parallel furrows and ridges.
CURBSIDE RECYCLING COLLECTION — The scheduled collection and
transport of recyclable materials placed at the curbline or other similar
location by residential establishments or approved small businesses.
DWELLING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms located within a building
and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or
intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating by one family.
This definition includes a mobile home. Any multifamily establishment of
two or three dwellings units is included in this definition. For purposes
of this chapter and any related contract, the term "dwelling unit" or
"residential unit" may also include any small commercial establishment or
institutional establishment that, due to its volume of solid waste, may be
treated by the Borough as a "dwelling unit" for the collection and disposal
F. Reduce the weight or volume of solid waste generated per capita in this
Borough on January 1, 1997, to a weight or volume less than that
generated per capita on the effective date of this chapter.
G. Teach each person living or working in the Borough the economic,
environmental and energy value of recycling and waste reduction, and
encourage, through a variety of means, participation in such activities.
H. Promote the procurement and use of products and materials with
recycled content and materials that are recyclable by the Borough to
the greatest extent practicable.
§ 86-3 RECYCLING § 86-4
86:185
of municipal solid waste and the collection, processing and marketing of
recyclables.
GLASS CONTAINERS — Bottles and jars made of clear, green or brown
glass. Excluded are plate glass, automotive glass, blue glass, light bulbs,
porcelain and ceramic products.
HIGH-GRADE OFFICE PAPER — All white paper, bond paper and computer
paper used in commercial, institutional, industrial and municipal
establishments.
INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment engaging in
manufacturing or processing, including but not limited to factories,
foundries, mills, processing plants and refineries.
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENT — Those facilities that house or serve
groups of people, such as hospitals, schools, day-care centers and nursing
homes.
LEAD ACID BATTERIES — Includes but is not limited to automotive, truck
and industrial batteries that contain lead.
LEAF WASTE — Leaves from trees, brushes and other plants, garden
residue, chipped shrubbery and tree trimmings, but not including grass
clippings.
MULTIFAMILY HOUSING PROPERTIES — Any properties having four or
more dwelling units per structure.
MUNICIPAL ESTABLISHMENTS — Any facility or building owned or
operated by a local government or county government, local government
or county government authority, state government or agency or federal
government or agency.
MUNICIPALITY — The Borough of Steelton, Dauphin County, Pennsylvania.
MUNICIPAL WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or office
waste and any other material, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained
gaseous materials resulting from the operation of residential, municipal,
commercial, institutional or industrial establishments and from community
activities; and sludge not meeting the definitions of residual or hazardous
waste in the Solid Waste Management Act31 from a municipal, commercial
or institutional waste water supply treatment plant, public waste water
treatment plant or air pollution control facility.
NEWSPAPER — Paper of the type commonly referred to as "newsprint" and
distributed at fixed intervals, having printed thereon news and opinions,
containing advertisements and other matters of public interest. Expressly
excluded are glossy advertising inserts often included with newspapers.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation, association,
institution, cooperative enterprise, municipal authority, federal government
or agency, state institution or agency or any other legal entity whatsoever
which is recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
31.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
§ 86-4 § 86-4
86:186
PLASTIC CONTAINERS — Empty plastic food and beverage containers. Due
to the large variety of types of plastic, only HDPE and PET type containers
will be accepted. These containers must have a recycling logo with a
number "1" or number "2" printed on it. Plastic milk jugs and detergent
bottles are typically made of HDPE; one-, two- and three-liter plastic soda
bottles are made of PET.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Those materials separated at the point of
origin for the purpose of being recycled, including those materials listed in
Act 10132 and by the municipality to be recycled.
RECYCLING — The separation, collection, recovery and sale or reuse of
metals, glass, paper, leaf waste, plastics and other materials which could
otherwise be disposed of or processed as solid waste or the mechanized
separation and treatment of solid waste (other than through combustion)
and creation and recovery of reusable materials other than a fuel for the
generation of energy.
RESIDENTIAL DWELLINGS — Any occupied single-family or multifamily
dwelling having three or fewer dwelling units per structure.
SOLID WASTE — All materials or substances that, as of the effective date of
this chapter or any subsequent date, were generally discarded or rejected
as being spent, useless, worthless or in excess to the owners at the time
of such discard or rejection, including garbage, refuse, industrial and
commercial waste, sludges from air or water pollution control facilities
or water supply treatment facilities, rubbish, ashes, contained gaseous
materials, incinerator residue, demolition and construction debris and offal;
excluding sewage and other highly diluted water-carried materials or
substances, material and substances in gaseous form and hazardous waste.
SOURCE-SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Recyclable materials
that are separated from solid waste at the point of origin for the purpose of
recycling.
STEEL CANS — Empty, all-steel (ferrous material) or bimetal beverage and
food containers.
§ 86-5. Program established.
A. There is hereby established a program for the mandatory separation of
recyclable materials from solid waste by persons residing in residential
dwellings, including apartments with three or fewer units.
B. Powers. In carrying out its duties under this section, the Borough
Council of the Borough of Steelton may adopt resolutions establishing
procedures, regulations and standards for the recycling,
transportation, storage and collection of source-separated recyclable
materials which shall not be less stringent than and not in violation or
inconsistent with the provisions and purposes of the Municipal Waste
32.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
§ 86-4 RECYCLING § 86-5
86:187
§ 86-6. Separation and placement of recyclables generally.
Recyclable materials from residential dwellings shall be placed at a
designated location separate from solid waste for collection at specific times
and dates, as established and advertised by Steelton Borough. Materials
to be recycled are: clear glass, colored glass, steel and bimetallic cans,
newsprint and HDPE and PET plastic containers (recycling logo Nos. 1 and
2).
§ 86-7. Separation by commercial and municipal establishments.
All commercial, municipal, institutional and industrial establishments shall
separate and store, until collection, high-grade office paper, corrugated
paper and aluminum cans.
Planning, Recycling and Waste Reduction Act33 and the regulations
promulgated pursuant thereto.
C. Duties. Steelton Borough shall implement the provisions of this chapter
by collecting, transporting, processing or marketing source-separated
materials or contracting, subject to competitive bidding, with any
person to carry out its duties for the recycling, transportation,
collection and storage of source-separated recyclable materials. Any
such person shall be jointly and severally responsible with Steelton
Borough in carrying out its duties for transportation, collection or
storage activity.
A. For establishments participating in the Borough's solid waste/ recycling
program, all commercial, institutional and industrial establishments
will be required to recycle the three materials listed above. The
exclusive contractor hauling waste for the Borough will provide for the
collection of the recyclables as well as collection of solid waste.
B. For establishments not participating in the Borough's solid waste/
recycling program, all commercial, institutional and industrial
establishments are required to provide for recycling of the three
materials listed above. If an establishment contracts on its own for
waste hauling, it must make arrangements for recycling services also.
Establishments which make their own arrangements for recycling must
report annually (by January 30) the amount (by weight) of each material
recycled the previous calendar year to the Steelton Borough Secretary.
C. The following recyclable materials must be separated until collection at
community activities (attended by 200 or more people): metal cans and
plastic (HDPE and PET) bottles. Sponsoring organizations must arrange
for the transfer or collection of these recyclables so that they are indeed
recycled.
33.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
§ 86-5 § 86-8
86:188
§ 86-8. Separation by multifamily housing properties.
The owner, landlord or an agent of an owner or landlord of multifamily
housing properties of four or more units shall establish a collection system
for recyclables at each property. Materials to be separated are clear glass,
colored glass, aluminum cans, steel and bimetallic cans, newsprint and
HDPE and PET plastic containers. The collection system must contain
suitable containers for collecting materials, easily accessible locations for
the containers and written instructions to all occupants, concerning the use
and availability of the collection system. Owners, landlords and agents of
owners or landlords shall not be liable for noncompliance of the occupants
of their buildings.
§ 86-9. Lead acid batteries.
No person may place a used lead acid battery in mixed municipal solid
waste, discard or otherwise dispose of a lead acid battery except by delivery
to an automotive battery retailer or wholesaler, to a secondary lead smelter
permitted by the Environmental Protection Agency or to a collection or
recycling facility authorized under the laws of the commonwealth to accept
such batteries.
§ 86-10. Leaves.
All persons who reside in residential dwellings and all persons who are
responsible for administration of multifamily housing properties,
commercial, municipal, institutional and industrial establishments who
gather leaves shall source separate all leaf waste from other waste and
place it for collection at the times and in the manner hereafter prescribed by
Steelton Borough. Nothing herein shall require any person to gather leaves
or prevent any person from utilizing leaves for compost, mulch or other
agricultural, horticultural, silvicultural, gardening or landscape purposes.
§ 86-11. Collection by unauthorized persons.
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person(s), unauthorized by the
Steelton Borough, to collect or pick up or cause to be collected or picked up
any recyclable material which is included in the Steelton Borough recycling
program. Each such collection in violation hereof shall constitute a separate
and distinct offense punishable as hereinafter provided.
§ 86-12. Alternative collection methods.
Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit persons in Steelton Borough from
donating or selling recyclable materials generated from their residence.
These materials must be delivered to the individuals' or organizations' site.
§ 86-13. Delivery to landfills or incinerators.
It shall be a violation of this chapter for the authorized collector of
recyclable materials to deliver such materials to a landfill or incinerator for
§ 86-8 RECYCLING § 86-13
86:189
the purpose of disposal unless the markets for such materials no longer
exists. The authorized collector will provide to the Borough of Steelton
the weight receipts of the recyclable materials disposed of at a landfill or
incinerator under this section.
§ 86-14. Franchises and licenses.
§ 86-15. Annual report.
An annual report on the weight of materials recycled during the previous
calendar year must be sent to the Borough Secretary by January 30 of
each year from commercial, institutional, industrial and municipal
establishments that are not participating in the Borough's recycling
program.
§ 86-16. Public education.
The Borough shall establish a comprehensive and sustained public
information and education program concerning recycling program features
and requirements as required by the Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling
and Waste Reduction Act.34
§ 86-17. Fees and billings.
A. The Borough of Steelton may enter into agreement(s) with public or
private agencies or firms to authorize them to collect all or part of the
recyclable material from curbside or from dropoff collection points.
B. Only a person licensed by the Borough of Steelton, Dauphin County,
Pennsylvania, may collect, transport and dispose recyclables or
recyclable materials generated within the territorial limits of Steelton
Borough, Dauphin County, Pennsylvania.
C. An authorized collector is one who has been granted a license by
Steelton Borough, Dauphin County, Pennsylvania, for the specific
purpose of collecting, transporting and disposing of recyclable
materials.
D. A licensed collector shall not in any manner be construed as an agent,
servant or employee of Steelton Borough, but shall, at all times, be
considered and remain an independent contractor.
A. It shall be the duty and responsibility of every owner of property and
every person occupying a dwelling unit, premise or place of business in
the Borough who are part of the Borough recycling program to pay a
service fee for collection and recycling, except as otherwise provided by
this chapter, to the authorized collector. The recycling fee may also
include an additional amount to cover the Borough's administrative
costs involved in this portion of the program. The owner and/or
34.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
§ 86-13 § 86-17
86:190
§ 86-18. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
occupant of any dwelling unit, including multifamily establishments or
other participants in the recycling program, shall pay a base quarterly
fee regardless of the amount or type of recyclables put out for
collection. An exclusive contractor may discontinue service for
nonpayment of quarterly fees by a resident, commercial, institutional or
industrial establishment covered by the program.
B. All quarterly fees established under an exclusive contract for the
collection of recyclables by the exclusive collector shall be established
by resolution of the Council of Steelton Borough. Any charges so
established shall be reviewed at least annually and adjusted as
necessary to ensure that all costs involved in the collection and disposal
of municipal waste under the exclusive contract, including
administrative costs of the Borough, are covered by the charge.
A. The Borough Code Enforcement Officer and the Borough Secretary, or
their designee, are authorized and directed to enforce this chapter. The
Borough Secretary is also hereby authorized and directed to establish
and promulgate reasonable regulations as to manner, materials, days
and time for the collection of recyclable materials and any other
matters required to implement this chapter in accordance herewith.
The Borough Secretary or his or her designee may change, modify,
repeal or amend any portion of said regulations at any time.
B. Any person, other than a municipal official exercising his or her official
duties, who shall violate any provision of this chapter, any regulation
promulgated hereunder or any order issued hereunder shall, upon
conviction thereof in a summary proceeding, be sentenced to pay a fine
of not less than $100 and not more than $1,000 and costs and, in default
of the payment of such fine and cost, to undergo imprisonment for not
more than 30 days. Each day's continuation of violation of this chapter
shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
C. In addition to any other remedies or penalties hereinbefore provided,
the Solicitor of the Borough is authorized to institute proceedings in
courts of law or equity to control the recycling, transportation,
collection and storage of source-separated recyclable materials or to
enforce the provisions of this chapter, including the securing of
injunctive relief to prohibit any unlicensed or unauthorized person, or
any licensed or authorized collector in violation of the provisions of this
chapter, from continuing the collection, transportation or disposal of
recyclable items hereunder, or to enforce compliance by any person
with the terms of this chapter.
§ 86-17 RECYCLING § 86-18
86:191
Chapter 90
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Borough Authority — See Ch. 6.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 93.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
99.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 108.
§ 86-18 § 86-18
90:192
ARTICLE I
Terminology
§ 90-1. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically and clearly indicates otherwise, the meaning
of terms used in this chapter shall be as follows:
ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE — A discharge not caused by the fault of any
person, and one that could not have been prevented by any means
suggested by common prudence, which would interfere with the operation
of the advanced wastewater treatment facility (AWTF).
ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the "Clean
Water Act of 1977," as amended.
ADVANCED WASTEWATER TREATMENT FACILITY OF THE CITY OF
HARRISBURG (AWTF) — The publicly owned wastewater collection
conveyance and treatment system (POTW) as defined by Section 212 of the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the "Clean Water Act of
1977," as amended.
APPLICANT — All persons holding title to facilities or improvements for
which a permit for the connection to or discharge into the sewer system is
required.
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF A SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER
— Either:
BILLING UNIT — Includes, as applicable, each of the following: a
"commercial establishment," a "residential establishment," or an "industrial
establishment."
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD) — The quantity of oxygen utilized
in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedure, five days at 20° expressed in terms of weight and concentration
(milligrams per liter).
BOD — Biochemical oxygen demand.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Steelton, Dauphin County, Pennsylvania, or
duly constituted and elected authorities thereof.
BOROUGH COUNCIL — The Council of the Borough of Steelton.
A principal executive officer of at least the level of vice president, if the
user is a corporation; or
A.
A general partner or proprietor if the user is a partnership or
proprietorship, respectively; or
B.
A duly authorized representative of the individual designated in
Subsection A or B above, if such representative is responsible for the
overall operation of the facility or facilities from which the discharge
originates.
C.
§ 90-1 SEWERS § 90-1
90:193
BOROUGH SECRETARY/TREASURER — The person responsible for the
administrative management and billing of the sewer system appointed by
the Council of the Borough of Steelton.
BOROUGH SEWER SYSTEM — All facilities and property owned by the
Borough as of any particular time, including but not limited to, facilities for
collecting, pumping, and conveying sanitary sewage and industrial wastes
into the treatment plant of the City of Harrisburg, AWTF.
BUILDING SEWER — The pipe leading from the sewage drainage system of
any structure to the collection sewer or the pressure sewer system.
CATEGORICAL STANDARD or FEDERAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT
STANDARD — Any regulations promulgated by the Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) which apply to a specific category or subcategory
of industry regarding their discharge of pollutants.
CFR — Code of Federal Regulations.
CITY — The City of Harrisburg.
CLEAN STREAMS LAW — The Act of June 22, 1937, P.L. 1987, as amended
and reenacted by Act of October 10, 1980, P.L. 894, 35 P.S. §§ 691.1 to
691.702.
CLEAN WATER ACT (aka "Federal Water Pollution Control Act") — A federal
statute enacted by Public Law 92-500, October 18, 1972; 33 U.S.C. § 1251
et seq.: as amended by Public Law 95-217, December 28, 1977; Public Law
97-117, December 29, 1981; Public Law 97-440, January 8, 1983; and Public
Law 100-04, February 4, 1987.
COLLECTION AND CONVEYANCE SYSTEM — The sanitary sewer
collection system of the City and conveyance system of The Harrisburg
Authority in which wastewater is collected, conveyed and discharged, or
will be discharged into the advanced wastewater treatment facility, AWTF.
COLLECTION SEWER — The Borough's sanitary sewers located under
highways, roads, streets, and public rights-of-way that collect and convey
sanitary sewage or industrial wastes or a combination of both to a pumping
or treatment facility.
COLLECTION SYSTEM — The sanitary sewer collection system of the City
in which wastewater is collected and discharged, or will be discharged, into
the AWTF.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any room, group of rooms, building
or enclosure containing plumbing and used or intended for use in the
operation of one business enterprise for the sale or distribution of any
product, commodity, article or service or used or intended for use for any
social, amusement, religious, educational, charitable or public purpose.
"Commercial establishment" includes institutional dormitories, but does not
include personal care boarding homes licensed by the commonwealth.
COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT — Wastewater constituents, which the
wastewater treatment plant is designed to treat, and wastewater
§ 90-1 § 90-1
90:194
substances, which will not interfere with the treatment system or pass
through the treatment system inadequately treated.
COMPLIANCE MONITORING — The act of checking specific conditions or
requirements of the industrial user permit.
CONNECTION FEE — A fee imposed in accordance with PA Act 209/Act
203 to reimburse the Borough for the costs incurred in providing the
necessary facilities between the collection sewer and the property line of
the property to be served. Where the Borough has allowed the property
owner or others to construct these facilities, the connection fee will reflect
the Borough's cost of administrative processing, or other costs chargeable
to these facilities.
CONNECTION UNIT — Each individual building or portion of a building
(factory, apartment house or office building), which is designed or adaptable
to separate ownership. Other multiple-unit structures whose individual
apartments or units are connected to a common internal sewage system and
are not subject to separate ownership shall be considered as one connection
unit.
CONVENTIONAL POLLUTANTS — Pollutants, which are usually found in
domestic, commercial or industrial wastes, such as phosphorus, total
suspended solids, biochemical oxygen demand, fecal coliform, adverse pH
levels, and oil and grease.
COOLING WATER — The water discharged from any use such as air
conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant added
is heat.
CUSTOMER FACILITIES FEE — A fee imposed in accordance with PA Act
209/Act 203 to reimburse the Borough for the costs of facilities installed
between the property line and the internal plumbing of the property to
receive service. Where the property owner or other install these facilities,
the customer facilities fee will reflect the Borough's cost of inspection,
administrative processing, or other costs chargeable to these facilities.
DEP — See "PADEP."
DEPARTMENT — The Department of Public Works of the City of Harrisburg.
DIRECTOR or DIRECTOR DPW — The Director of the Department of Public
Works of the City of Harrisburg.
DISCHARGER — Any person who contributes, causes or permits the
contribution of treated or untreated wastewater into the sewer system.
DOMESTIC WASTES or DOMESTIC WASTEWATER — The wastes produced
from noncommercial or nonindustrial activities, and which result from
normal human living processes, which are of substantially similar origin and
strength to those typically produced in residential establishments, including
wastes from sanitary conveniences.
ENGINEER — The then or current Consulting Engineer to the Borough.
§ 90-1 SEWERS § 90-1
90:195
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY (EPA) — An agency or
administrative department of the United States, or any other agency or
administrative department of the United States hereafter exercising all or
any portion, as appropriate, of the powers or jurisdiction presently being
exercised thereby.
EPA — United States Environmental Protection Agency.
EQUIVALENT DWELLING UNIT (EDU) — A measure of the volume of flow
or expected flow of sanitary sewage or industrial waste from any property
that is equal to the volume of flow discharged from one dwelling unit as
determined in accordance with sound engineering practice.
FEDERAL ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as
the "Clean Water Act of 1977," as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
FEDERAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS — National
Categorical Pretreatment Standards.
GRAB SAMPLE — A sample, which is taken from a waste stream on a onetime
basis with no regard to the flow in the waste stream and without
consideration of time.
HARRISBURG CONVEYANCE SYSTEM — The interceptor sewers, pumping
stations and force mains and all related structures which are a part of the
wastewater facilities transporting and conveying wastewater from facilities
of the City and any of suburban municipalities of the AWTF which are part
of the wastewater facilities.
HOLDING TANK WASTE — Any waste from holding tanks of vessels,
chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks and vacuum-pump tank
trucks.
IMPROVED PROPERTY — Any property upon which there is erected a
structure intended for continuous or periodic habitation, occupancy or use
by human beings or animals and from which domestic wastewater and/or
industrial wastes shall be or may be discharged.
INDIRECT DISCHARGE — The discharge of the introduction of
nondomestic pollutants from any source regulated under Section 307(b), (c)
or (d) of the Federal Act [33 U.S.C. § 1317(b), (c) or (d)], into the AWTF.
For the purposes of this definition, holding tank wastes shall be considered
indirect discharge.
INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any nonresidential establishment
discharging sewage and wastes other than normal waste carried domestic
sewage and wastes and cooling water, directly or indirectly to the AWTF.
INDUSTRIAL USER — A source of indirect discharge, which does not
constitute a "discharge of pollutants" under regulations issued pursuant to
Section 402 of the Federal Act (33 U.S.C. § 1342).
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance, waterborne
wastes or form of energy rejected or escaping from any industrial,
manufacturing, trade or business proceeds or from the development,
§ 90-1 § 90-1
90:196
recovering or processing of natural resources, as distinct from sanitary
sewage.
INTERFERENCE — The inhibition or disruption of the AWTF treatment
processes or operation, which contributes to a violation of any requirement
of The Harrisburg Authority's NPDES permit. The term includes pollution
which prevents the use or disposal of sewage sludge by the AWTF in
accordance with Section 405 of the Federal Act (33 U.S.C. § 1345) or any
criteria, guidelines or regulations developed pursuant to the Solid Waste
Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substance Control Act or more
stringent state criteria applicable to the method of disposal or use employed
by the AWTF.
LEASE — The agreement of lease between the City as lessee and The
Harrisburg Authority as lessor, whereunder the wastewater facilities are
leased to the City for operation and use, and any amendments and
supplements to such lease.
LOCAL LIMITS — A locally established limit deemed to be a pretreatment
standard for the purpose of Section 307(d) of the Clean Water Act. The
limit is specific to the advanced wastewater treatment facility (AWTF) and is
based on the potential for pass-through, interference, sludge contamination
or capacity to cause damage or hazards to structures, equipment or
personnel of the advanced wastewater treatment facility (AWTF) by the
discharge of any pollutant by an industrial user.
MILLIGRAM PER LITER (MG/L) — Concentration based on mass of
pollutant per unit volume.
NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS — Any
regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the United
States Environmental Protection Agency in accordance with Section 307(b)
and (c) of the Federal Act, 33 U.S.C. § 1317(6)(b) and (c), which applies to a
specific category of industrial users.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES)
PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Federal Act, 33.
U.S.C. § 1342.
NATIONAL PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARD — Any regulation
developed under authority of Section 307(b) of the Federal Act, 33 U.S.C.
§ 1317(b) and 40 CFR 403.5.
NEW SOURCE — Any new building, structure, facility or installation from
which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, which commences after
the date of publication of a proposed pretreatment standard under Section
307(c) of the Clean Water Act.
NONRESIDENTIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any building, structure, room,
group of rooms, establishment, or facility other than a residence which
discharge sewage and wastes, including industrial wastes, directly or
indirectly to the AWTF.
OCCUPIED BUILDING — Any structure erected and intended for
continuous or periodic habitation, occupancy or use by human beings or
§ 90-1 SEWERS § 90-1
90:197
animals and from which structure sanitary sewage, industrial waste or both
is or may be discharged.
OWNER — Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or
partial, of any improved property.
PADEP — The Department of Environmental Protection, an agency or
administrative department of the commonwealth, or any other agency or
administrative department of the commonwealth hereafter exercising all or
any portion, as appropriate, of the powers or jurisdiction presently being
exercised thereby.
PARTS PER MILLION (PPM) — Indicates a mass ratio meaning milligrams
per million milligrams, and generally will be considered equivalent to
milligrams per liter (mg/L).
PASS-THROUGH — A discharge, which exits the AWTF into a waterway
of the United States in quantities, or concentrations, which, alone or in
conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of
a violation of The Harrisburg Authority's NPDES permit.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, company, association, society, trust,
corporation (whether public or private) or other group or entity, including a
municipal authority and municipality.
pH — The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of
hydrogen ions expressed in grams per liter of solution.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage,
garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical waste, wastes, biological
materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment,
rock, sand and cellar dirt, and industrial, municipal and agricultural waste
discharged into water.
POLLUTION — The man-made or man-induced alteration of the chemical,
physical, biological or radiological integrity of water.
PRESSURE SEWER SYSTEM — A complete grinder pump system including
grinder pump, motor, basin, control panel, and pressure lateral between the
grinder pump unit and point of connection at the collection sewer.
PRETREATMENT or TREATMENT — The reduction of the amount of
pollutants, the elimination of pollutants or the alteration of the nature of
pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu
of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into the AWTF. The
reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological
process, or process changes by other means, except as prohibited by 40
CFR 403.6(d) (dilution).
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENT — Any substantive or procedural
requirement related to pretreatment other than a pretreatment standard
imposed on an industrial user.
PRETREATMENT STANDARD — Any national categorical pretreatment
standard, local limit, or discharge prohibition regulation identified in § 90-6
containing a list of pollutant discharge limitations.
§ 90-1 § 90-1
90:198
PROCESS WASTEWATER — Any water which, during manufacturing or
processing, comes into direct contact with or results from the production or
use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished product, by-product
or waste product. Sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown
wastewaters are excluded unless they become process makeup water.
PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARD — National Prohibited Discharge
Standard.
PROPERTY ACCESSIBLE TO THE COLLECTION SYSTEM — Any improved
property (any property within Steelton Borough upon which there is erected
a structure intended for continuous or periodic habitation, occupancy or use
by human beings or animals and from which structure sanitary sewage and/
or industrial waste shall be or may be discharged) abutting on or adjoining
any street or highway in which a sewer or drain is located which is part of
the sewer system.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW) — A treatment works as
defined by Section 212 of the Clean Water Act; which is owned by a state
or municipality [as defined by Section 502(4) of the Clean Water Act]. This
definition includes any devices and systems used in the storage, treatment;
recycling, and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a
liquid nature. It also includes sewers, pipes and other conveyances only if
they convey wastewater to a treatment facility.
RESERVATION OF CAPACITY FEE — A fee imposed by the Borough for
allocating to a property owner, based on his request, capacity in the
Borough's sewer system in advance of his payment of the Borough's tapping
fee.
RESIDENTIAL ESTABLISHMENT or RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — Any
room, group of rooms, building or other enclosure occupied or intended
for occupancy as separate living quarters by a single family or by persons
living alone, excluding institutional dormitories, but including personal care
boarding homes licensed by the commonwealth. Such property shall be
billed and considered a separate entity.
SANITARY SEWAGE — The normal water-carried household and toilet
wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and commercial
and industrial establishments.
SELF-MONITORING — Sampling and analysis performed by the industrial
user to ensure compliance with permit provisions.
SERVICE AGREEMENT — The second supplemental agreement dated
September 15, 1976, among the City of Harrisburg, Harrisburg Sewerage
Authority and the suburban municipalities, and any supplements and
amendments to such agreement.
SERVICE PERIOD — For sewer rental purposes, means the length of time
for which sewer rentals are billed as may be determined by the Bureau
of Water of the City to correspond with water service periods; except
as otherwise provided in the Second Supplemental Agreement dated
§ 90-1 SEWERS § 90-1
90:199
September 15, 1976, among the City of Harrisburg and the suburban
municipalities and any supplements and amendments to such agreement.
SEWER — Any pipe, main or conduit constituting a part of the sewer system
and used or usable for collection and transportation of sanitary sewage and
industrial wastes.
SEWER SYSTEM — All the facilities for the collection and conveyance of
sewage and suitable industrial wastes into the AWTF and the treatment
plant.
SIC — Standard Industrial Classification.
SIGNATORY — A responsible corporate officer, general partner, proprietor,
or duly authorized representative of that individual.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER — All categorical industrial users or any
noncategorical industrial users that:
SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE — One or more violations of:
SLUG DISCHARGE — Any pollutant released in a discharge at a flow or
concentration rate, which will cause interference with the operation of the
AWTF.
SPILL PREVENTION, COUNTERMEASURES AND CONTROL PLAN (SPCC)
— A plan prepared by an industrial user to minimize the likelihood of a spill
and to expedite control and cleanup activities should a spill occur.
Have a discharge flow of 25,000 gallons or more per average work day
of process wastewater; or
A.
Have an average process flow which makes up 5% or more of the
average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the treatment
plant (Ord. 43-1990); or
B.
Have a reasonable potential in the opinion of the Superintendent to
adversely affect the treatment plant through inhibition, pass-through of
pollutants, sludge contamination or endangerment of AWTF workers, or
to violate any pretreatment standard or requirement.
C.
Wastewater discharge limits, including chronic violations, technical
review criteria violations, any discharge which alone or in combination
causes interference or pass-through, or endangers the health or welfare
of AWTF personnel, the public or environment, or results in the AWTF
exercising its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge;
A.
B. Compliance schedule milestones;
C. Reporting requirements;
D. Accurately reporting noncompliance; or
Any other violation or group of violations the AWTF considers to be
significant.
E.
§ 90-1 § 90-1
90:200
STANDARD CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS — The current standard
construction and material specifications for sanitary sewer extensions of the
Borough.
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION — A classification pursuant to
the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office
of the President, Office of Management and Budget (1972).
STANDARD METHODS — The most recent edition of "Standard Methods for
the Examination of Water and Wastewater" as published by the American
Public Health Association.
STATE — The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
STEELTON CONVEYANCE SYSTEM — The facilities owned or leased by the
Borough of Steelton, which transport and convey wastewater from facilities
of any of the suburban municipalities, and not through the Harrisburg
conveyance system, to the wastewater treatment facilities, which are part
of the wastewater facilities.
SUBURBAN MUNICIPALITIES or SUBURBAN MUNICIPAL AUTHORITIES
— The Borough of Penbrook, Borough of Paxtang, Borough of Steelton,
Township of Swatara, Township of Lower Paxton, and the Township of
Susquehanna and, as applicable, Swatara Township Authority, Lower Paxton
Authority, Steelton Borough Authority, and Susquehanna Township
Authority, collectively or individually, as appropriate.
SUPERINTENDENT — The person designated by the City to supervise
the operation of the AWTF and who is charged with certain duties and
responsibilities by this chapter or any other applicable legislation or one or
more duly authorized representatives.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS (SS) — The total suspended matter that floats on the
surface of or is suspended in water, wastewater or other liquids and which
is removable by laboratory filtering.
TAPPING FEE — A fee imposed by the Borough in accordance with PA
Act 209/Act 203 consisting of capacity part, collection system part, special
purpose part, and a reimbursement part.
TOXIC MATERIAL OR POLLUTANT — Any pollutant or combination of
pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the EPA under
Section 307(a) of the Federal Act or the Federal Laws.
TREATMENT — Pretreatment.
TREATMENT PLANT — The plant for the treatment of sewage conveyed
thereto by the collection system, and the equipment and facilities thereof;
the AWTF.
UPSET — An exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and
temporary noncompliance with the pretreatment standards because of
factors beyond the reasonable control of the industrial user. An upset
does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error,
improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities,
lack of preventive maintenance or careless or improper operation.
§ 90-1 SEWERS § 90-1
90:201
USE — Any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of
wastewater into the AWTF.
VIOLATION — The act of not meeting specific conditions or requirements
(i.e., noncompliance).
WASTEWATER — The liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic
wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, and
institutions, together with any pollutants, which may be present, whether
treated or untreated, which are contributed into or permitted to enter the
sewer system.
WASTEWATER FACILITIES — The wastewater conveyance, treatment,
disposal and related facilities owned by The Harrisburg Authority and
leased to the City of Harrisburg for operation and use, including existing
facilities and all future additions and improvements thereto.
§ 90-1 § 90-1
90:202
ARTICLE II
Connection Required; Permits
§ 90-2. Connection required.
§ 90-3. Use of other facilities prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person owning any property accessible to the
sewer system to erect, construct, use or maintain or cause to be erected,
constructed, used or maintained any privy, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or
other receptacle on such property for receiving sewage, after the expiration
of the particular period specified in § 90-2 hereof, or at any time to erect,
construct, use or maintain any pipe, conduit, drain or other facility for
the discharge of sanitary sewage except into the sewer system. It shall be
unlawful for any person to make a connection to the sewer system from any
cesspool, privy, vault, cistern or other depository.
§ 90-4. Abatement.
Any person who erects, constructs, uses or maintains a privy, cesspool,
sinkhole or septic tank on any property accessible to the sewer system in
violation of this article shall be deemed and shall be declared to be erecting,
A. All persons owning any occupied building now erected upon property
accessible to the sewer system shall, if not already connected, at their
own expense connect such building with the sewer system within one
year after the effective date of this article.
B. All persons owning any property accessible to the sewer system upon
which an occupied building is hereafter erected shall, at the time of the
erection of such building and at their own expense, connect the same
with the sewer system.
C. All persons owning any occupied building upon property which
hereafter becomes accessible to the sewer system shall, at their own
expense connect such a building with the sewer system within 30 days
after notice to do so from the Borough.
D. When an existing double house or condominium complex with
individual unit ownership is served by a single building sewer and
ownership of a unit is sold or otherwise conveyed, the owner of the unit
shall, at his own expense, connect such unit with the sewer system
within 30 days after notice to do so from the Borough (see § 90-15).
E. When an existing double house or condominium complex with
individual unit ownership is served by a single building sewer and
maintenance upon the building sewer is required, each side of the
double house and/or each individual unit of the condominium complex
shall be connected with the sewer system with an appropriate building
sewer within 30 days after notice to do so from the Borough (see
§ 90-15).
§ 90-2 SEWERS § 90-4
90:203
constructing and maintaining a nuisance, which nuisance the Borough is
hereby authorized and directed to abate in the manner provided by law.
§ 90-5. Compliance required when making connections.
No connection or discharge shall be made to or into the sewer system
except in compliance with all federal, state and local laws, ordinances,
resolutions, rules, and regulations now in force and effect as well as such
federal, state and local laws, ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations
as may, from time to time, be enacted, adopted, approved, or promulgated
by any federal, state or local authority, or may be otherwise provided by law.
§ 90-6. Power to prohibit connections and certain discharges.
A. The Borough or the City reserves the right to refuse permission to
connect to the sewer system, to compel discontinuance of use of the
sewer system or to compel pretreatment of wastewaters by any person
in order to prevent discharges deemed harmful or deemed to have a
deleterious effect upon the operation of, or any portion of, the sewer
system.
B. No wastewaters shall be discharged to the sewer system:
(1) Having heat in such quantities that the discharge causes the
temperature at the AWTF to exceed 40° C. or 104°F.;
(2) Containing fats, wax, grease or oils of petroleum origin, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/L, or petroleum oil,
nonbiodegradable cutting oil or petroleum products of mineral
origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass-through at
the AWTF;
(3) Containing any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other
explosive liquids, solids or gases or any other pollutants which will
create a fire or explosion hazard, including but not limited to waste
streams with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140° F. or 60° C.
using the test methods specified in 40 CFR Part 261.21;
(4) Containing any garbage that has not been ground by household
type or other suitable garbage grinders;
(5) Containing any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal,
glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, paunch, manure, or any
other solids or viscous substances capable of causing obstructions
or other interferences with proper operation of the sewer system;
(6) Having a pH lower then 6.0 or higher than 10.0 standard units, or
having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or
hazards to structures, equipment or personnel of the sewer system;
(7) Containing toxic or poisonous substances in sufficient quantity to
injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process, to
§ 90-4 § 90-6
90:204
§ 90-7. Connection permit application.
constitute hazards to humans or animals or to create any hazard
in waters, which receive treated effluent from the sewer system
treatment plant. Toxic wastes shall include, but not be limited to,
wastes containing cyanide, chromium, cadmium, mercury, copper
or nickel or any characteristic or listed hazardous waste;
(8) Containing noxious or malodorous gases or substances capable of
creating a public nuisance;
(9) Containing solids of such character and quantity that special and
unusual attention is required for their handling;
(10) Containing any substance, which may affect the AWTF's effluent
and cause violation of the NPDES permit requirements;
(11) Containing any substance which would cause the AWTF to be in
noncompliance with sludge use, recycling or disposal criteria
pursuant to guidelines or regulations developed under Section 405
of the Federal Act, the Clean Air Act or regulations criteria for
sludge management and disposal as required by the DEP;
(12) Containing color, which is not removed in the treatment processes;
(13) Containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes;
(14) Containing any pollutant, including conventional pollutants,
released at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration, which would
cause interference with the AWTF;
(15) Containing substances, which may solidify or become viscous at
temperatures between 0° C. or 32° F. and 60° C. or 140° F.;
(16) Containing chemical constituents which alone or in combination
result in the release of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes in a quantity
that may cause acute worker health and safety problems.
C. When the Superintendent or Director determines that an industrial user
is contributing any of the above substances in such amounts as to
exceed stated limits or to interfere with the operation of the AWTF, he
or she shall:
(1) Advise the user and Steelton Borough of the impact of such
discharges on the operation of the AWTF; and
(2) Develop effluent limitations for those discharges to correct the
interference with the operations of the AWTF; and
(3) Direct the user to comply with the effluent limitations as provided
in Article VI, § 90-46;
(4) Utilize the enforcement provisions of Article VI, § 90-71.
§ 90-6 SEWERS § 90-7
90:205
§ 90-8. Payment of fees.
The required fees as provided for in Article VII, § 90-95, shall accompany
the application referred to in § 90-7. An application is not considered
complete unless accompanied by payment of all applicable fees.
§ 90-9. Permit issuance.
Upon receipt of a properly executed application to connect, which
application and review of pertinent information demonstrates (in the
determination of the Borough and the City) that the connection can comply
with the requirements of the Borough and the City, and payment of all
required fees; the Borough shall issue a connection permit to the property
owner.
A. No connection shall be made to the sewer system, nor construction of
the building sewer, or pressure sewer system commenced unless and
until the owner of the property in which the work is to be done, or the
contractor who is to do the work as the owner's representative, shall
have applied for and obtained a connection permit, in the manner
hereinafter provided. A connection permit shall also be required
whenever any of the following situations exist:
(1) A new building or facility is connected to the sewer system or to the
internal drainage system of an existing building or facility.
(2) An existing building or facility is expanded in such a way that there
is an increased potential for the generation of wastewater. Flow
estimates shall be made by the Borough based on sound
engineering practice.
(3) An existing double house or condominium complex with individual
unit ownership is served by a single building sewer and ownership
of a unit is sold or otherwise conveyed.
(4) An existing double house or condominium complex with individual
unit ownership is served by a single building sewer and
maintenance of the building sewer is required.
(5) The Borough reserves the right to require a connection permit as it
deems necessary.
B. In addition, persons applying for connection of a nonresidential
establishment must satisfy the requirements of Article VI as necessary.
C. The application for connection to the sewer system shall be submitted
on the official form prepared for this purpose and must be complete.
Forms may be secured at the Borough's Code office.
§ 90-7 § 90-10
90:206
§ 90-10. Permit display.
The connection permit shall be kept on the property owner's premises and
shall be made available for review, upon request, from the time the work
begins until the final inspection has been made and the work has been
approved.
§ 90-11. Permits for significant industrial users.
Refer to Article VI, Industrial Waste Pretreatment, § 90-45.
§ 90-12. Sale of property.
If a property which is connected to the sewer system is sold, or otherwise
conveyed, the purchaser and/or seller shall promptly notify the Borough of
such sale or conveyance.
§ 90-10 SEWERS § 90-12
90:207

ARTICLE III
Connection Procedure and Specifications
§ 90-13. Specifications for connection.
No connection shall be made to the sewer system unless the manner in
which the connection is made and the materials and workmanship employed
in affecting such connection shall comply with the requirements of this
chapter and the Borough. It shall also be necessary for all connections to
comply with any special requirements imposed under § 90-17 of this article.
§ 90-14. Illegal discharges.
Any person who discharges or permits to be discharged any material to
the sewer system except through approved connections will be subject to
charges as provided in Article VII, § 90-102, in addition to being subject to
the penal provisions of any appropriate Borough ordinance.
§ 90-15. Separate connections; exceptions.
§ 90-16. Legal requirements.
All contractors installing connections to the sewer system shall comply with
all of the Borough's rules, regulations and guidance and all federal, state,
and local requirements, including but not limited to the following:
A. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, each connection unit shall
be connected separately and independently to the sewer through a
building sewer.
B. The grouping of more than one connection unit on a building sewer
shall not be permitted except where existing connection units are
grouped on a building sewer.
C. In the event the property ownership of a connection unit grouped on a
building sewer is to be sold or ownership transferred, all connection
units grouped on the building sewer shall be required to install
separate building sewers before property ownership is sold or
ownership transferred. The installation of such separate building
sewers shall be made at the expense of the property owners.
D. Further, in the event that any disagreement occurs between the
property owners of connection units grouped on a building sewer
concerning future maintenance of the building sewer, such
disagreement will be sufficient cause for the Borough to require
additional connections to the sewer system to provide individual
service, the installation of such separate building sewers shall be made
at the expense of the property owners.
A. The latest Borough ordinance governing sewer connections and the
Code of the Borough of Steelton, Pennsylvania, Chapter 94, Streets and
Sidewalks, Article II, Openings and Excavations;
§ 90-13 SEWERS § 90-16
90:209
§ 90-17. Special conditions.
Whenever, in the opinion of the Engineer or other duly authorized
representative of the Borough, special conditions require additional
safeguards or more stringent specifications to be observed, then,
notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, or requirements of the
Borough, the Borough specifically reserves the right to refuse to permit a
connection to be made to its sewer system until such special requirements
or specifications as may be stipulated by the Borough have been satisfied.
§ 90-18. Contractor qualifications.
B. Pennsylvania law which requires that a utility be notified in advance of
work to be performed in the area of a utility's facilities;
C. Federal occupational safety and health administration regulations;
D. Pennsylvania Department of Transportation regulations for work within
state highway rights-of-way, such as, but not limited to: i) permits, ii)
blasting bonds, iii) construction methods and materials, iv) inspection,
and v) traffic control;
E. Department of Environmental Protection streams encroachment and
soil erosion and sedimentation control requirements.
A. Insurance.
(1) No contractor shall install or construct a building sewer or
pressure sewer system unless registered with the Borough Code
Officer. The contractor shall register by completing an application,
by providing evidence of past experience in blasting, plumbing, or
electrical work, and by providing evidence of adequate insurance
coverage. Evidence of insurance coverage shall be presented to the
Borough in the form of insurance certificates and shall indicate
coverage with the following minimum limits:
(a) General liability.
[1] Bodily injury: $100,000 to $300,000.
[2] Property damage: $100,000.
[3] Contractual liability coverage to fund the hold-harmless
agreement contained in the Borough's registration
application and coverage of independent contractors, and
completed operations shall also be included. The Borough
of Steelton shall be listed as Additional Insured.
(b) Automotive.
[1] Bodily injury: $100,000 to $300,000.
[2] Property damage: $50,000.
§ 90-16 § 90-18
90:210
§ 90-19. Building sewer connection by Borough; billing and
collection.
Upon the failure of any property owner to make a required building sewer
connection following the procedure set forth in this article, the Borough
may enter upon the property and construct the building sewer connection.
In such case the Borough shall forthwith, upon completion of the work,
send an itemized bill of the cost of construction together with 10% penalty
thereon of the building sewer connection to the owner of the property to
which connection has been so made, which bill shall be payable forthwith.
In case of neglect or refusal of the owner of such property to pay said
bill the Borough may file municipal liens or bring a civil action for such
construction, the same to be subject in all respects to the general law
providing for filing and recovery of municipal liens and civil actions.
§ 90-20. Building sewer pipes and fittings.
(2) Insurance certificates shall be kept current with the Borough Code
Officer during the period the contractor is installing or
constructing building sewers or pressure sewer system in the
Borough.
B. The Borough's contractor registration becomes final upon the
satisfactory completion by the contractor of at least one building sewer
or pressure sewer system installation in the Borough's service area.
C. Removal of a contractor from the Borough's registration listing may
occur for any of the following reasons:
(1) Contractor fails to maintain the required certificates of insurance
specified by the Borough;
(2) Contractor noncompliance with any provisions of this chapter or
any other Borough ordinance;
(3) Excessive expenditure of Borough personnel time and effort
required to monitor contractor work performance;
(4) Noncompliance with the quality of work required by the Borough.
D. The installation of a building sewer or pressure sewer system shall be
performed by a registered contractor.
A. For all gravity installations, the pipe and fittings used for the building
sewer shall be ductile iron conforming to the requirements of ANSI
21.51 and ANSI 21.10 or polyvinyl chloride (PVC) SDR 35 pipe and
fittings conforming to the requirements of ASTM D 3034 manufactured
from Class 12454-B. All pipe and fittings shall bear the identification of
the manufacturer. All plastic pipe, fittings and components shall be
third-party certified as conforming to NSF 14. [Amended 4-18-2005
by Ord. No. 2005-3, approved 4-18-2005]
§ 90-18 SEWERS § 90-20
90:211
§ 90-21. Main trap and air intake pipes.
B. For all pressurized systems, polyvinyl chloride (PVC) SDR-21 pipe
conforming to the requirements of ASTM D 2241 manufactured from
Class 12454-B (PVC 1120) rigid PVC compounds shall be used. All pipe
and fittings shall bear the identification of the manufacturer. All plastic
pipe, fittings and components shall be third-party certified as
conforming to NSF 14. [Amended 4-18-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-3,
approved 4-18-2005]
C. Joints for ductile iron pipes and fittings shall be either mechanical or
push-on with rubber gasket compression joints conforming to the
requirements of ANSI A21.11. Joints for PVC SDR-35 and PVC SDR-21
pipes and fittings shall be push-on type gasket joints conforming to
ASTM D 3212 and ASTM D 3139 respectively. The gasket shall conform
to ASTM F 477.
D. The pipes shall have permanently tight joints which shall prevent the
admission of groundwater and shall be laid at a minimum grade of 1/4
inch per foot with the best possible alignment. To protect the pipes from
frost or crushing from surface activity, a minimum of four feet of cover
must be provided. Under special conditions, a variance to the latter two
requirements may be granted by the Borough.
E. The pipe for the building sewer shall have a minimum inside diameter
of four inches or six inches. No transitions from one pipe size to another
or from one pipe material to another will be made unless manufactured
adapters, designed specifically for that purpose and approved by the
Borough, are used. Reductions in pipe size in the direction of flow are
not permitted. All changes in direction must be made with pipe fittings.
No fitting greater than 45° will be permitted, except under certain
conditions acceptable to the Borough. Sweep ninety-degree bends may
be used. The Borough reserves the right to adjust the building sewer
pipe diameter as it so desires. [Amended 4-18-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-3, approved 4-18-2005]
F. For purposes of identification and early warning during trenching or
other excavation, nonresidential properties shall have continuous
warning tapes in all trenches. Such tapes shall be optional for
residential properties unless trenches are within the rights-of-way
limits of state highways and/or Borough streets. Tapes shall be buried
at a depth of six inches below finished grade. In pavement, tapes shall
be buried six inches below the top of the subgrade. The underground
warning tape shall be a magnetic polyethylene tape, three inches in
width with a minimum lettering of one inch.
A. Prior to the installation of the building sewer, the Borough's
representative may inspect the property to determine whether or not
the plumbing facilities are properly trapped and vented. Based upon the
results of that inspection, an air intake pipe with trap may be required.
§ 90-20 § 90-21
90:212
§ 90-22. Cleanouts.
§ 90-23. Building sewer bedding.
Building sewers shall be provided with stone bedding consisting of AASHTO
No. 8 coarse aggregate or suitable substitute if approved by the Borough's
representative. Exposed bedrock shall not be considered a suitable
substitute. A minimum of four inches of stone is required underneath the
pipe with backfill of stone to the midpoint of the pipe diameter.
§ 90-24. Notification of Borough inspector.
The permit holder shall give advance notice to the Borough's representative
when the facilities to be connected to the sewer system are ready to be
tested. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to insure that the facilities
will withstand the prescribed test before giving notification to the Borough.
Inspections and tests shall only be performed during the hours posted by
the Borough's inspector.
B. If the inspection is not performed, or if the facilities do not pass the
inspection, a trap and air intake pipe must be provided for each
building sewer (see Exhibit A35). The trap must be placed immediately
outside the building wall and the air intake pipe must extend from the
trap. The top of the air intake pipe shall extend a minimum of six inches
above the ground surface to prevent surface water from entering and
shall be provided with a mushroom or other type cap sufficient to
prevent the entrance of rainwater.
A. Unless otherwise authorized by the Borough or its representative,
cleanouts shall be provided in each building sewer at intervals that will
permit complete rodding with a fifty-foot-long auger or tape. Such
intervals shall include the length of the building sewer and riser as
appropriate. Cleanouts will also be required within five feet upstream of
every change in direction greater than 45° and immediately
downstream of the trap. Cleanouts shall be constructed using a one
piece combination wye and eight bend and riser to the ground surface.
The riser pipe shall be provided with a standard four-inch screw-type
ferrule and shall be watertight.
B. Building drain and building sewer junction. A cleanout shall be installed
near the junction of the building drain and building sewer. This cleanout
shall be either inside or outside the building wall, provided it is brought
up to finish grade or to the lowest floor level. An accessible interior
building drain cleanout or test tee within close proximity to the building
drain exit point shall fulfill this requirement. Cleanouts shall be a
minimum four inches in size. [Added 4-18-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-3,
approved 4-18-2005]
35.Editor's Note: Said exhibit is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 90-21 SEWERS § 90-25
90:213
§ 90-25. Open trench inspection of building sewers and pressure
sewer systems.
No connection or pipe trench shall be backfilled unless and until the
pressure sewer system or building sewer installation has been inspected,
tested and approved by the Borough's representative. The building sewer or
pressure sewer system may be carefully covered with 12 inches of AASHTO
No. 8 stone prior to testing and inspection provided the joints are left
uncovered.
§ 90-26. Air testing and inspection of building sewers.
§ 90-27. In-home inspection and discharge regulations.
A. An air test (see Exhibit B36) shall be performed in the presence of the
Borough's representative on the line being installed from the point of
connection at the building to the point of connection at the grinder
pump or sewer system. Both ends of the building sewer shall remain
uncovered until the air testing has been completed and the installation
approved and noted in writing on the permit. No other evidence of such
approval shall be accepted.
B. After the air test has been completed and the installation approved, the
remainder of the trench shall be backfilled using backfill materials as
specified below, compacted, and restored. The entire backfill process
shall be carried out carefully so as not to disturb the pipe.
(1) Within the rights-of-way limits of state highways: Conform to the
requirements of PENNDOT.
(2) Within the rights-of-way limits of Borough streets: PENNDOT 2A
modified aggregate.
(3) Bituminous and stone parking areas and driveways, sidewalks, and
unpaved areas: Clean earth void of rock, wood, or other similar
debris.
(4) Use of a new connection to the sewer system will not be permitted
until the installation has been inspected, tested, and approved in
accordance with the Borough's procedures.
A. At the time of the inspection of the building sewer, and from time to
time as determined by the Borough, the Borough's representatives shall
have the right to inspect the facilities within the home following
adequate prior notification to determine whether the facilities
connected to the sewer system are in conformance with this chapter.
B. All water contaminated by use must be discharged into the sewer
including water from sinks and washing machines. Conversely, the
discharge of roof, storm, surface, or building foundation water or
36.Editor's Note: Said exhibit is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 90-25 § 90-27
90:214
§ 90-28. Building sewer and pressure sewer system costs.
All of the costs and expenses associated with the construction of the
building sewer, pressure sewer system and the connection of the building
sewer or pressure sewer system to the collection sewer, including testing,
shall be borne by the owner of the improved property served. Such owner
shall indemnify and save harmless the Borough from all loss or damage
which may be occasioned, directly or indirectly, from the construction of the
building sewer, pressure sewer system and the connection of the building
sewer or pressure sewer system to the collection sewer.
§ 90-29. Grinder pump agreements.
On occasion, it may be practical and desirable for the Borough to allow
owners of improved property to have access to the Borough's sewer system
by use of a grinder pump and pressure sewer system. Property owners may
be required to enter into a written agreement with the Borough before
a permit is granted for such connections. The agreement shall be in a
form approved by the Borough and shall set forth the terms under which
the Borough shall render service through such connections. Copies of the
agreement may be recorded in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds of
Dauphin County. All expenses of the Borough, including preparation and/or
review of the agreement and cost of recording the agreement shall be paid,
or reimbursed to the Borough, by the owner.
§ 90-30. Grinder pump specifications and maintenance of pressure
sewer system.
drainage into the sewer is expressly prohibited. Floor drains in
basements subject to groundwater infiltration or flooding must also
be removed, permanently sealed, or otherwise not connected to the
building sewer.
A. Prior to issuance of a pressure sewer system connection permit, the
owner shall submit to the Borough documentation to enable the
Borough to determine whether the proposed installation meets its
requirements and whether the grinder pump will serve its intended
purpose. For single-family residential establishments, the prefabricated
unit shall consist of a factory-built grinder pump with all associated
parts and fittings mounted in a fiberglass reinforced tank with a remote
control pump panel mounted at a suitable location outside the home.
The grinder pump shall be suitable for use near structures, free from
noise, odor, or health hazards and shall be of a type approved by the
Borough.
B. Maintenance of the pressure sewer system to the point of connection
with the sewer system shall be the responsibility of the owner.
C. Pressure sewer systems for all other types of nonresidential
establishments are subject to the review and approval of the Borough.
§ 90-27 SEWERS § 90-30
90:215
§ 90-31. Grinder pump installation.
D. Specifications. [Added 4-18-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-3, approved
4-18-2005]
(1) Sewage grinder pumps receiving discharge from a building shall
have minimum discharge velocity of 1.9 feet per second throughout
the discharge piping to the point of connection with a gravity sewer
or pressure sewer system. A nongrinding pump or ejector shall be
capable of passing a one-and-five-tenths-inch-diameter solid ball,
and the discharge piping shall be not less than two inches in
diameter. The discharge piping of grinding pumps shall be not less
than 1.25 inches in diameter. A check valve and a gate valve located
on the discharge side of the check valve shall be installed in the
pump or ejector discharge piping between the pump or ejector and
the drainage system. Access shall be provided to such valves. Such
valves shall be located above the sump cover or, when the
discharge pipe from the ejector is below grade, the valves shall be
accessibly located outside the sump below grade in an access pit
with a removable access cover.
(2) The sump pit shall be not less than 18 inches in diameter and 24
inches deep, unless otherwise approved. The pit shall be accessible
and located such that all drainage flows into the pit by gravity. The
sump pit shall be constructed of reinforced fiberglass. The pit
bottom shall be solid and provide permanent support for the pump.
The sump pit shall be fitted with a gastight removable cover
adequate to support anticipated loads in the area of use. The sump
pit shall be vented.
(3) The effluent level control shall be adjusted and maintained to at all
times prevent the effluent in the sump from rising to within two
inches of the invert of the gravity drain inlet into the sump.
A. Excavation for the grinder pump unit shall be to a depth such that, after
installation of the grinder pump unit, the top of the unit shall be raised
six inches above finished grade. The bottom of the excavation shall be
level and all loose material shall be removed. A six-inch-deep layer of
gravel or crushed stone, equal to or finer than AASHTO No. 8, shall be
placed in the excavation prior to placement of the grinder pump unit.
B. The grinder pump unit shall be weighted and anchored with a concrete
weight to avoid flotation (see Exhibit C37).
C. The grinder pump unit shall be leveled on the gravel base and rotated
for proper alignment with the gravity building sewer, pressure lateral,
and electrical service connection. Backfill around the grinder pump
unit, and for a distance of one foot above the pressure lateral discharge
pipe, shall be AASHTO No. 8 stone, as required, with proper
37.Editor's Note: Said exhibit is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 90-30 § 90-31
90:216
§ 90-32. Pressure lateral specifications and installation.
§ 90-33. Grinder pump wiring specifications.
Installation of wiring from the grinder pump to the control panel and from
the control panel to the owner's circuit breaker panel or fuse box shall
be in accordance with the requirements of all local, state, and national
electric codes and the grinder pump manufacturer's recommendations.
Underground conduit shall be a minimum diameter of 3/4 of an inch and
watertight. A minimum of two feet of cover shall be provided.
§ 90-34. Underground warning tape.
For the purposes of early warning and identification of underground wiring
and pressure piping during trenching or other excavation, continuous
warning tapes shall be provided in all trenches. Tapes shall be buried to
a depth of six inches below finished grade. In pavement, tapes shall be
buried six inches below the top of the subgrade. The underground warning
tape shall be a magnetic polyethylene tape, three inches wide with one-inch
lettering.
compaction. Care shall be taken to bring the fill up evenly around the
grinder pump unit. Rock, wood, or other debris shall not be used as
backfill. After stone backfill has been placed around the unit to a height
of one foot above the pressure lateral, clean earth fill may be used to
complete the backfill operation to the ground surface.
A. The pressure lateral (see Exhibit C38) shall be 1 1/2 inch SDR 21 PVC
pipe (200 psi), with rubber gasket joints. The pipe shall be placed a
minimum of four feet below the surface. Thrust blocks shall be provided
for all fittings and at all locations where horizontal and/or vertical
deflections are made. All pipe and fittings shall bear the identification of
the manufacturer. All plastic pipe, fittings and components shall be
third-party certified as conforming to NSF 14. [Amended 4-18-2005
by Ord. No. 2005-3, approved 4-18-2005]
B. A minimum of four inches of AASHTO No. 8 coarse aggregate shall be
placed underneath the pipe. Stone backfill shall be placed to a minimum
of one foot above the top of the pipe in such a manner so as not to
disturb the pipe. Backfill for the remaining portion of the trench shall
be in accordance with the requirements of §§ 90-25 and 90-26.
C. In addition, where a pressure lateral discharges into a force main
collection sewer, a curb box and redundant check valve shall be
installed by the owner unless already provided by the Borough as a part
of its facilities.
38.Editor's Note: Said exhibit is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 90-31 SEWERS § 90-35
90:217
§ 90-35. Gravity portion of grinder pump installation.
The gravity portion of the building sewer upstream of the grinder pump
basin, including traps and cleanouts, shall be constructed as provided in
other applicable sections of Article III (especially §§ 90-20 through 90-26)
except that the cleanout riser immediately downstream of the house trap
shall be modified to also serve as a vent for the grinder pump basin.
§ 90-36. Testing and inspection of pressure sewer systems.
Every pressure sewer system shall be inspected, tested and approved by the
Borough prior to connection to the sewer system. The pressure lateral shall
be hydrostatically tested by the installer in accordance with the procedures
and requirements listed in Exhibit D.39 If the pressure lateral fails the
prescribed test requirements, the installer shall be responsible for
determining deficiencies in the materials and/or workmanship and for
correcting the same to the satisfaction of the Borough. The installation shall
then be retested for conformance with the Borough's requirements.
§ 90-37. Connection to sewer system.
The connection of the building sewer or pressure sewer system to the
collection sewer shall be in accordance with the Borough Standard
Construction Specifications. A Borough's representative must be on site for
inspection during the connection to the sewer system. Any connection to the
sewer system which was not inspected by a representative of the Borough
shall be deemed an improperly connected system.
§ 90-38. Grease traps.
A. For all new commercial and industrial establishments, grease traps
shall be provided in each building sewer, unless otherwise authorized
by the Borough or its representative. The grease trap shall be
appropriately sized for the establishment it is serving. The installation,
service and maintenance of the grease trap shall be made at the
expense of the property owner.
B. All existing commercial and industrial establishments shall be
evaluated by the borough for compliance with this chapter. If the
existing commercial or industrial establishment is determined to need a
grease trap, or if the size of the grease trap is determined to be
inadequate or if the grease trap is difficult to pump and maintain due to
its location, a new grease trap shall be installed at the expense of the
property owner.
C. Interceptors and separators shall be provided to prevent the discharge
of oil, grease, sand and other substances harmful or hazardous to the
building drainage system, the public sewer, or sewage treatment plant
39.Editor's Note: Said exhibit is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 90-35 § 90-38
90:218
or processes. [Added 4-18-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-3, approved
4-18-2005]
D. The size, type and location of each interceptor and of each separator
shall be designed and installed in accordance with the manufacturer's
instructions and the requirements of this section based on the
anticipated conditions of use. Wastes that do not require treatment or
separation shall not be discharged into any interceptor or separator.
[Added 4-18-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-3, approved 4-18-2005]
E. A grease trap or grease interceptor shall be required to receive the
drainage from fixtures and equipment with grease-laden waste located
in food preparation areas, such as in restaurants, hotel kitchens,
hospitals, school kitchens, bars, factory cafeterias, or restaurants and
clubs. [Added 4-18-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-3, approved 4-18-2005]
F. Where food waste grinders connect to grease traps, a solids interceptor
shall separate the discharge before connecting to the grease trap.
Solids interceptors and grease interceptors shall be sized and rated for
the discharge of the food waste grinder. [Added 4-18-2005 by Ord.
No. 2005-3, approved 4-18-2005]
G. Grease traps and grease interceptors shall conform to PDI G101, ASME
A112.14.3 or ASME A112.14.4 and shall be installed in accordance with
the manufacturer's instructions. [Added 4-18-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-3, approved 4-18-2005]
H. Grease traps shall have the minimum grease retention capacity
indicated in Table 1 for the flow-through rates indicated. [Added
4-18-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-3, approved 4-18-2005]
TABLE 1
Minimum Capacity of Grease Traps
Total Flow-Through Rating
(gpm)
Grease Retention Capacity
(pounds)
4 8
6 12
7 14
9 18
10 20
12 24
14 28
15 30
18 36
20 40
25 50
§ 90-38 SEWERS § 90-38
90:219
TABLE 1
Minimum Capacity of Grease Traps
Total Flow-Through Rating
(gpm)
Grease Retention Capacity
(pounds)
35 70
50 100
I. Grease traps shall be equipped with devices to control the rate of water
flow so that the water flow does not exceed the rated flow. The flowcontrol
device shall be vented and terminate not less than six inches
above the flood rim level or be installed in accordance with the
manufacturer's instructions. [Added 4-18-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-3,
approved 4-18-2005]
J. At repair garages, car-washing facilities with engine or undercarriage
cleaning capability and at factories where oily and flammable liquid
wastes are produced, separators shall be installed into which all oilbearing,
grease-bearing or flammable wastes shall be discharged
before emptying in the building drainage system or other point of
disposal. [Added 4-18-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-3, approved
4-18-2005]
K. A mixture of treated or untreated light and heavy liquids with various
specific gravities shall be separated in an approved receptacle. [Added
4-18-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-3, approved 4-18-2005]
L. Oil separators shall have a depth of not less than two feet below the
invert of the discharge drain. The outlet opening of the separator shall
have not less than an eighteen-inch water seal. [Added 4-18-2005 by
Ord. No. 2005-3, approved 4-18-2005]
M. Where automobiles are serviced, greased, repaired or washed or where
gasoline is dispensed, oil separators shall have a minimum capacity of
six cubic feet for the first 100 square feet of area to be drained, plus one
cubic foot for each additional 100 square feet of area to be drained into
the separator. Parking garages in which servicing, repairing or washing
is not conducted, and in which gasoline is not dispensed, shall not
require a separator. Areas of commercial garages utilized only for
storage of automobiles are not required to be drained through a
separator. [Added 4-18-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-3, approved
4-18-2005]
N. Sand and similar interceptors for heavy solids shall be designed and
located so as to be provided with ready access for cleaning, and shall
have a water seal of not less than six inches. [Added 4-18-2005 by
Ord. No. 2005-3, approved 4-18-2005]
O. Commercial laundries shall be equipped with an interceptor with a wire
basket or similar device, removable for cleaning, that prevents passage
§ 90-38 § 90-38
90:220
§ 90-39. Grit chambers.
into the drainage system of solids 0.5 inch or larger in size, string, rags,
buttons or other materials detrimental to the public sewage system.
[Added 4-18-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-3, approved 4-18-2005]
P. Optional: Bottling plants shall discharge process wastes into an
interceptor that will provide for the separation of broken glass or other
solids before discharging waste into the drainage system. [Added
4-18-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-3, approved 4-18-2005]
Q. Optional: Slaughtering room and dressing room drains shall be
equipped with approved separators. The separator shall prevent the
discharge into the drainage system of feathers, entrails and other
materials that cause clogging. [Added 4-18-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-3, approved 4-18-2005]
R. Interceptors and separators shall be designed so as not to become airbound
where tight covers are utilized. Each interceptor or separator
shall be vented where subject to a loss of trap seal. [Added 4-18-2005
by Ord. No. 2005-3, approved 4-18-2005]
S. Access shall be provided to each interceptor and separator for service
and maintenance. Interceptors and separators shall be maintained by
periodic removal of accumulated grease, scum, oil, or other floating
substances and solids deposited in the interceptor or separator. [Added
4-18-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-3, approved 4-18-2005]
A. For all new commercial and industrial establishments, grit chambers
shall be provided in each building sewer, unless otherwise authorized
by the Borough or its representative. The grit chamber shall be
appropriately sized for the establishment it is serving. The installation,
service and maintenance of the grit chamber shall be made at the
expense of the property owner.
B. All existing commercial and industrial establishments shall be
evaluated by the Borough for compliance with this chapter. If the
existing commercial or industrial establishment is determined to need a
grit chamber, or if the size of the grit chamber is determined to be
inadequate, or if the grit chamber is difficult to pump and maintain due
to its location, a new grit chamber shall be installed at the expense of
the property owner.
C. Where the Borough has determined that a grease trap and grit chamber
are required for a commercial or industrial establishment, a
combination grease trap/grit chamber shall be provided in each
building sewer. The installation, service and maintenance of the grease
trap/grit chamber shall be made at the expense of the property owner.
§ 90-38 SEWERS § 90-40
90:221
§ 90-40. Restoration of Borough streets.
The restoration of Borough Streets shall be in accordance with the Code of
the Borough of Steelton, Pennsylvania, Chapter 94, Streets and Sidewalks,
Article II, Openings and Excavations.
§ 90-40 § 90-40
90:222
ARTICLE IV
Maintenance of building sewers
§ 90-41. Customer responsibility; exceptions.
The maintenance, repair or replacement of a building sewer and or pressure
sewer system shall be the obligation of the property owner.
§ 90-41 SEWERS § 90-41
90:223

ARTICLE V
Extensions and Additions to the Sewer System
§ 90-42. Extensions and additions made by Borough and at
Borough's expense.
Whenever any person, firm or corporation desires the extension of the
facilities of the sewer system to service new areas not theretofore serviced,
such person, firm or corporation may present a petition to the Borough
requesting an extension. This petition must be signed by the owners of not
less than 51% of the "footage fronting" on the proposed extension. This
petition must state whether the customers are residential, commercial, or
industrial, and the increase of customers, if any, which may be immediately
anticipated. Upon receipt of said petition, the Borough may undertake the
extension of its facilities at the expense of the Borough if such extension is
beneficial in the opinion of the Borough. Should the Borough, in the exercise
of its discretion, determine that the extension shall not be made, the person
or persons submitting the petition shall be notified.
§ 90-43. Extensions and additions made to accommodate
developers, builders and other persons.
Wherever extensions or additions to the sewer system are desired and are
not made under § 90-42 of this article, the following guidelines shall be
followed:
A. Extensions not designed and installed by the Borough. Persons desiring
wastewater service shall submit an escrow deposit in an amount to be
determined by the Borough. The escrow deposit will be used to
reimburse the Borough for any professional services or costs incurred
during the review, comment and inspection of the proposed project and
shall never be allowed to fall below $500. When the applicant's escrow
account approaches or falls below the $500 limit, the applicant will
receive a written notice from the Borough itemizing expenditures from
the account and requesting a further deposit. The Borough will not take
any further action on the project until the deposit is received. Any
unused portion of the escrow deposit will be returned to the applicant.
B. For purposes of review and comment by the Borough, the applicant
shall prepare and submit a complete DEP sewage facilities planning
module and a preliminary plan for the proposed project. The Borough
will act upon the module within 60 to 90 days of its receipt.
C. Should the Borough act favorably upon the applicant's module, the
applicant must execute, within 30 days of written notice, a completed
sewer agreement.
D. Along with the completed and fully executed sewer agreement, the
applicant must submit to the Borough an administrative fee. This fee is
nonrefundable and will cover the costs of administering the agreement.
Upon receipt of the completed and executed sewer agreement and
§ 90-42 SEWERS § 90-43
90:225
administrative fee, the Borough will complete the appropriate sections
of the applicant's DEP planning module and will execute the same.
E. Once the Borough and the DEP approve the applicant's sewage
facilities planning module, the applicant will prepare or have prepared
detailed plans for the sewer extension. Said plans shall be in
conformance with the Borough's Standard Construction Specifications
and shall be submitted along with all necessary permit applications for
a sanitary sewer extension to the Borough for review. Additional
information about the extension may be requested by the Borough as a
result of the review.
F. After all of the appropriate Borough and DEP approvals and other
necessary permits have been received (including, but not limited to, a
highway occupancy permit, a sanitary sewer construction permit and a
building permit), the applicant shall submit in writing to the Borough
the name of the contractor who will be installing the sanitary sewer
extension. The contractor shall submit to the Borough for approval a list
of material suppliers, shop drawings and manufacturer certifications as
outlined in the Borough's Standard Construction Specifications.
G. Following review and approval of the submitted items, the Borough will
authorize the applicant in writing to begin construction. The applicant
will give the Borough a minimum of one week's written notice prior to
the start of the construction.
H. Project construction shall be performed entirely at the applicant's own
responsibility, liability and expense. All costs associated with the
construction phase, including engineering and inspection fees, are also
the responsibility of the applicant.
I. Upon completion of the construction, the applicant shall notify the
Borough in writing that the extension has been completed and is ready
for final inspection. Within 30 working days after said notice, the
Borough, or the Borough's agent, may begin to inspect the collection
system with a mobile television unit rented or otherwise obtained by the
Borough, to verify that the system has been completed in accordance
with the Borough's Standard Construction Specifications.
J. Promptly upon completion of the extension, but no longer than 60 days
after the completion, the applicant shall submit to the Borough, at his
own expense, a set of drawings of the completed extension project as
detailed in the Standard Construction Specifications. Where applicable,
and within the aforesaid 60 days after the completion of the project, the
applicant shall also cause to be prepared, executed, acknowledged and
delivered to the Borough a deed of dedication for the entire extension
project, and all of its appurtenances as well as all rights-of-way over the
street and other thoroughfares and private lanes necessary for the
existence and future maintenance thereof.
K. In the event of dedication as set forth in the above paragraph, the
applicant shall, for a period of two years after delivery of said deed of
§ 90-43 § 90-43
90:226
dedication and acceptance by the Borough, guarantee said sewer
system as to workmanship and materials and shall furnish to the
Borough appropriate security for said maintenance in the amount of
15% of the construction costs.
L. Applicants under this section shall pay the cost of securing a permit, if
required from the Department of Environmental Protection of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, including the cost of preparing the
necessary reports required to obtain such permit. No service shall be
rendered on any additions or extensions until such cost shall have been
paid.
§ 90-43 SEWERS § 90-43
90:227

ARTICLE VI
Industrial Waste Pretreatment
§ 90-44. Customer's pretreatment and sampling facilities.
§ 90-45. Wastewater discharge permits.
A. Upon notification of customer and Steelton Borough by the City,
pretreatment facilities shall be installed, within 90 days of the date of
such notice, at the sole cost of the significant industrial user, to meet
City requirements. In no event shall dilution be acceptable as a means
of pretreatment to meet the requirements of this chapter. Any order to
install pretreatment facilities may be appealed to the Director as
provided in § 90-86.
B. The City reserves the right to require nonresidential dischargers having
large variations in rates of wastewater discharge to install suitable
regulating devices for equalizing wastewater flows to the sewer system.
C. When directed by the Department or by one of the suburban
municipalities at the request of the Department, industrial users shall
install, within 90 days of the directive, at their sole cost and expense,
and thereafter maintain a manhole and such other devices as may be
approved by the Department to facilitate observation, measurement
and sampling of wastewaters discharged into the sewer system. The
duly authorized representatives of the Department shall, at all times, be
permitted to:
(1) Enter upon any and all properties of industrial users for the
purpose of inspecting for compliance, observing, measuring and
sampling wastewaters discharged into the sewer system;
(2) Set up and use monitoring equipment;
(3) Inspect and copy industrial waste discharge, monitoring and
production records or any other records pertinent to compliance
with this chapter; and
(4) Have access to any meters used for establishing or determining
water consumption, water excluded from the sewer system and
wastewater discharged into the sewer system. If an individual user
has security measures in force which physically limit entry to the
premises of such user, the industrial user shall, within 30 days of
the effective date of this section, immediately provide the
Department with whatever is necessary to allow authorized City
representatives to enter the premises, without delay, for the
purpose of performing their duties and responsibilities.
D. The Department and any suburban municipality may require any
industrial establishment to provide information needed to determine
compliance with this chapter.
§ 90-44 SEWERS § 90-45
90:229
A. Any industrial establishment desiring to discharge or currently
discharging, directly or indirectly, wastes into the sewer system, or
planning to change operations so as to materially alter the
characteristics and/or volumes of wastewaters discharged into the
sewer system, shall notify the Department and any affected suburban
municipality in writing at least 30 days before making such connection
or changing its operations and shall obtain a permit from the
Department to do so. Applications for such permit shall be on the form
supplied by the Superintendent and shall be accompanied by all
information requested by the Department for the determination of
waste volumes, characteristics and constituents. The cost for obtaining
such information shall be borne by the applicant. Any significant
industrial user shall make application for a new permit within 30 days
of the effective date of this section.
B. This application shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following
information in units and terms appropriate for evaluation:
(1) Name, address and location of applicant;
(2) SIC number(s) according to the Standard Industrial Classification
Manual, Bureau of Budget, 1972, as amended;
(3) Volume of wastewaters to be discharged;
(4) Wastewater constituents and characteristics including, but not
limited to, those set forth in § 90-6B, as determined by a reliable
analytical laboratory. Sampling and analysis shall be performed in
accordance with the procedures established by the United States
EPA pursuant to Section 304(g) of the Federal Act, 33 U.S.C.
§ 1314(g), and the regulations promulgated thereunder, 40 CFR
Part 136, as amended;
(5) Time and duration of discharge;
(6) Average and maximum wastewater flow rates, including daily,
monthly and seasonal variations, if any;
(7) A schematic flow representation which shall include floor plans,
mechanical and plumbing plans and details of all sewers, sewer
connections and appurtenances, sizes, locations and elevations;
(8) Number of employees and hours worked;
(9) Description of activities, facilities and plan processes on the
premises, including all materials which are or could be discharged;
(10) Each product produced, listed by type, amount and rate of
production;
(11) Type and amount of raw materials processed, average and
maximum per day;
§ 90-45 § 90-45
90:230
(12) Each substance considered toxic, hazardous, noxious or
malodorous, including a description of the hazards associated with
each substance;
(13) Certification of accuracy by the applicant;
(14) Any other information required by 40 CFR 403.12(b) or any other
information as may be deemed necessary by the Department to
evaluate that permit application.
C. The Department shall evaluate the data furnished by the applicant and
may require additional information. After evaluation and acceptance of
the data furnished, the Superintendent shall issue a permit subject to
terms and conditions provided therein, as set forth in Subsection D
hereof.
D. Wastewater discharge permits shall be subject to all provisions of this
chapter and all other applicable federal, state and local laws, rules,
regulations, charges, and fees. The conditions of such permits shall be
uniformly enforced by the City in accordance with this chapter and
applicable federal, state and local laws, rules and regulations. Permits
may contain, but shall not be limited to, the following conditions:
(1) The unit charge or schedule of special charges and fees or
wastewater surcharges to be paid the City for the wastewater to be
discharged into the sewer system pursuant to such permit;
(2) The average and maximum allowable wastewater constituent and
characteristics;
(3) Equalization, neutralization or other requirements to control high
pH or highly variable pH discharge;
(4) Limits on rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow
regulations and equalization;
(5) Requirements for installation, maintenance and/or operation of
monitoring, inspection and sampling facilities;
(6) Pretreatment requirements;
(7) Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge
reports;
(8) Signatory requirements for certification of technical reports or
discharge reports;
(9) Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating
to wastewater discharge for a minimum of three years or longer as
specified by the Department and affording the Department access
thereto;
(10) Compliance schedules;
§ 90-45 SEWERS § 90-45
90:231
§ 90-46. Specific discharge limitations.
(11) Specifications for monitoring programs, including self-monitoring,
sampling location, frequency and method of sampling, number,
types and standards for tests and reporting schedules;
(12) Requirements for notification of pretreatment standard
exceedance and repeat sampling and testing;
(13) Requirements for notification of slug or accidental discharge;
(14) Requirements for a spill prevention and control plan;
(15) Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the City to insure
compliance with these regulations.
E. Wastewater discharge permits shall be issued for a specified time
period, not to exceed five years, subject to compliance with all of the
provisions of this chapter and the regulations promulgated thereunder.
Any applicant who does not meet the standards of this chapter shall not
be entitled to a five-year permit. All holders of a wastewater discharge
permit must also comply with any National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards within 90 days of their promulgation or any revisions
thereto.
F. A wastewater discharge permit is not assignable or transferable to a
new user, owner or new use.
A. No industrial user shall discharge, directly or indirectly, into the
wastewater collection or conveyance system any wastewater containing
in excess of the following pollutant in milligrams per liter:
Pollutant Daily Maximum Instantaneous Maximum
Arsenic (T) 2.81 5.62
Cadmium (T) 0.75 1.50
Chromium (T) 1.31 2.60
Copper (T) 2.99 5.98
Cyanide (T) 2.15 2.15
Lead (T) 0.55 1.10
Mercury (T) 0.04 0.08
Nickel (T) 1.00 2.00
Zinc (T) 2.20 4.40
B. The limits may be changed by regulation of the Director or by the EPA,
to whichever limitation is more stringent.
§ 90-45 § 90-47
90:232
§ 90-47. Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards.
Upon promulgation of federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards or any
federal standard for a particular industry or subcategory, the standards
referenced in 40 CFR Chapter 1, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471, if more
stringent than the limitations contained in this chapter for such discharges,
shall immediately supersede the standards set forth in this chapter. The
Superintendent shall notify all affected industrial users of the applicable
reporting requirements under 40 CFR 403.12.
§ 90-48. State standards.
Any state requirements and limitations on discharge which have been or
may be adopted which are more stringent than the federal limitations
or those contained in this chapter shall supersede both federal and City
standards. The Superintendent shall notify all affected users of any such
change.
§ 90-49. Upset, slug or accidental discharge; notice requirements.
A. Each significant industrial user shall provide protection from an upset
of pretreatment facilities, slug or accidental discharge of prohibited
materials, and any other substances requested by this chapter.
Facilities to prevent and plans to mitigate an upset, slug or accidental
discharge shall be provided and maintained at such user's expense.
Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall
be provided and maintained at such user's expense. No significant
industrial user which commences discharge into the sewer system shall
be permitted to introduce pollutants into the sewer system until a spill,
prevention and control plan has been approved by the Department
approval of such plans and procedures shall not relieve such user of the
responsibility to modify such user's facility as necessary to meet the
requirements of this chapter.
B. In the event of an upset, slug, or accidental discharge, it shall be the
responsibility of the significant industrial user to:
(1) Make immediate notification to the AWTF of location of discharge
date and time thereof type of waste including concentration and
volume and corrective action taken; and
(2) Within five days following an upset, slug or accidental discharge,
submit to the Superintendent a written report which shall specify:
(a) Description of the upset, slug or accidental discharge, the
cause thereof, and the impact on the industrial user's
compliance status, including location of discharge, type,
concentration and volume of waste;
(b) Duration of noncompliance, including exact date and times of
noncompliance, and, if the noncompliance continues, the time
by which compliance is reasonably expected to occur;
§ 90-47 SEWERS § 90-49
90:233
§ 90-50. Compliance reports.
(c) All steps taken or to be taken to reduce, eliminate and prevent
recurrence of such an upset, slug or accidental discharge or
other conditions of noncompliance.
C. The notification required by this section shall not relieve the significant
industrial user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability incurred
to the AWTF, the City, any state or federal department or authority, or
any damage to person, property or environment; nor will this
notification relieve the significant industrial user of any fines, penalties
or any other liability which may be imposed by § 90-94 or any other
applicable law.
A. With 90 days following the date for final compliance or, if a new source,
the commencement of discharge, any user subject to the pretreatment
provisions of this chapter shall submit to the Superintendent a report
indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants and the average
and maximum flows of the discharges which are limited by such
pretreatment standards and requirements. The report shall state
whether the applicable pretreatment standards and requirements are
being met and, if not, what additional pretreatment facilities or
additional operations and maintenance tasks are necessary to bring
such user in compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards
and requirements. This statement shall be signed by an authorized
representative of the user and certified by a qualified individual.
B. Any significant industrial user subject to the provisions of this chapter
shall submit to the Superintendent, at least on a semiannual basis, a
report containing the information required by its permit. The reports
required by this subsection shall be certified by an authorized signatory
of the user and submitted within 30 days following the end of the
reporting period, unless the Superintendent authorizes, in writing,
another submission date or schedule.
C. If any sampling and testing required by Subsections A and B hereof
indicate a violation of a pretreatment standard, the industrial user shall
notify the Department within 24 hours of becoming aware of the
violation, repeat sampling and testing within 72 hours, or the first day
representative of normal operation, and submit, in writing, the results
of the repeat analysis within 30 days.
D. In addition to the requirements of Subsections A, B and C hereof, if the
Director or Superintendent has reason to believe that a significant
industrial user is not meeting the pretreatment standards on a
consistent basis, such user may be required to submit interim
compliance reports on a regular or irregular schedule.
E. Any reports required by this section shall be maintained and retained
for a minimum of three years or longer, as specified by the Department,
and access by the Department afforded thereto.
§ 90-49 § 90-51
90:234
§ 90-51. Prior notice of discharge of hazardous waste.
No industrial user shall introduce any untreated process waste or process
wastewater into the sewer system containing any hazardous waste
constituent identified in 40 CFR Part 261 without prior written notification
to the Superintendent. Any notification shall provide the identity of the
waste, the hazardous waste constituent and number, and an estimation of
the mass and concentration of hazardous waste to be discharged and shall
be accompanied by a statement certifying that a waste reduction program
is in place. In no case shall the introduction of any hazardous process waste
or nonprocess waste constituent be permitted as a substitute for the proper
treatment and disposal of any such waste.
§ 90-52. Limitations on point of discharge.
§ 90-53. Holding tank wastes.
No user shall discharge any holding tank or septic tank wastes unless such
person has been issued a special permit to do so by the Superintendent and
a special permit to do so by Steelton Borough. Such permit shall not be
assignable or transferable.
§ 90-54. Charges and fees.
The Director shall adopt a schedule of charges and fees to cover the costs
of implementation of the pretreatment provisions of this chapter. These fees
are in addition to and separate from all other fees charged by the City and
will be assessed by the City on all permit holders. Such charges and fees
may include, but are not limited to, the following:
A. No user shall discharge any waste or wastewater directly into a
manhole or other opening in the sewer system, other than an approved
building sewer, unless such user has been issued a special permit to do
so by the Superintendent. Such permit shall be of limited duration, and
the permittee shall comply with all applicable provisions of this chapter.
B. The discharge of any trucked or hauled pollutants is prohibited except
at discharge points designated in a special permit approved by the
Superintendent. Such permit shall be of limited duration, and the
permittee shall comply with all applicable provisions of this section.
A. Costs of monitoring, inspection and surveillance procedures;
B. Costs of reviewing permit applications;
C. Administrative costs of appeals;
D. Costs of reviewing accidental discharge reports;
E. Costs of reviewing pretreatment facility construction plans;
F. Costs of consistent removal by the AWTF of pollutants subject to
pretreatment standards;
§ 90-51 SEWERS § 90-54
90:235
§ 90-55. Applicability.
The pretreatment provisions and all other requirements of this chapter shall
apply to any person currently discharging into, directly or indirectly, or
otherwise using, the sewer system, or any person who shall in the future
discharge into, directly or indirectly, or otherwise use, the sewer system.
§ 90-56. Present and future rules and regulations.
The Director is authorized to promulgate such rules and regulations as are
necessary for the proper administration, implementation and enforcement
of this part. This authority is in addition to that granted in any section of
this part. Such rules and regulations shall have the same force and effect
as the provisions of this section, and any violation thereof shall be deemed
a violation of the applicable chapters for enforcement purposes in §§ 90-80
through 90-94. The Director shall publish notice of the promulgation of
any such rules and regulations and shall notify each of the suburban
municipalities prior to adoption of the same, pursuant to § 90-72.
§ 90-57. Failure to comply.
Should any user refuse, neglect or fail to comply with any provision of this
chapter or any of the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder or any
notice or directive given in conformity with or pursuant to the provisions
of this chapter, the City may pursue any or all of the remedies set forth in
§§ 90-80 through 90-94 et seq.
§ 90-58. Confidentiality of proprietary information.
Any information submitted to the City pursuant to these ordinances or
any rules and regulations promulgated thereunder may be claimed as
confidential by the submitter. Any such claim shall be asserted at the time of
submission by the stamping or placing of the words "Confidential Business
Information" on each page containing such information. If no claim is made
at the time of submission, the City may make the information available to
the public without further notice. If a claim is asserted, the information
shall be treated in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR Part 2 (Public
Information); provided, however, that any information regarding effluent
data shall be available to the public without restriction.
§ 90-59. Compliance monitoring and inspection performed by City.
Compliance monitoring and inspection will be performed by the City. This
duty will be based on a schedule determined by the type of facility, type and
concentration of pollutants in the discharge, and the past performances of
compliance by the industrial user.
G. Any other costs incurred by the City in implementing the requirements
of this chapter.
§ 90-54 § 90-60
90:236
§ 90-60. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any of the provisions of §§ 90-44 to 90-59 shall be
subject to the penalty and enforcement provisions of §§ 90-80 through 90-94
et seq., including the right of the City to disconnect service.
§ 90-61. Sewer rental payment by property owner.
All persons owning property connected to, and from which sanitary sewage
or industrial wastes are discharged into, the sewer system shall pay to the
City rates and rental charges, for each service period, in accordance with
the schedule or rates set forth in this chapter.
§ 90-62. Charges payable by suburban municipalities pursuant to
service agreement.
§ 90-63. Charges payable by significant industrial users which
discharge excess strength waste into sewer system.
A. Residences and nonresidential establishments. Billings by the City to
suburban municipalities for residential properties and nonresidential
establishment customers of suburban municipalities shall be based on
the sewer rental rates as set forth in § 90-64 for persons whose
wastewater is ultimately discharged by the respective municipality into
the Harrisburg Conveyance System or the Steelton Conveyance
System. Billings by the suburban municipalities to their respective
customers shall be based on either the volume rate or the flat rate as
specified by the respective suburban municipalities.
B. Nonresidential establishments and industrial establishments that
discharge excess strength wastes to wastewater system. See § 90-64 for
relevant provisions.
A. A significant industrial user discharging, directly or indirectly, into the
sewer system wastewaters having an average five-day biochemical
oxygen demand (BOD) greater than 290 mg/L, or a suspended solids
content (SS) greater than 380 mg/L, or total phosphorus (P) content
greater than 10 mg/L shall pay to the Department a strength-of-waste
surcharge in addition to applicable volume charges. Such surcharges
shall be determined in accordance with rates set forth in § 90-64 and
shall be billed by the Department to the significant industrial user. The
strength of wastewaters — to be used for establishing the amount of
surcharges — shall be determined at least once annually either:
(1) By suitable sampling and analysis of the wastewaters for three
consecutive days during a period of normal discharge; or
(2) From estimates made by the City; or
(3) From known relationships of products produced to strengths of
wastewaters for those users for which such factors have been
established.
§ 90-60 SEWERS § 90-63
90:237
§ 90-64. Rates, rentals and charges.
B. In establishing wastewater strengths for surcharge purposes by
analysis, analyses shall be made in accordance with procedures
outlined in the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination
of Water and Wastewater," published by the American Public Health
Association, Inc., or any method approved by the EPA. Owners of
industrial establishments discharging domestic and/or industrial
wastewater to the sewer system shall furnish the Department upon
request all information deemed essential for determination of
applicable sewer rental surcharges for excess strength wastes. The cost
of obtaining such information shall be borne by the owners of such
industrial establishments.
A. Effective January 1, 1996, there are hereby established rates or charges
for the use and service of the wastewater facilities of the City. The gross
rate established is that set forth in Subsection C hereof which gross
rate is the applicable sum total of "user charges" for operating and
maintenance charges of the wastewater facilities as set forth in
Subsection C(1) hereof and that portion of charges applicable to rental
and other obligations of City as imposed by the lease entered into
between the City and The Harrisburg Authority as set forth in
Subsection C(2), (3) and (4) hereof.
B. The rates set forth under the column captioned "payable by suburban
municipalities" are set forth on a "per customer" basis. These rates
shall be charged by the City to the suburban municipalities under the
service agreement dated September 15, 1976, as amended. The
suburban municipalities shall pay the statements as issued by the City
to the respective municipalities. The municipalities shall be responsible
for billing their respective customers.
C. Total sewer rental rates payable with respect to the wastewater
facilities [the total of Subsections C(1), (2), (3) and (4) below]:
Payable by Suburban
Municipalities per
Customer
Harrisburg
Customers
Harrisburg
Conveyance
System
Steelton
Conveyance
System
Volume Rate
Dollars
per
volume of
water
consumed
$17.211 per
1,000 cubic
feet
or
$2.301
per 1,000
gallons
$1.984 per
1,000
gallons
$1.576 per
1,000
gallons
Flat Rate
§ 90-63 § 90-64
90:238
Payable by Suburban
Municipalities per
Customer
Harrisburg
Customers
Harrisburg
Conveyance
System
Steelton
Conveyance
System
Dollars
per
residential
property
per year
$149.56 $128.96 $102.44
Strength of Waste Surcharges (see Note * below)
Pollutant Threshold
BOD 290 mg/L 1.1 per
1,000 cubic
feet
or
.15 per
1,000
gallons
.11 per
1,000
gallons
.11 per
1,000
gallons
SS 380 mg/L .83 per
1,000 cubic
feet
or
.11 per
1,000
gallons
.11 per
1,000
gallons
.11 per
1,000
gallons
P 10 mg/L 16.3 per
1,000 cubic
feet
or
2.18 per
1,000
gallons
2.21 per
1,000
gallons
2.21 per
1,000
gallons
NOTES:
* Strength of waste surcharges are expressed as cents per volume of
water consumed for each mg/L by which the pollutant exceeds the
threshold.
(1) Sewer rental attributable to operation, maintenance and
administration expenses.
§ 90-64 SEWERS § 90-64
90:239
Payable by Suburban
Municipalities per
Customer
Harrisburg
Customers
Harrisburg
Conveyance
System
Steelton
Conveyance
System
Volume Rate
Dollars
per
volume
of water
consumed
$11.213
per 1,000
cubic feet
or
$1.499
per
1,000
gallons
$1.499
per 1,000
gallons
$1.250 per
1,000
gallons
Flat Rate
Dollars
per
residential
property
per year
$97.44 $97.44 $97.44
Strength of Waste Surcharges (see Note * below)
PollutantThreshold
BOD 290 mg/L 88 per
1,000
cubic feet
or
.12 per
1,000
gallons
.12 per
1,000
gallons
.12 per
1,000
gallons
SS 380 mg/L 66 per
1,000
cubic feet
or
.09 per
1,000
gallons
.09 per
1,000
gallons
.09 per
1,000
gallons
P 10 mg/L 12.32 per
1,000
cubic feet
or
1.64 per
1,000
gallons
1.64 per
1,000
gallons
1.64 per
1,000
gallons
NOTES:
* Strength of waste surcharges are expressed as cents per volume
of water consumed for each mg/L by which the pollutant exceeds
the threshold.
(a) The sewer rental rates presented above in this Subsection C(1)
are the user charges relative to the wastewater facilities as
defined by regulations of the United States Environmental
Protection Agency published in the Federal Register, February
11, 1974.
§ 90-64 § 90-64
90:240
(2) Sewer rental attributable to 1984 and 1988 Series A Lease Rental
and related revenue requirements.
Payable by
Suburban
Municipalities per
Customer
Harrisburg
Customers
Harrisburg
Conveyance
System
Steelton
Conveyance
System
Volume Rate
Dollars
per
volume of
water
consumed
$3.127
per 1,000
cubic feet
or
$0.418
per 1,000
gallons
$0.482
per 1,000
gallons
$0.323 per
1,000
gallons
Flat Rate
Dollars
per
residential
property
per year
$27.17 $31.33 $21.00
Strength of Waste Surcharges (see Note * below)
Pollutant Threshold
BOD 290 mg/L .20 per
1,000
cubic feet
or
.02 per
1,000
gallons
.02 per
1,000
gallons
.02 per
1,000
gallons
SS 380 mg/L .15 per
1,000
cubic feet
or
.02 per
1,000
gallons
.02 per
1,000
gallons
.02 per
1,000
gallons
P 10 mg/L 1.64 per
1,000
cubic feet
or
0.21 per
1,000
gallons
0.24 per
1,000
gallons
0.25 per
1,000
gallons
NOTES:
* Strength of waste surcharges are expressed as cents per volume
of water consumed for each mg/L by which the pollutant exceeds
the threshold.
(3) Sewer rental attributable to Series B lease and related revenue
requirements.
§ 90-64 SEWERS § 90-64
90:241
§ 90-65. City's right of entry.
For the purpose of determining the amount of sewer rental payable under
the provisions set forth in §§ 90-61 through 90-64, the City shall have
access at all reasonable times without delay to all industrial users using the
sewer system and any meters used for establishing or determining water
consumption, water excluded from the sewer system and sewage or waste
water discharged into the sewer system.
Payable by Suburban
Municipalities per
Customer
Harrisburg Customers
Harrisburg
Conveyance
System
Steelton
Conveyance
System
Volume Rate
Dollars per
volume of
water
Consumed
$1.803 per
1,000 cubic
feet or
$0.241 per
1,000
gallons
N/A N/A
Flat Rate
Dollars per
residential
property per
year
$15.66 N/A N/A
(4) Sewer rental attributable to the 1996 PENNVEST Loan, Pension
Fund Loan and related revenue requirements.
Payable by Suburban
Municipalities per
Customer
Harrisburg Customers
Harrisburg
Conveyance
System
Steelton
Conveyance
System
Volume Rate
Dollars per
volume of
water
consumed
$1.070 per
1,000 cubic
feet
$0.143 per
1,000
gallons
$0.003 per
1,000
gallons
$0.003 per
1,000
gallons
Flat Rate
Dollars per
residential
property
per year
$9.30 $0.20 $0.20
§ 90-64 § 90-66
90:242
§ 90-66. Bills and billing.
Bills for the payment of strength of waste surcharges for sewer service and
the use of the sewer system pursuant to this section shall be rendered at the
same time and intervals as charges for water consumed in and furnished
to the same property and shall be due and payable upon presentation. All
quarterly billings shall be made and distributed and shall cover service over
the following months:
Months of Billing Months of Service Covered by Billing
February November, December and January
May February, March and April
August May, June and July
November August, September and October
§ 90-67. Delinquent rental penalty.
If any bill for strength of waste surcharges, except for annual service
periods, is not paid within 60 days after the same becomes due and payable,
it shall be delinquent, and a penalty shall be imposed as provided in Chapter
1-301.5 of the Recodified Ordinances of the City of Harrisburg. Bills for
annual service periods shall be subject to the same penalties, except that
penalties shall not be added or begin to accrue until August 1 of such annual
service period.
§ 90-68. Shutting off service.
Upon the failure of any person to pay in full any bill for strength of waste
surcharge within 60 days after the same becomes due and payable, the
City shall have the right to terminate sewer service to the property of
such person or to turn off the water supply to such property. Service may
be restored upon payment of all delinquent bills against such property
and expenses which may have been incurred in terminating such service,
turning off the water supply, or restoring the same.
§ 90-69. Collection of unpaid bills.
The sewer rentals imposed by this chapter shall be collected as provided in
§§ 90-80 through 90-94.
§ 90-70. Effective dates; right to change charges.
This section is hereby declared to be urgent for the preservation of the
peace, health and comfort of the residents of the City and the Township
and shall take effect and be in force, as hereinafter provided, immediately
after final passage and publication as required by law. The City reserves
the right, subject to its obligations under its lease with The Harrisburg
Authority, and its obligations under the Second Supplemental Agreement
dated September 15, 1976, among the City of Harrisburg and the suburban
§ 90-66 SEWERS § 90-70
90:243
municipalities and any supplements and amendments to said agreement,
to make such changes from time to time as in its determination may be
desirable or beneficial and to amend this chapter or to change the rates or
charges in such manner and at such time as in its determination may be
advisable.
§ 90-71. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be subject to the
penalty and enforcement provisions of §§ 90-80 through 90-94, including the
right of the City to disconnect service.
§ 90-72. Application for connection.
§ 90-73. Filing fee.
All such applications by an industrial establishment shall be accompanied
by a filing fee of $75 to cover to the costs and expenses of investigating the
same.
§ 90-74. Investigation and recommendation.
Upon the filing of the application and payment of the filing fee, the Director
shall forthwith cause to be made an investigation to determine whether the
requested tappage will or will not be prejudicial to the best interests of the
AWTF in view of the additional burden imposed on the sewer system and
after taking into consideration present and anticipated future needs.
§ 90-75. Issuance of permit; acceptance of terms.
Upon the approval of any such application, the Director is authorized to
issue permit granting to the applicant the right or privilege of tapping,
A. No connection to the sewer system beyond the limits of the City shall be
made except under the terms, provisions and conditions set forth in this
article and those in §§ 90-44 through 90-60, if applicable, and after
issuance of a permit by the Director DPW if required by §§ 90-44
through 90-60. Any industrial establishment desiring to connect to the
sewer system beyond the limits of the City shall make application to the
Director for a permit to connect upon a form provided by the
Superintendent. To the form shall be attached a sketch or plan showing
in detail: the location and size of lot; the improvements now of such lot
or thereon proposed to be erected for which the permit is requested;
the precise place where the tappage is proposed to be made to the
sewer system; and the location, length and size of the sewerage line
proposed therefor. The Superintendent shall notify the affected
suburban municipality upon receipt of any such application.
B. Any other connection to the sewer system beyond the City limits shall
be according to the terms and conditions set forth in the Service
Agreement of 1976 or any amendments thereto.
§ 90-70 § 90-75
90:244
in conformity with the application, into a specified sanitary sewer. The
permit shall be subject to §§ 90-44 through 90-60 to which terms, provisions
and conditions the applicant, for it and any successors in title to the
improvements in question, by accepting the permit and acting thereon
hereby agrees to all as though specifically set forth in written contract
between the City and the applicant. The permit shall not be assignable or
transferable.
§ 90-76. Permitted discharges only.
Unless otherwise allowed by a permit issued pursuant to § 90-44 et seq., any
connection beyond the City limits shall be for the purpose of discharging
sanitary sewerage only into the sewer system.
§ 90-77. Surcharge for industrial establishments.
Each industrial establishment governed by the pretreatment requirements
of §§ 90-44 through 90-60 located in a suburban municipality shall be
assessed a surcharge directly by the City for the pollutant load for all
sewage and wastes discharged into the sewer system which exceed the
maximum threshold levels set forth therein, such surcharge to be
determined by the City.
§ 90-78. Legal requirements.
§ 90-79. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the
penalty and enforcement provisions of §§ 90-80 through 90-94, including the
right of the City to disconnect service.
A. Any municipality contributing to the sewer system shall agree to adopt,
enforce and keep in full force and effect during the term of any
agreement or discharge into the sewer system an ordinance or
ordinances, or resolution or resolutions, as appropriate, prohibiting the
discharge into its sewage collection system which discharges into the
City sewer system of any wastes prohibited to be discharged into the
sewer systems under the ordinances, rules and regulations of the City
as the same shall be, from time to time, adopted.
B. Any municipality contributing to the sewer system shall agree to adopt
such ordinances or resolutions necessary to impose any rates, charges,
tariffs or requirements upon any of the customers by agreements or
laws and regulations which relate to obligations assumed under such
agreements.
C. Any municipality contributing to the sewer system shall agree to
cooperate with the City in any investigation regarding industrial waste
discharges into the sewer system and shall grant to the City the right to
review, at any time, the volume, pollutant load and character of sewage
and wastes being discharged into the sewer system.
§ 90-75 SEWERS § 90-80
90:245
§ 90-80. Applicability.
Whoever violates any provision of §§ 90-44 through 90-79 shall be subject to
the provisions hereinafter set forth.
§ 90-81. Termination or suspension of service or permit.
Pursuant to the notice requirements of § 90-85, the City may suspend
wastewater treatment and/or a discharge permit when such suspension is
necessary, in the opinion of the City, in order to stop an actual or threatened
discharge which:
§ 90-82. Cessation of harmful activity.
After informal notice to halt or prevent a discharge which reasonably
appears to present an imminent endangerment to the health or welfare of
persons, the AWTF, the sewerage system or the environment, the person
responsible for the discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate the
contribution. In the event of failure of the person to cease or cause to
cease such contribution, the Superintendent shall notify the Director who
shall authorize any actions as deemed necessary to halt or prevent such
contribution, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to
prevent or minimize damage to the sewerage system and/or the AWTF, the
environment or to any individuals.
§ 90-83. Suspension or revocation of permit.
The existence of any one of the following conditions may cause the City to
revoke the permit of the significant industrial user.
A. Presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to
the health or welfare of persons or to the environment;
B. Causes or may cause interference with the operations of or damage to
the AWTF; or
C. Causes the City to violate any condition of its NPDES permit.
A. Failure to factually report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of a discharge;
B. Failure to report significant changes in operations or in wastewater
constituents and characteristics;
C. Refusal of access to the discharger's premises for the purpose of
inspecting or monitoring or determining the amount of sewer rental
payable;
D. Failure to comply with any of the terms and conditions of a permit;
E. Failure to comply with any of the provisions of §§ 90-44 through 90-78;
§ 90-80 § 90-83
90:246
§ 90-84. Reinstatement of permit and restoration of service.
The City shall reinstate a permit and/or restore service under the following
conditions, as applicable:
§ 90-85. Notice of violation.
Whenever the Superintendent finds that any person has violated or is
violating any provisions of the chapters to which these enforcement
provisions apply, any permit issued thereunder, or any applicable federal,
state or local regulation, the Superintendent or a designee shall serve or
cause to be served upon such person a written notice stating the nature of
the violation and requiring the submission within 30 days of the date of the
notice a plan for the satisfactory correction of such violation. If the violation
has occurred outside the City, the Superintendent shall mail a copy of such
notice to the appropriate suburban municipality or municipal authority.
F. Failure to pay in full any bill for sewer rental, sewer maintenance
charge, tappage fee, or any other charge or fee imposed by ordinance
or regulation within 60 days after the same becomes due and payable.
A. Demonstration to the satisfaction of the City that such significant
industrial user is now utilizing good management practices to prevent
or reduce the contribution of pollutants to the sewer system. Good
management principles include, but are not limited to, preventive
operating and maintenance practices to reduce the quantity or improve
the quality of effluent discharged and the control of plant spillage, leaks
and drainage from storage areas; and
B. Submission to the City of proof of elimination of any noncomplying
discharge; and
C. Submission within 15 days of the occurrence a detailed report
describing the causes of the noncomplying discharge and the measures
taken to prevent any future occurrence; or
D. Access to the premises in question for enforcement purposes is
assured; or
E. Submission of a detailed report describing the measures taken to
ensure present and future compliance with the terms and conditions of
a permit; or
F. Evidence of compliance with federal, state and local laws, rules and
regulations is submitted; or
G. Payment in full of all delinquent bills, fees and charges and all charges
incurred by the City in damages or as costs of enforcement is made.
§ 90-83 SEWERS § 90-86
90:247
§ 90-86. Right to hearing.
Any person affected by a notice, directive or other decision of the
Superintendent may request a hearing before the Director and present
evidence of circumstances justifying reconsideration of the decision of the
Superintendent. Such request must be in writing and served on the Director
within 10 days of the date of the notification or decision. The Director shall
hold a hearing and render a decision within 15 days of the request.
§ 90-87. Injunctive relief.
Subject to the notice provisions of § 90-85, in circumstances where the
nature of the violation constitutes a violation of the Clean Streams Law,40
the City may apply for a mandatory preliminary injunction or special
injunction in the Court of Common Pleas of Dauphin County or the
Commonwealth Court of Pennsylvania in accordance with the Pennsylvania
Rules of Civil Procedure relating to actions in equity.
§ 90-88. Civil liability.
§ 90-89. Remedy by City.
A. Any person who permits or allows a discharge which causes an
obstruction or damage to the AWTF shall be assessed a charge equal to
the amount necessary to repair or replace the damaged facilities.
B. Should any person refuse, neglect or fail to comply with pretreatment
provisions and discharge limitations of §§ 90-61 through 90-71, with
any of the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, or with any
directive or notice given pursuant to this chapter or to any other
chapter in Article VI to which these enforcement provisions apply, then
the Director is hereby empowered to authorize and may authorize the
supply of all labor and materials necessary to effect compliance. Such
person shall be assessed a charge equal to the amount necessary to
effect compliance.
C. Should the City suffer the termination or suspension of its NPDES
permit or be assessed penalties or fines for violations thereof, which
violations were caused by the failure of a discharger to comply with the
provisions of §§ 90-61 through 90-71 or other sections in this part and
any applicable rules and regulations, such discharger shall be assessed
a charge equal to the amount expended by the City to cause its NPDES
permit to be reinstated plus the amount of any penalties or fines
imposed against it.
A. All charges assessed in accordance with § 90-88, all sewer rental,
tappage and sewer maintenance fees, fees or charges imposed for
inspection, monitoring and laboratory analysis, or any other fees or
charges authorized by any provision to which this chapter applies shall
40.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. §§ 691.1 et seq.
§ 90-86 § 90-89
90:248
§ 90-90. Public notification.
Pursuant to the public participation requirements of 40 CFR Part 25, the
Department shall cause to have published, at least annually in the largest
daily newspaper of general circulation in the City, a list of all industrial
users who, during the previous twelve-month period, were in significant
noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards or other
pretreatment requirements. For the purpose of this provision, a significant
noncompliance violation is:
be a lien on the properties served from the date the charge therefor
first becomes due and payable.
B. All charges imposed pursuant to § 90-80 et seq. and § 90-88, together
with a 10% penalty thereon, shall be certified by the Director to the City
Solicitor who shall enter the same as a lien in the Court of Common
Pleas of Dauphin County and proceed to collect the same in like manner
as other municipal claims are by law collectible.
C. Sewer rental, tappage and maintenance fees shall be a lien on the
properties served from the date the charge therefor first becomes due
and payable. If such charges are not paid, the City may file such liens
and proceed to collect the same in like manner as other municipal
claims are by law collectible.
D. In addition to the above method, the City may proceed to collect such
assessments by action in assumpsit in the name of the City against the
owner of the property charged and/or the person discharging into the
sewer system.
E. In addition to the above, the City may recover reasonable attorneys'
fees, court costs, court reporter fees and all other expenses of litigation
to enforce the claim or claims of the City.
A. One or more violations of wastewater discharge limits including chronic
violations and technical review criteria violations;
B. Any discharge which alone or in combination cause interference or
pass-through or endangers the health or welfare of AWTF personnel,
the public or the environment or results in the AWTF exercising its
emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge;
C. Failure to meet a compliance schedule milestone;
D. Failure to provide required reports;
E. Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
F. Any other violation or group of violations the AWTF considers to be
significant.
§ 90-89 SEWERS § 90-91
90:249
§ 90-91. Public nuisance.
Any person who violates any of the terms, provisions or requirements of
§§ 90-44 through 90-79, or any of the applicable rules and regulations
regarding discharges, shall be deemed to be maintaining a nuisance, which
nuisance the City is authorized and directed to abate in the manner
provided by law.
§ 90-92. Service of notice.
Whenever notice is necessary under this article, such notice shall be
properly served upon an owner if a copy thereof is delivered to the owner
personally; or by leaving a notice at the usual place of abode with someone
of suitable age and discretion who shall be informed of the contents thereof;
or by certified or registered mail addressed to the owner at the last known
address with return receipt showing it has been delivered. If the return
receipt shows that it has not been delivered, then service may be made
by posting a copy thereof in a conspicuous place in or about the structure
affected by such notice. Such notice shall set forth a reasonable time for
such compliance to be accomplished.
§ 90-93. Issuing authorities.
§ 90-94. Violations and penalties.
A. The Superintendent of the AWTF, Pretreatment Coordinator, City
Engineer, and Plumbing Inspector shall act in the capacity of police
officers for the limited purpose of issuing non-traffic-summary citations
to owners of premises or persons who are found in violation of this part.
Notice of issuance of a citation shall also be given to Steelton Borough.
B. The Director may, by written rule or regulation, designate further
employees of the Department of Public Works who may issue such
citations. Such rules and regulations shall be effective three days
following filing with the City Clerk.
A. Civil penalty. In addition to proceedings under this article or any other
remedy available at law or equity for violation of pretreatment
standards requirements, any person who fails to comply with any
provision of §§ 90-15 through 90-53, or any applicable rules or
regulations, or whoever fails to comply with a notice given pursuant to
those sections and/or this part, may be assessed a civil penalty, whether
or not the violation was willful or negligent, in accordance with
Subsection 4(a)(1) of the Publicly Owned Treatment Works Penalty Law,
Act of March 26, 1992, P.L. 23, 35 P.S. § 752.4(a)(1), of not more than
$25,000 per day of violation. Each twenty-four-hour period during
which a violation continues shall be considered a separate and distinct
offense under this provision and punishable as such.
B. Criminal penalty. Any person who knowingly or negligently violates any
of the terms, provisions or requirements of § 90-53 or any of the
§ 90-91 § 90-94
90:250
applicable rules and regulations, or whoever refuses or neglects to
comply with any notice given pursuant to these sections to such person,
or whoever obstructs or interferes with any person in the enforcement
of these chapters shall, upon conviction thereof, severally for each and
every violation or noncompliance respectively be fined not more than
$1,000 or imprisoned for not more than 90 days, or both. Each twentyfour-
hour period during which a violation continues shall be considered
a separate offense and punishable as such.
C. Any person who knowingly or negligently makes a false oral or written
statement in any report, record, plan, application or other document
filed with the City or who falsifies, tampers with or renders inaccurate
any monitoring device or method required under this part, shall be
liable to prosecution under appropriate criminal statues, including but
not limited to: false swearing, 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 4903; unworn falsification
to authorities, 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 4904; tampering with or fabricating
physical evidence, 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 4910; and tampering with public
records or information, 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 4911.
§ 90-94 SEWERS § 90-94
90:251

ARTICLE VII
Rates; Charges; Billing
§ 90-95. Tapping and connection fees.
For each connection made to the sewer system, the following fees and
charges will be imposed:
A. Capacity fee and charge.
(1) For all connections made to the sewer system (including the
existing system, additions to the system and capped sewers
whether built by the Borough or built by or at the expense of
developers), a capacity fee and charge shall be imposed to reflect
the value of service readily available for use and to reflect the
capital costs associated with the Borough's wastewater facilities.
(2) This fee shall also be imposed whenever: 1) a new building or
facility is connected to an existing building sewer or the internal
drainage system of an existing building or facility; 2) an existing
building or facility is expanded in such a way that the generated
quantity of wastewater is likely to exceed one EDU. Flow estimates
shall be made by the Borough based on sound engineering practice.
(3) Said capacity fee and charge shall be as shown on the Rate
Schedule as "Tapping Fee — Capacity Part," and shall be due and
payable at the time the application for connection is filed. Said fee
and charge shall be in addition to any and all other fees and
charges pursuant to this article.
(4) If two or more residential units, stores, offices, industrial units,
etc., are connected to the sewer system through a single building
sewer, or if two or more types of uses are made of the same
improved property, the tapping fee shall be computed as though
each residential unit, store, office, industrial unit, etc., were a
separate improved property or user with a separate connection to
the sewer. In other words, multiple uses of the same building are
additive.
B. For all new connections to the sewer system, a collection system fee
and charge will be imposed to recover the cost to the Borough of
constructing street mains. Said fee and charge shall be as shown on the
Rate Schedule as "Tapping Fee — Collection Part" and shall be due and
payable at the time the application for connection is filed. Said fee and
charge shall be in addition to any and all other fees and charges
imposed pursuant to this article.
C. A connection fee and charge shall be imposed for all connections to a
line installed by the Borough from a street main to the curb line and
shall be imposed to cover the expense to the Borough for installation of
said line. Said connection fee shall be as shown on the Rate Schedule as
"Connection Fee" and shall be due and payable at the time the
§ 90-95 SEWERS § 90-95
90:253
§ 90-96. Inspection fees.
For each connection made to the sewer system, the following fees and
charges will be imposed:
§ 90-97. Reservation of capacity fee.
application for connection is filed. Said fee and charge shall be in
addition to any and all other fees and charges imposed pursuant to this
article.
A. Inspection fee and charge.
(1) An inspection fee and charge shall be imposed for the inspection of
any building sewer or pressure sewer system installation and shall
be shown on the Rate Schedule as "Inspection Fee." Said fee and
charge shall be established based on the following costs to the
Borough:
(a) The actual costs to the Borough of inspecting said installation.
(b) For the installation of a building sewer or pressure sewer
system which is under a sewer extension agreement with the
Borough, the actual costs to the Borough of inspecting the
installation.
(2) Said fee and charge shall be in addition to any and all other fees
and charges imposed pursuant to this article. Said inspection fee
shall be as shown on the Rate Schedule as "Customer Facility
Fee — Inspection Fee."
A. By specific resolution of the Borough, a reservation of capacity fee may
be imposed upon all properties which may be lawfully required to
connect to the sewer system of the Borough, but which have not been
connected thereto, provided that such reservation of capacity fee shall
be effective upon the expiration of at least 60 days after the notice to
connect to the sewer system has been received. This fee may also be
imposed upon the owners of property who have requested the Borough
to reserve capacity for future development, either directly or by
submitting a planning module for the Borough's approval.
B. The reservation of capacity fee shall be in an amount established from
time to time by the Borough and shall be billed and collected at the
same time and in the same manner as the sewer rentals or charges
imposed by the Borough for the users of the sewer system.
C. Reservation of capacity and payment of the reservation of capacity fee
shall be limited to one year. Connection to the sewer system must be
completed within 60 days of the end of that year. If requested, a onetime,
six-month extension may be granted by the Borough. If the
Borough grants an extension, connection to the sewer system must be
completed within 60 days of the end of the extension.
§ 90-95 § 90-98
90:254
§ 90-98. Sewer rentals or charges.
A. Sewer rentals or charges are imposed upon, and shall be collected
from, the owner of each improved property which shall be connected
with the sewer system. The charge is for the availability of use of the
sewer system, whether such use shall be direct or indirect, and shall be
payable as provided herein.
B. Sewer rentals shall be based upon the Rate Schedule adopted by the
Borough and amended from time to time.
(1) All Sewer rentals shall be computed in accordance with the rates
shown on the current Rate Schedule.
(2) Sewer rental billings under this section shall be rendered in arrears
of the service provided.
(3) Owners of property connected to the sewer system for only a
portion of a period shall pay a pro rata sewer rental for the period
of time actually connected during the first period.
(4) The sewer rental or charge for all nonresidential establishments
shall be based on the reading obtained from the water service
meter.
(5) The sewer rental or charge for any nonresidential establishment
that does not install a water service meter will be based on the EDU
rating listed in the Rate Schedule.
(6) Exclusion from the sewerage system of noncontaminated
wastewaters and waters used solely for cooling purposes may be
required by the Borough, or such exclusion may be optional with
the property owner if not required by the Borough. When such
wastewaters are excluded, sewer rentals shall be based upon total
water consumed, less water excluded, at the rates stipulated under
Subsection A above. Water excluded from the sewerage system
may be determined from meters installed and maintained by the
property owner or the Borough or from estimates or measurements
made by the Borough. The Borough may require any individual
establishment or the industrial establishment may elect to install,
pay for and maintain a meter approved by the Borough for
measuring the volume of sewage and waste actually discharged to
the sewerage system, in which case sewer rentals shall be
computed as set forth under Subsection A above. For sewer rental
purposes, any business concern having 20 or more persons on the
payroll per working day during the quarter immediately preceding
the quarter for which the sewer billing is rendered shall be
classified as an industrial establishment.
(7) Additional classifications, sewer rentals or modifications of the
above sewer rental schedule may be established by the Borough
from time to time as deemed necessary.
§ 90-98 SEWERS § 90-98
90:255
§ 90-99. Industrial waste discharge permit fee.
Each application for an industrial waste discharge permit (see Article VI,
§ 90-45) shall be accompanied by a fee. The amount of the fee shall be as
shown on the Rate Schedule.
§ 90-100. Estimated charges.
Whenever any person discharges or permits to be discharged any material
into the sewer system by any means other than through a connection
approved in accordance with these regulations, the Borough reserves the
right to estimate the quantity and strength of the material and to make an
appropriate charge based on such estimate.
§ 90-101. Billing and collection procedures.
(8) Notwithstanding the provisions above, sewer rents and charges
shall be levied upon all users of the sewer system to reflect
applicable United States Environmental Agency rules and
regulations promulgated in connection with user charges and
industrial cost recovery charges.
A. The net amount of the sewer rental billing furnished to owners shall, in
general, be rendered on a quarterly basis on or about the first day of
February, May, August and November.
B. All bills for sewer service sent to owners are payable immediately upon
receipt of the bill. If not paid by February 28, May 31, August 31 and
November 30, a penalty of 5% of the current bill will be added and
collected as part thereof, and if not paid by March 31, June 30,
September 30 and December 31, an additional 5% penalty of the
current bill will be added and collected as part thereof. Thereafter, if
not paid by the next billing dates of February 1, May 1, August 1 and
November 1, interest of 2.5% per quarter shall be added on the total
unpaid balance each quarter until paid in full.
C. If a bill is not paid within 30 days after date of bill, a notice may be
forwarded to the owner at his last recorded address on the books of the
Borough informing the customer of the delinquency and the penalty and
declaring the intention of the Borough to discontinue sewer service, by,
in conjunction with the Steelton Borough Authority, water service, if the
bill is not paid within 10 days.
D. If the said bill is not paid within 10 days of the mailing of the above
delinquency notice, water service may be shut off and discontinued in
accordance with State law and regulations. If service is terminated
under these conditions, a reconnection charge of $25 on weekdays or
$50 on weekends or after the hours of 3:00 p.m. on weekdays must be
paid to the Borough, in addition to all arrearages before service shall be
restored.
§ 90-98 § 90-101
90:256
§ 90-102. Remedy in case of noncompliance.
Should any person refuse, neglect or fail to comply with the provisions of
this chapter or of any rules and regulations herein provided for or of any
notice given in conformity with or pursuant to the provisions hereof, then
the appropriate official of the Borough is empowered and directed to supply
all labor and material required of said negligent of delinquent owner; and
the cost and expense thereof, together with 10% penalty thereon, shall be
certified to the Borough Solicitor who shall enter the same as a lien against
the property in the Court of Common Pleas of Dauphin County and proceed
to collect the same in like manner as other municipal claims are by law
collectible; or any action of assumpsit may be brought to recover the same,
in the name of the Borough, from the said owner or owners.
§ 90-103. Violations and penalties.
The provisions of this chapter are declared to be for the health, safety
and welfare of the citizens of the Borough. Any person violating any of
the terms, provisions or requirements of this chapter or of the rules and
regulations, or who shall refuse, neglect or fail to comply with any notice
given to such person by a duly authorized representative of the Borough,
in conformity with or pursuant to the provisions of this chapter or of
such rules and regulations, or who shall obstruct or interfere with any
person in the execution of this chapter, shall, upon conviction thereof
before any District Justice, severally for each and every such violation or
noncompliance, respectively, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $600
and costs of suit and, in default of the payment thereof, shall be committed
to the jail of Dauphin County for a period not exceeding 30 days. Each
thirty-day period during which a violation continues shall be considered a
separate offense and punishable as such.
E. Sewer rentals imposed by this article shall be a lien upon the properties
served from the date the charge therefor first becomes due and
payable. In addition to all other rights of the Borough herein granted, if
such rentals are not paid, the Borough may file such liens and collect
the same in the manner provided by law for the filing and collection of
municipal liens and claims or may proceed to collect such sewer rentals
by action in assumpsit in the name of the Borough against the property
charged or the user of the service.
§ 90-101 SEWERS § 90-103
90:257

ARTICLE VIII
Abatement of Rentals or Charges
§ 90-104. No abatement except for physical disconnection.
There shall be no abatement of sewer rentals or service charges imposed
by this chapter unless the property for which an abatement has been
requested has been physically disconnected from the sewer system in a
manner satisfactory to the Borough.
§ 90-105. Dischargeless EDU rental or charges.
A. A reduced rental rate (known as a "dischargeless EDU") shall be
applicable for structures or properties that will be vacant for a period of
three months or longer.
B. A written request to the Borough will be reviewed, and, if appropriate,
will be granted for dischargeless EDUs. The dischargeless EDU rate
will be set as listed in the Rate Schedule.
C. If the property becomes occupied before the required three months, the
property owner will be responsible for the full amount of sewer rental
due during the dischargeless EDU rate period.
§ 90-104 SEWERS § 90-105
90:259

ARTICLE IX
Inspection and Enforcement
§ 90-106. Inspection rights.
For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter of the Borough
with respect to the operation of the sewer system and for the purpose of
advancing and protecting the public health, the Borough reserves the right
to come upon or enter the premises of any person, firm, or corporation
connected to the system for the purpose of inspecting the sewer facilities
located thereon and for the purpose of determining compliance with the
requirements of the Borough. In the event that the Borough's duly
authorized representatives are denied access to any customer's premises
for these purposes, the Borough reserves the right to discontinue sewer
service to such premises until inspection is permitted and compliance with
the requirements of the Borough has been determined.
§ 90-107. Discontinuance of service.
Notwithstanding any other provisions or implications of this chapter to the
contrary, the Borough reserves the right at all times to refuse to render
or to continue to render sewer service to any property or through any
lines whenever it appears that the connection of the property to the sewer
system has been improperly made or whenever it appears there has been
a violation of this chapter with respect to the installation or use of the
sewage disposal facilities. In the event that the Borough shall elect to
discontinue service to any user connected to its lines, except as provided
in the Industrial Waste Control Regulation for Significant Users document,
the Borough shall give 10 days' written notice by certified mail to the owner
prior to disconnecting the property from the sewer system.
§ 90-108. Remedy in case of noncompliance.
Should any person refuse, neglect or fail to comply with the provisions
of this article or of any rules and regulations herein provided for or of
any notice given in conformity with or pursuant to the provisions hereof,
then the appropriate official of the Borough hereby is empowered and
directed to supply all labor and material required of said negligent or
delinquent owner; and the cost and expense thereof, together with 10%
penalty thereon, shall be certified to the Borough Solicitor who shall enter
the same as a lien against the property in the Court of Common Pleas of
Dauphin County and proceed to collect the same in like manner as other
municipal claims are by law collectible; or an action of assumpsit may be
brought to recover the same, in the name of the Borough, from the said
owner or owners.
§ 90-106 SEWERS § 90-108
90:261

ARTICLE X
Rate Schedule
§ 90-109. Adoption of rentals, charges, fees and rates by resolution.
The sewer rentals and charges, tapping and connection fees, customer
facilities/inspection fees, surcharge limits and calculation rates, industrial
waste discharge permit fees, dischargeless EDU rental or charges, and any
other miscellaneous charges or fees provided for in this chapter shall be
set forth on a Rate Schedule, which Rate Schedule shall be adopted by
resolution of the Borough.41
41.Editor's Note: The following articles from the end of Ord. No. 2004-10, comprising
standard, boilerplate language, were deleted for purposes of codification: Art. XI,
Severability; Art. XII, Repeal Provisions; and Art. XIII, Effective Date.
§ 90-109 SEWERS § 90-109
90:263
Chapter 92
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Open burning — See Ch. 48.
Littering — See Ch. 71.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 82.
Recycling — See Ch. 86.
§ 90-109 § 90-109
92:264
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 92-1. Title.
This Chapter 92 shall be known as the "Steelton Borough Solid Waste
Ordinance."
§ 92-2. Purposes.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the health, safety and welfare
of the residents of the Borough of Steelton by regulating the collection,
storage, transportation, removal and disposal of solid waste by:
§ 92-3. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have,
unless the context clearly dictates otherwise, the meanings given to them in
this section:
AUTHORIZED COLLECTOR — Person, persons, firm, firms, corporation,
association, partnership or other legal entity certified by the Borough of
Steelton to collect municipal waste in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Steelton, Dauphin County, Pennsylvania.
BULKY WASTE — Items of solid waste which, due to their size, shape
or weight, cannot be collected as a part of the normal weekly municipal
waste collection and therefore require special handling. For example, large
household appliances such as stoves and refrigerators, plumbing fixtures,
furniture, large crates, tires, tools, machinery or parts thereof and similar
items in size shall be considered "bulky waste."
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENTS — Any establishment engaged in
nonmanufacturing or nonprocessing business, including but not limited
to stores, markets, office buildings, restaurants, shopping centers and
theaters.
CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION WASTE — Lumber, roofing material,
sheathing, rubble, broken concrete, macadam, plaster and brick, conduit,
pipe, insulation and other material which results from a construction,
demolition or remodeling process.
DESIGNATED FACILITY — Any disposal, processing or transfer facility
utilized for the management of municipal solid waste and specified as part
of the Dauphin County Intermunicipal Solid Waste Authority (DCISWA)
Municipal Waste Management Plan.
A. Instituting a comprehensive solid waste management program.
B. Establishing a program of regulation over the storage, treatment,
processing and disposal of solid waste materials in Steelton Borough.
§ 92-1 SOLID WASTE § 92-3
92:265
DWELLING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms located within a building
and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or
intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating by one family.
This definition includes a mobile home. Any multifamily establishment of
two or three dwelling units is included in this definition. For purposes of this
chapter and any related contract, the term "dwelling unit" or "residential
unit" may also include any small commercial establishment or institutional
establishment that, due to its volume of solid waste, may be treated by the
Borough as a dwelling unit for the collection and disposal of municipal solid
waste and the collection, processing and marketing of recyclables.
EXCLUSIVE CONTRACT — An agreement entered into by the Borough of
Steelton with a private person, persons or corporation for the collection
and disposal of all municipal waste and the collection and marketing of
recyclable materials within the Borough of Steelton to the extent provided
by this chapter and the agreement.
EXCLUSIVE CONTRACTOR — The person, persons, individual organization,
group, association, partnership, firm or corporation or other legal entity
that was awarded the exclusive contract to collect municipal waste.
INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENTS — Any establishment engaging in
manufacturing or processing, including but not limited to factories,
foundries, mills, processing plants and refineries.
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment engaged in
service to persons, including but not limited to hospitals, nursing homes,
orphanages, schools and universities.
MULTIFAMILY ESTABLISHMENTS — Rental housing apartment buildings
or apartment complexes which have four or more dwelling units, and
condominium associations and homeowners' associations of four or more
dwelling units which are established and organized in such a manner that
the association provides common services for the residents of the housing
development. This definition shall also include apartment buildings and
apartment complexes owned and operated by institutional establishments if
this institutional establishment charges a rental fee for the dwelling units.
MUNICIPAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any facility or building owned or
operated by a local government or county government, local government
or county government authority, state government or agency or federal
government or agency.
MUNICIPAL WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or office
waste and any other material, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained
gaseous materials, resulting from the operation of residential, municipal,
commercial or institutional establishments and from community activities;
and sludge not meeting the definition of residual or hazardous waste in
the Solid Waste Management Act42 from a municipal, commercial or
institutional waste water supply treatment plant, public waste water
treatment plant or air pollution control facility. The term does not include
42.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018-101 et seq.
§ 92-3 § 92-3
92:266
source-separated recyclable materials (Pennsylvania Act 101, Section
103).43
MUNICIPAL WASTE COLLECTOR — "Collector" shall mean a person,
persons, individual organization, group, association, partnership, firm or
corporation or other legal entity authorized under the provisions of this
chapter to collect and dispose of solid waste, garbage, rubbish, refuse
or any other form of municipal waste from residential or nonresidential
properties under the terms and conditions of this chapter; "collector" shall
also mean a hauler.
NONRESIDENTIAL — Commercial, industrial, institutional and municipal
establishments.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation, association,
institution, cooperative enterprise, municipal authority, federal government
or agency, state institution or agency or any other legal entity whatsoever
which is recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
RESIDENTIAL MUNICIPAL WASTE — Municipal solid waste, as herein
defined, that is generated at a dwelling unit.
RESIDENTIAL UNIT — See "dwelling unit."
RESIDUAL WASTE — Any garbage, refuse or other discarded material
or other waste, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous
materials, resulting from industrial, mining or agricultural water supply
treatment facility, waste water treatment facility or air pollution control
facility, provided that it is not hazardous. The term shall not include coal
refuse as defined in the act of September 24, 1968 (P.L. 1040, No. 318),
known as the "Coal Refuse Disposal Control Act."44 The term shall not
include treatment sludges from coal mine drainage treatment plants,
disposal of which is being carried on pursuant to and in compliance with
a valid permit issued pursuant to the Act of June 22, 1937 (P.L. 1987, No.
394), known as the "Clean Streams Law."45
SOLID WASTE — All materials or substances that, as of the contract date
or any subsequent date, were generally discarded or rejected as being
spent, useless, worthless or in excess to the owners at the time of such
discard or rejection, including garbage, refuse, industrial and commercial
waste, sludges from air or water pollution control facilities or water supply
treatment facilities, rubbish, ashes, contained gaseous materials,
incinerator residue, demolition and construction debris and offal; excluding
sewage and other highly diluted water-carried materials or substances,
material and substances in gaseous form and hazardous waste.
UNACCEPTABLE WASTE — The portion of solid waste that is not municipal
waste and which is predominantly noncombustible, including metal
furniture and appliances, concrete rubble, mixed roofing materials,
noncombustible building debris, rock, gravel and other earthen materials,
43.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.103.
44.Editor's Note: See 52 P.S. § 30.51 et seq.
45.Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 4521 et seq.
§ 92-3 SOLID WASTE § 92-3
92:267
large automotive vehicle parts, engines, blocks and transmissions, trailers,
equipment, wire and cable, as well as hazardous waste, pathological,
infectious and biological waste, sewage, sludge, explosives, chemicals and
radioactive materials or other materials which by applicable law or
regulation must be processed or disposed at specific facilities. If any
governmental agency or unit having appropriate jurisdiction shall
determine that any wastes which are not included, as of the effective date of
this chapter, within this definition of "unacceptable waste," are considered
harmful, toxic or dangerous to public health and welfare, than such wastes
shall be "unacceptable wastes" for the purposes of this chapter.
§ 92-3 § 92-3
92:268
ARTICLE II
Storage, Handling and Disposal
§ 92-4. Duties of owners and occupants.
It shall be the duty of every owner of property and every person occupying
a dwelling unit, multifamily establishment premises, institutions or place
of business within the Borough where municipal waste is generated and
accumulated, at his/her own expense and costs, except as otherwise
specified in this chapter, to provide and keep at all times a sufficient number
of containers to hold all municipal waste accumulated between intervals of
collection of such waste by the exclusive contractor or other collector and
to ensure the sanitary and legal disposal of such waste in accordance with
this chapter and all other Borough, state and federal applicable laws and
regulations.
§ 92-5. Storage on residential property.
A. Containers.
(1) All municipal waste accumulated by owners of residential
properties shall be placed in containers for collection by the
exclusive contractor. The containers shall be durable, watertight
and made of a rigid rust-resistant metal or plastic. The size of each
container shall not exceed a thirty-five-gallon capacity and the
weight shall not exceed 50 pounds unless bulk (dumpster type)
containers are used.
(2) (Reserved)46
(3) Bulk containers for multifamily establishment waste shall meet the
general container requirements previously set forth except for size
and weight limitation. Bulk containers shall be sized according to
the type and quantity of waste production, equipment handling
capabilities and the frequency of collection.
(4) Tree trimmings, branches, hedge clippings and similar materials
which cannot be conveniently placed in the aforementioned
containers shall be baled, tied or sacked in compact bundles less
than four feet in length and width.
B. Location of containers. Each municipal waste container shall be placed
for collection so as to be accessible to any collector at ground level and
at a point mutually agreeable between the resident, the Borough and
the collector. Failure to place containers at such locations may result in
waste not being picked up. Location of bulk containers at multifamily
establishments and other commercial/institutional establishments shall
be in accordance with § 92-6B below. No municipal waste or containers
holding municipal waste (excepting bulk containers at multifamily
46.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(2), regarding disposal bags, was repealed 10-20-2003
by Ord. No. 2003-7, approved 10-20-2003.
§ 92-4 SOLID WASTE § 92-5
92:269
§ 92-6. Storage on nonresidential property.
§ 92-7. Certification of collectors.
establishments and other commercial/industrial establishments) shall
be placed at curbside or adjacent to the street or alley for collection
purposes more than 12 hours before the scheduled collection day.
Containers shall be removed from curbside or location adjacent to
street or alley and returned to their storage area within the property
line within 12 hours of the actual collection from them of their contents.
[Amended 10-16-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-4, approved 10-16-2000]
C. Frequency of collection. Waste shall be collected:
(1) No less than weekly.
(2) Within 24 hours of the designated collection day(s).
A. Containers.
(1) Storage of municipal waste at commercial, institutional and
industrial properties shall be done in the same type of containers as
required for residential properties except where the accumulation
of solid waste for such commercial, institutional or industrial
property precludes their use, in which case such owner or occupant
may make special arrangements with the exclusive contractor or
collector for the storing of such additional quantities. Special
arrangements include the number and type of special bulk
container(s) to be furnished by the exclusive contractor or collector
as may be approved by the Borough.47
B. Location of containers. Containers for the collection at commercial,
institutional or industrial properties shall be located on the owner or
occupant's premises at a place agreed upon by the owner or occupant
of the commercial, institutional or industrial property and the exclusive
contractor or collector and shall be satisfactory to the Borough. Such
locations shall not interfere with public or private sidewalks, walkways,
driveways, roads, streets, highways, alleys or entrances and exits of
public or private buildings.
C. Frequency of collection. Waste shall be collected no less than once per
week.
A. Certification. It shall be unlawful for any person, persons, individual
organization, group, association, partnership, firm, corporation or other
legal entity other than authorized municipal waste collectors to collect,
process or transfer municipal waste from Steelton Borough without the
certification of the Borough Secretary.
47.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(2), regarding disposal bags, which immediately
followed this subsection, was repealed 10-20-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-7, approved
10-20-2003.
§ 92-5 § 92-7
92:270
B. Designated facility. No certified municipal waste collector may dispose,
process or transfer municipal waste to any facility, except as specified
by the DCISWA through the Dauphin County Municipal Waste
Management Plan.
C. Hazardous or unacceptable waste. No certified waste collector shall in
any event or for any reason deliver hazardous or unacceptable waste to
a designated facility which was collected within the Borough's
jurisdiction. The Borough retains the right to make periodic and
random inspections of vehicles collecting waste to determine that only
municipal waste is being collected. The collection of or delivery to a
designated facility of any hazardous waste or unacceptable waste shall
constitute a violation of this chapter and may result in the immediate
termination of the collector's certification to collect municipal waste.
D. Documentation. Collectors must submit all information contained in
Appendix A48 on an annual basis to the Steelton Borough Secretary.
Collectors will be notified in writing by the Borough Secretary if they
are certified to operate within the Borough.
E. Revocation of certificate.
(1) The Borough shall have the right, at any time without refund of any
part of any certification fee, to suspend or revoke the certification
of a collector, in addition to those reasons previously set forth in
this chapter, for any of the following causes:
(a) False or misleading statements on the application for a
certification.
(b) Collecting or transporting acceptable waste in a careless or
negligent manner resulting in littering, odor or any unsafe or
unsanitary condition.
(c) Burning of any refuse within the confines of the Borough.
(d) Failure to comply with any rules, regulations or directives
adopted by the Borough in implementation of this chapter.
(2) Upon violation of any part, section or subsection of this chapter
and/or the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania relating to
the storage, collection, transportation or disposal of acceptable
solid waste, the Borough may, in addition to any other remedies
provided pursuant to the terms of this chapter, notify the collector
involved of such violation, and of a time for a meeting to consider
the matter. Failure of the collector involved in such violation to
attend or to be represented at such meeting shall be in and of itself
grounds for cancellation by the Borough of the certification granted
to the collector. If satisfactory solution or adjustment of the
violation cannot be accomplished, the Borough reserves the right
48.Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file at the Borough offices.
§ 92-7 SOLID WASTE § 92-7
92:271
§ 92-8. Collection vehicles.
§ 92-9. Transportation of solid waste.
Any person, organization or corporation transporting solid waste within the
Borough shall prevent or remedy any spillage from vehicles or containers
used in the transport of such solid waste. The vehicles used to transport or
convey solid waste shall be leak-proof and enclosed to the extent necessary
to ensure no loss or spillage of waste from the vehicles. The Borough shall
have the authority to inspect the vehicles used for the transport of solid
waste as it deems necessary.
§ 92-10. Disposal of municipal waste.
All municipal waste produced, processed, collected and transported from
within the jurisdictional limits of the Borough shall be disposed of at a
disposal, processing or transfer facility designated by the Dauphin County
Intermunicipal Solid Waste Authority (DCISWA). All municipal waste
generated at commercial, industrial and institutional facilities that is not
being collected and disposed as a part of Steelton Borough's solid waste/
recycling program must also be processed, transferred or disposed at a
DCISWA designated facility. The Borough reserves the right to make
inspections of all waste collectors to ensure that waste generated within the
to cancel the privilege and certificate granted under the terms of
this chapter to the collector.
F. Assignment of certification. The privilege and certificate hereby
granted to collectors shall be deemed personal to said collectors, and
any of them, and there shall be no assignment of a said privilege and
certificate unless such assignment is approved by the Borough.
A. All vehicles used for the collection of acceptable solid waste shall have
watertight enclosed metal bodies and shall meet the following
standards:
(1) Each vehicle shall have its tare weight conspicuously displayed on
the exterior of the vehicle.
(2) Every vehicle shall be identified as to owner.
(3) All vehicles must comply with all existing state laws regarding
identification of vehicles (such as requirements set forth in Act
101)49 and truck conditions as set forth in applicable state and
federal laws.
B. All licensed and authorized collectors agree to abide by the regulations
for flow of traffic through the designated facility scales and into the
designated facility site and shall comply with such reasonable safety
and traffic rules which are applicable.
49.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.100 et seq.
§ 92-7 § 92-10
92:272
Borough is being disposed of in a designated facility. Any waste collector
found to be in violation of this section shall have his certification to haul
municipal waste in the Borough revoked.
§ 92-11. Unlawful deposition of waste.
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit for collection any solid waste,
including bulky items, not generated at the address from which collection
is made or to bring solid waste into the Borough or from one address to
another in the Borough for the purpose of taking advantage of the collection
service or to avoid the cost of collection.
§ 92-12. Bulky waste.
Bulky waste which is not collected by the normal or weekly residential
collection shall not be stored outside of a building or accessory building on
any land in the Borough, except for a period not exceeding 14 days pending
the special handling for disposal of the bulky waste. It shall be unlawful for
any person to place bulky waste on any property other than on the property
at which it was generated or directly associated with. Bulky waste shall
be disposed of at a state permitted or licensed disposal facility, a facility
especially designed by the Borough to take such bulky items or a legitimate
salvage dealer that is in the business of disposing or recycling such items.
§ 92-13. Leaves.
Brush, tree trimmings, yard clippings, leaves, grass or other waste from
living plantings may be stored for periods of time in excess of 14 days
if necessary until the next scheduled collection for such items or for the
purpose of composting such material in accordance with the Borough
ordinances, unless such storage violates other ordinances or regulations of
the Borough.
§ 92-14. Construction and demolition waste.
All waste materials resulting from the building, structural alteration, repair,
construction or demolition of buildings or structures shall be disposed of
as permitted by the regulations of the State Department of Environmental
Resources50 or pertinent ordinances or regulations of the Borough. It shall
be the responsibility of the property owner and the waste contractor to
ensure the disposal of such waste in accordance with applicable laws and
regulations.
§ 92-15. Exclusions.
A. All residential (including multifamily establishments), commercial,
institutional and industrial establishments must participate in
Steelton's solid waste program. The only exceptions are those
50.Editor's Note: Said Department was split in 1995 into the Department of Environmental
Protection and the Department of Conservation and Natural Resources.
§ 92-10 SOLID WASTE § 92-15
92:273
§ 92-16. Alternate disposals.
In the event that, due to unforeseen circumstances, a DCISWA disposal,
processing or transfer facility is unable to accept waste originating from
Steelton Borough, the contractor shall dispose of the waste at an alternate
disposal facility designated by DCISWA. This alternate facility will not be
more than 60 miles one way from the Borough.
commercial, institutional or industrial establishments that utilize bulk
containers (dumpsters) to collect waste. These establishments may
choose to be part of Steelton Borough's solid recycling program or
contract privately for those services.
B. Those commercial, industrial or institutional establishments that
choose to haul their own waste or contract for collection and hauling of
their waste must utilize a waste disposal, processing or transfer facility
designated by the DCISWA through its Municipal Solid Waste
Management Plan.
C. Nothing contained herein shall prohibit a farmer from carrying out
normal farming operations, including composting or spreading of
manure or other farm-produced agricultural waste, not otherwise
prohibited or regulated for land applications.
D. The provisions of this chapter do not apply to anything but the storage,
collection, transportation and disposal of municipal waste and do not
apply therefore, to hazardous or residual waste as defined by the
Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act 9751 and its amendments.
All hazardous or residual waste must be disposed of in compliance with
applicable state and federal laws and regulations.
51.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
§ 92-15 § 92-16
92:274
ARTICLE III
Service Fees and Billing
§ 92-17. Payments required.
It shall be the duty and responsibility of every owner of property and
every person occupying a dwelling unit, premise or place of business within
the Borough where municipal waste is produced and is accumulated to
pay a service fee for the collection and disposal of this waste, except as
otherwise provided by this chapter, to a contracted hauler. The owner and/
or occupant of any dwelling unit, including multifamily establishments, shall
pay a base quarterly fee regardless of the amount or type of waste put
out for collection. The exclusive contractor may discontinue service for
nonpayment of quarterly fees by a resident, commercial, institutional or
industrial establishment.
§ 92-18. Basis of charges.
To encourage and maximize recycling and waste reduction, all quarterly
waste fees paid either to a municipal waste collector, or an exclusive
contractor shall be based upon the volume of waste collected at dwelling
units to the extent than any amount over three thirty-five-gallon cans or
bags per week be charged on a volume basis through the use of tags sold
directly to the resident by the Borough for use on excess cans or bags. In
addition, the Borough may add a quarterly surcharge to each residential
unit to cover the Borough's administrative costs. Commercial, industrial and
institutional facilities that utilize bags or cans to dispose of their waste are
also subject to a three-bag or can amount per week. The only exceptions are
those facilities that utilize dumpster-type service or those facilities that are
not part of the Steelton Borough Solid Waste Program. To effectuate this
provision, the following guidelines are hereby established:
A. Haulers shall be required to file with the Borough a complete schedule
of rates showing evidence that their rates are established on a volume
basis, and said rates shall be annually for the length of the contract.
B. An exclusive contract for the collection of residential municipal waste
that may be established by the Borough shall include provisions for
billing residential units on a volume basis by the exclusive collector.
These provisions shall not preclude the Borough or its collector from
establishing a minimum charge for solid waste collection as an
assessment against the property for the benefit to the health and
welfare of the community for having a comprehensive solid waste
collection program available to the owners of property in the Borough.
Such minimum charges will be set at a level that is approximate to
cover the basic cost of solid waste collection but shall not be set so high
as to discourage recycling of solid waste.
§ 92-17 SOLID WASTE § 92-19
92:275
§ 92-19. Changes to be set by resolution.
All quarterly fees established under an exclusive contract for the collection
of waste by the exclusive contractor shall be established by a resolution
of the Council of Steelton Borough. Any surcharge(s) so established shall
be reviewed at least annually and adjusted as necessary to ensure that all
costs involved in the collection and disposal of municipal waste under the
exclusive contract, including the administrative costs of the Borough are
covered by the surcharge(s).
§ 92-19 § 92-19
92:276
ARTICLE IV
Penalties and Remedies
§ 92-20. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction by a District Magistrate, be subject to a fine of not less than
$100 nor more than $1,000, together with the cost of prosecution, or, in
default of payment of such fine, imprisonment in the Dauphin County Jail
for a period of not more than 30 days. Every violator of the provisions of
this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense each and every day
such violation continues and shall be subject to the penalty imposed by this
section for each and every separate offense.
§ 92-21. Other remedies.
In addition to the foregoing penalty, the Borough may require the owner
or occupant of a property to remove any accumulation of solid waste, and
should said person fail to remove any accumulation of solid waste and
should said person fail to remove such solid waste after five days following
written notice, the Borough may cause the solid waste to be collected and
disposed of with the cost for such action to be charged to the owner or
occupant of the property in a manner provided by law. The Solicitor of the
Borough is authorized to institute proceedings in courts of law or equity
to control the collection, storage, transportation, processing, treatment and
disposal of solid waste to enforce the provisions of this chapter, including
securing injunctive relief to prohibit any unlicensed or unauthorized person
or any licensed or authorized collector in violation of the provisions of this
chapter from continuing collection, transportation or disposal under the
terms hereof, or to enforce compliance by any licensed collector with the
terms of this chapter.
§ 92-20 SOLID WASTE § 92-21
92:277
Chapter 93
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 90.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
99.
Zoning — See Ch. 120.
§ 92-21 § 92-21
93:278
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 93-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as "Stormwater
Management."
§ 93-2. Statement of findings.
The governing body of the Borough finds that:
A. Stormwater runoff from lands modified by human activities threatens
public health and safety by causing decreased infiltration of rainwater
and increased runoff flows and velocities, which overtax the carrying
capacity of existing streams and storm sewers, and greatly increases
the cost to the public to manage stormwater.
B. Inadequate planning and management of stormwater runoff resulting
from land development and redevelopment throughout a watershed can
also harm surface water resources by changing the natural hydrologic
patterns, accelerating stream flows (which increase scour and erosion
of streambeds and streambanks thereby elevating sedimentation),
destroying aquatic habitat and elevating aquatic pollutant
concentrations and loadings such as sediments, nutrients, heavy metals
and pathogens. Groundwater resources are also impacted through loss
of recharge.
C. A program of stormwater management, including reasonable regulation
of land development and redevelopment causing loss of natural
infiltration, is fundamental to the public health, safety, welfare, and the
protection of the people of the Borough and all the people of the
commonwealth, their resources, and the environment.
D. Stormwater can be an important water resource by providing
groundwater recharge for water supplies and base flow of streams,
which also protects and maintains surface water quality.
E. Public education on the control of pollution from stormwater is an
essential component in successfully addressing stormwater.
F. Federal and state regulations require certain boroughs to implement a
program of stormwater controls. These boroughs are required to obtain
a permit for stormwater discharges from their separate storm sewer
systems under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(NPDES).
G. Nonstormwater discharges to Borough separate storm sewer systems
can contribute to pollution of waters of the commonwealth by the
Borough.
§ 93-1 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 93-3
93:279
§ 93-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote health, safety, and welfare within
the Borough and its watersheds, by minimizing the harms and maximizing
the benefits described in § 93-2 of this chapter, through provisions designed
to:
§ 93-4. Statutory authority.
The Borough of Steelton is empowered to regulate land use activities that
affect stormwater impacts by the authority of the following statutory
provisions: the Borough Code, 53 P.S. § 46202(17), 53 P.S. § 47201; the
Storm Water Management Act, 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
§ 93-5. Applicability.
A. Manage stormwater runoff impacts at their source by regulating
activities that cause the problems.
B. Provide review procedures and performance standards for stormwater
planning and management.
C. Utilize and preserve the existing natural drainage systems as much as
possible.
D. Manage stormwater impacts close to the runoff source, which requires
a minimum of structures and relies on natural processes.
E. Focus on infiltration of stormwater, to maintain groundwater recharge,
to prevent degradation of surface and groundwater quality and to
otherwise protect water resources.
F. Maintain existing flows and quality of streams and watercourses.
G. Meet legal water quality requirements under state law, including
regulations at 25 Pa. Code Chapter 93.4a to protect and maintain
"existing uses" and maintain the level of water quality to support those
uses in all streams.
H. Prevent scour and erosion of streambanks and streambeds.
I. Provide for proper operations and maintenance of all permanent
stormwater management BMPs that are implemented in the Borough.
J. Provide a mechanism to identify controls necessary to meet the NPDES
permit requirements.
K. Implement an illegal discharge detection and elimination program to
address nonstormwater discharges into the Borough separate storm
sewer system.
A. This chapter applies to any regulated earth disturbance activities
within the Borough, and all stormwater runoff entering into the
§ 93-3 § 93-5
93:280
§ 93-6. Repealer.
Any other ordinance provision(s) or regulation of the Borough inconsistent
with any of the provisions of this chapter is hereby repealed to the extent of
the inconsistency only.
§ 93-7. Severability.
In the event that any section or provision of this chapter is declared invalid
by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the
validity of any of the remaining sections or provisions of this chapter.
§ 93-8. Compatibility with other requirements.
Borough separate storm sewer system from lands within the boundaries
of the Borough.
B. Earth disturbance activities and associated stormwater management
controls are also regulated under existing state law and implementing
regulations. This chapter shall operate in coordination with those
parallel requirements; the requirements of this chapter shall be no less
restrictive in meeting the purposes of this chapter than state law.
A. Approvals issued and actions taken under this chapter do not relieve
the applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits or
approvals for activities regulated by any other code, law, regulation or
ordinance. To the extent that this chapter imposes more rigorous or
stringent requirements for stormwater management, the specific
requirements contained in this chapter shall be followed.
B. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to affect any of the Borough's
requirements regarding stormwater matters which do not conflict with
the provisions of this chapter such as local stormwater management
design criteria (e.g., inlet spacing, inlet type, collection system design
and details, outlet structure design, etc.). Conflicting provisions in
other Borough ordinances or regulations shall be construed to retain
the requirements of this chapter addressing state water quality
requirements.
§ 93-5 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 93-8
93:281

ARTICLE II
Terminology
§ 93-9. Word usage.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms and words used herein shall
be interpreted as follows:
§ 93-10. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCELERATED EROSION — The removal of the surface of the land through
the combined action of human activities and the natural processes, at a rate
greater than would occur because of the natural process alone.
APPLICANT — A landowner, developer or other person who has filed an
application for approval to engage in any regulated earth disturbance
activity at a project site in the Borough.
BMP (BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE) — Activities, facilities, designs,
measures or procedures used to manage stormwater impacts from
regulated earth disturbance activities, to meet state water quality
requirements, to promote groundwater recharge and to otherwise meet the
purposes of this chapter, BMPs include but are not limited to infiltration,
filter strips, low impact design, bioretention, wet ponds, permeable paving,
grassed swales, forested buffers, sand filters and detention basins.
BOROUGH — Steelton Borough, Dauphin County, Pennsylvania.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — The Dauphin County Conservation District.
DEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
DEVELOPER — A person that seeks to undertake any regulated earth
disturbance activities at a project site in the Borough.
DEVELOPMENT — See "earth disturbance activity." The term includes
redevelopment.
DEVELOPMENT SITE — The specific tract of land where any earth
disturbance activities in the Borough are planned, conducted or maintained.
A. Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the singular
number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the
singular; words of masculine gender include feminine gender; and
words of feminine gender include masculine gender.
B. The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the
specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other
instances of like kind and character.
C. The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory; the words "may" and
"should" are permissive.
§ 93-9 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 93-10
93:283
EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — A construction or other human activity
which disturbs the surface of the land, including, but not limited to, clearing
and grubbing, grading, excavations, embankments, road maintenance,
building construction and the moving, depositing, stockpiling, or storing of
soil, rock or earth materials.
EROSION — The process by which the surface of the land, including
channels, is worn away by water, wind, or chemical action.
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN — A plan for a project site
which identifies BMPs to minimize accelerated erosion and sedimentation.
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE — Replenishment of existing natural
underground water supplies.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that prevents the infiltration of water
into the ground. Impervious surface includes, but is not limited to, any roof,
parking or driveway areas, and any new streets and sidewalks. Any surface
areas designed to initially be gravel or crushed stone shall be assumed to
be impervious surfaces.
NPDES — National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System, the federal
government's system for issuance of permits under the Clean Water Act,
which is delegated to DEP in Pennsylvania.
OUTFALL — "Point source" as described in 40 CFR 122.2 at the point
where the Borough storm sewer system discharges to surface waters of the
commonwealth.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation, or a governmental unit, public utility or any other legal entity
whatsoever which is recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
POINT SOURCE — Any discernible, confined and discrete conveyance,
including, but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, or conduit
from which stormwater is or may be discharged, as defined in state
regulations at 25 Pa. Code Section 92.1.
PROJECT SITE — The specific area of land where any regulated earth
disturbance activities in the Borough are planned, conducted or maintained.
REDEVELOPMENT — Earth disturbance activities on land which has
previously been disturbed or developed.
REGULATED EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — Earth disturbance
activity one acre or more with a point source discharge to surface waters
or the Borough storm sewer system, or five acres or more regardless of
the planned runoff. This includes earth disturbance on any portion of, part,
or during any stage of, a larger common plan of development. This only
includes road maintenance activities involving 25 acres or more of earth
disturbance.
ROAD MAINTENANCE — Earth disturbance activities within the existing
road cross-section, such as grading and repairing existing unpaved road
surfaces, cutting road banks, cleaning or clearing drainage ditches and
other similar activities.
§ 93-10 § 93-10
93:284
SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM — A conveyance or system of
conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, Borough streets,
catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels or storm drains)
primarily used for collecting and conveying stormwater runoff.
STATE WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS — As defined under state
regulations — protection of designated and existing uses (See 25 Pa. Code
Chapters 93 and 96) — including:
STORMWATER — The surface runoff generated by precipitation reaching
the ground surface.
SURFACE WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — Any and all rivers,
streams, creeks, rivulets, impoundments, ditches, watercourses, storm
sewers, lakes, dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs, and all other bodies
or channels of conveyance of surface water, or parts thereof, whether
natural or artificial, within or on the boundaries of this commonwealth.
WATERCOURSE — A channel or conveyance of surface water, such as
a stream or creek, having defined bed and banks, whether natural or
artificial, with perennial or intermittent flow.
WATERSHED — Region or area drained by a river, watercourse or other
body of water, whether natural or artificial.
Each stream segment in Pennsylvania has a "designated use," such
as "cold water fishery" or "potable water supply," which are listed in
Chapter 93. These uses must be protected and maintained under state
regulations.
A.
"Existing uses" are those attained as of November 1975, regardless
whether they have been designated in Chapter 93. Regulated earth
disturbance activities must be designed to protect and maintain
existing uses and maintain the level of water quality necessary to
protect those uses in all streams, and to protect and maintain water
quality in special protection streams.
B.
Water quality involves the chemical, biological and physical
characteristics of surface water bodies. After regulated earth
disturbance activities are complete, these characteristics can be
impacted by addition of pollutants such as sediment, and changes
in habitat through increased flow volumes and/or rates as a result
of changes in land surface area from those activities. Therefore,
permanent discharges to surface waters must be managed to protect
the streambank, streambed and structural integrity of the waterway, to
prevent these impacts.
C.
§ 93-10 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 93-10
93:285

ARTICLE III
Requirements and Standards
§ 93-11. General requirements for stormwater management.
§ 93-12. Permit requirements by other government entities.
The following permit requirements may apply to certain regulated earth
disturbance activities and must be met prior to commencement of regulated
earth disturbance activities, as applicable:
A. All regulated earth disturbance activities within the Borough shall be
designed, implemented, operated and maintained to meet the purposes
of this chapter, through these two elements:
(1) Erosion and sediment control during the earth disturbance
activities (e.g., during construction); and
(2) Water quality protection measures after completion of earth
disturbance activities (e.g., after construction), including
operations and maintenance.
B. No regulated earth disturbance activities within the Borough shall
commence until the requirements of this chapter are met.
C. Erosion and sediment control during regulated earth disturbance
activities shall be addressed as required by § 93-13.
D. Postconstruction water quality protection shall be addressed as
required by § 93-14. Operations and maintenance of permanent
stormwater BMPs shall be addressed as required by Article IV.
E. All best management practices (BMPs) used to meet the requirements
of this chapter shall conform to the state water quality requirements,
and any more stringent requirements as determined by the Borough.
F. Techniques described in Appendix A (Low Impact Development
Practices) of this chapter52 are encouraged, because they reduce the
costs of complying with the requirements of this chapter and the state
water quality requirements.
A. All regulated earth disturbance activities subject to permit
requirements by DEP under regulations at 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102.
B. Work within natural drainageways subject to permit by DEP under 25
Pa. Code Chapter 105.
C. Any stormwater management facility that would be located in or
adjacent to surface waters of the commonwealth, including wetlands,
subject to permit by DEP under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 105.
52.Editor's Note: Said appendix is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 93-11 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 93-12
93:287
§ 93-13. Erosion and sediment control during regulated earth
disturbance activities.
D. Any stormwater management facility that would be located on a state
highway right-of-way, or require access from a state highway, shall be
subject to approval of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
(PennDOT).
E. Culverts, bridges, storm sewers or any other facilities which must pass
or convey flows from the tributary area and any facility which may
constitute a dam subject to permit by DEP under 25 Pa. Code Chapter
105.
A. No regulated earth disturbance activities within the Borough shall
commence until approval by the Borough of an erosion and sediment
control plan for construction activities.
B. In the event that any person shall intend to make changes in the
contour of any land or engage in earthmoving activity, whether for
subdivision, land development or any purpose, such person, who is
required to obtain a permit, shall obtain such a permit from the DEP in
accordance with the requirements of the "Rules and Regulations,"
Chapter 102, Erosion Control, authorized under P.L. 1987, June 22,
1937. DEP has regulations that require an erosion and sediment control
plan for any earth disturbance activity of 5,000 square feet or more,
under 25 Pa. Code Section 102.4(b).
C. Furthermore, under the requirements noted above, the Borough of
Steelton shall notify the DEP immediately upon receipt of an application
for a building permit involving earthmoving activity which affects five
acres or more of land. The Borough shall not issue a building permit to
those engaged in earthmoving activities requiring a DEP permit until
the DEP has issued the permit.
D. DEP has regulations, under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 92, that a DEP
"NPDES construction activities" permit is required for regulated earth
disturbance activities.
E. Evidence of any necessary permits for regulated earth disturbance
activities from the Southcentral Regional DEP office or Dauphin County
Conservation District must be provided to the Borough.
F. An erosion and sedimentation control plan must be prepared for a
single lot or more where subdivision, land development or other
earthmoving activity is proposed. The plan must be submitted:
(1) As required by the rules and regulations of the DEP noted above;
and
(2) As required by the Pennsylvania Clean Streams Law, Act 222, July
31, 1970, as amended.53
§ 93-12 § 93-13
93:288
§ 93-14. Water quality requirements after regulated earth
disturbance activities are complete.
G. Such erosion and sedimentation control plan shall be submitted to the
Borough Engineer and Dauphin County Conservation District for
review, and a copy of the plan and review comments shall be submitted
to the Steelton Borough Planning Commission as part of the preliminary
and final plat applications.
H. In the preparation of erosion and sedimentation control plans the
person preparing such plans shall consult with the Dauphin County
Conservation District to determine the measures needed to control
erosion and sedimentation. The current DEP Erosion and
Sedimentation Pollution Control Program Manual shall be used in the
preparation of such plans. Copies are available in the Dauphin County
Conservation District office.
I. A copy of the erosion and sediment control plan and any required
permit, as required by DEP regulations, shall be available at the project
site at all times.
A. No regulated earth disturbance activities within the Borough shall
commence until approval by the Borough of a plan which demonstrates
compliance with state water quality requirements after construction is
complete.
B. The BMPs must be designed, implemented, and maintained to meet
state water quality requirements, and any other more stringent
requirements as determined by the Borough.
C. To control postconstruction stormwater impacts from regulated earth
disturbance activities, state water quality requirements can be met by
BMPs, including site design, which provide for replication of preconstruction
stormwater infiltration and runoff conditions, so that
postconstruction stormwater discharges do not degrade the physical,
chemical or biological characteristics of the receiving waters. As
described in the DEP Comprehensive Stormwater Management Policy
(#392-0300-002. September 28, 2002), this may be achieved by the
following:
(1) Infiltration: replication of preconstruction stormwater infiltration
conditions.
(2) Treatment: use of water quality treatment BMPs to ensure filtering
out of the chemical and physical pollutants from the stormwater
runoff and
(3) Streambank and streambed protection: management of volume and
rate of postconstruction stormwater discharges to prevent physical
degradation of receiving waters (e.g., from scouring).
53.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 93-13 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 93-14
93:289
§ 93-15. General standards.
D. DEP has regulations that require boroughs to ensure design,
implementation, and maintenance of best management practices
(BMPs) that control runoff from new development and redevelopment
after regulated earth disturbance activities are complete. These
requirements include the need to implement postconstruction
stormwater BMPs with assurance of long-term operations and
maintenance of those BMPs. Evidence of any necessary permit(s) for
regulated earth disturbance activities from the Southcentral DEP
Regional Office must be provided to the Borough.
E. BMP operations and maintenance requirements are described in Article
IV of this chapter.
A. A stormwater management plan shall be prepared and stormwater
drainage facilities required, as necessary, to:
(1) Permit the unimpeded flow of natural watercourses;
(2) Ensure the drainage of all low points along the line of streets and
other applicable areas;
(3) Intercept, retain, or detain surface water runoff in a manner
reasonably related to the extent and grade of the area drained;
(4) Provide positive drainage away from buildings.
B. The stormwater management plan shall contain and illustrate the
following:
(1) The mapping of the watershed area or areas in which the proposed
subdivision or land development is located.
(2) Calculations of runoff based on either the Soils Cover Complex
Method or Rational Method, as approved by the Borough Council.
(3) The complete drainage system for the subdivision or land
development including the identification of drainage features
which will be incorporated into the design.
(4) An overall stormwater management plan for the entire site. If the
subdivision or land development is to be developed in phases, the
plan shall be submitted with the first phase and appropriate future
development phases for the drainage system shall be indicated.
The advice of the Borough Engineer shall be sought in designing
the stormwater management plan.
C. The existing points of natural drainage discharge onto adjacent
property shall not be altered without the written approval of the
affected landowners.
§ 93-14 § 93-15
93:290
D. Stormwater runoff or natural drainage water shall not be diverted so as
to overload existing drainage systems, or create flooding or the need for
additional drainage structures on other private properties or public
lands, without approved provisions being made by the applicant for
properly handling such conditions.
E. Facilities for storm drainage shall be designed to handle the anticipated
peak discharge from the property being subdivided as well as to handle
the anticipated increase in runoff that will occur when all the property
at a higher elevation in the same watershed area is fully developed.
F. Where a watercourse runs across or through a subdivision, a drainage
easement, which conforms with the line of such watercourse, shall be
provided at such a width as will be adequate to preserve the unimpeded
flow of natural drainage.
G. All drainage structures that are located within the right-of-way of state
highways shall be approved by PennDOT and a letter of approval
PennDOT office shall be directed to the Steelton Borough Planning
Commission.
H. All streets shall be designed so that surface water is discharged from
their right-of-way. The slope of the crown on proposed streets shall not
be less than 1/8 of an inch per foot and not grater than 1/3 of an inch
per foot.
I. Storm drainage facilities, as required, shall be placed in front of the
curb or curb line when located in a street right-of-way. When located in
undedicated land, they shall be placed within an easement, as approved
by the Borough Council, who may require additional width of easement
as circumstances warrant.
J. Street drainage shall not be permitted to cross intersections or the
crown of the road.
K. Stormwater roof drains shall not discharge water directly over a
sidewalk.
L. Stabilized outlets shall be provided for footer drains, flood drains, and
downspouts.
M. No person shall block, impede the flow of, alter, construct any
structure, or deposit any material or thin, or commit any act which will
affect normal or flood flow in any stream or watercourse without having
obtained prior approval from the Borough and/or DEP or other
regulatory agency, whichever is applicable.
N. Where a stormwater detention basin is proposed, the plan shall include
a proposal to prevent such basin from becoming a safety hazard or
public nuisance and for regular perpetual maintenance of the basin to
insure its continuous effectiveness.
§ 93-15 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 93-16
93:291
§ 93-16. Ground water recharge (infiltration/recharge/retention).
A. The ability to retain and maximize the ground water recharge capacity
of the area being developed is encouraged. Design of the infiltration/
recharge stormwater management facilities shall give consideration to
providing ground water recharge to compensate for the reduction in
the percolation that occurs when the ground surface is paved and
roofed over. These measures are encouraged, particularly in hydrologic
soil groups B and C and shall be utilized wherever feasible. Soils used
for the construction of basins shall have low-erodibility factors ("K"
factors).
(1) Percent volume method.
Rev = [(S)(Rv)(A)]/12
where: Rev = 0.05 + 0.009(I) where I is percent impervious
cover
A = site area in acres
(2) Percent area method.
Rev = (S)(Ai)
where: Ai = the measured impervious cover
Hydrologic Soil Group Soil Specific Recharge Factor (S)
A 0.39
B 0.26
C 0.14
D 0.07
The recharge volume is considered part of the total WQv that must
be provided at a site and can be achieved either by a structural
practice (e.g., infiltration, bioretention), a nonstructural practice
(e.g., buffers, disconnection of rooftops), or a combination of both.
Drainage areas having no impervious cover and no proposed
disturbance during development may be excluded from the Rev
calculations. Designers are encouraged to use these areas as
nonstructural practices for Rev treatment.
Note: Rev and WQv are inclusive. When treated separately, the
Rev may be subtracted from the WQv when sizing the water
quality BMP.
B. Basis for determining recharge volume.
(1) If more than one HSG is present at a site, a composite soil specific
recharge factor shall be computed based on the proportion of total
site area within each HSG. The recharge volume provided at the
site shall be directed to the most permeable HSG available.
§ 93-16 § 93-16
93:292
(2) The "percent volume" method is used to determine the Rev
treatment requirement when structural practices are used to
provide recharge. These practices must provide seepage into the
ground and may include infiltration and exfiltration structures
(e.g., infiltration, bioretention, dry swales or sand filters with
storage below the underdrain). Structures that require
impermeable liners, intercept groundwater, or are designed for
trapping sediment (e.g., forbays) may not be used. In this method,
the volume of runoff treated by structural practices shall meet or
exceed the computed recharge volume.
(3) The "percent area" method is used to determine the Rev treatment
requirements when nonstructural practices are used. Under this
method, the recharge requirements are evaluated by mapping the
percent of impervious area that is effectively treated by an
acceptable nonstructural practice and comparing it to the
minimum recharge requirements.
(4) Acceptable nonstructural practices include filter strips that treat
rooftop or parking lot runoff sheet flow discharge to stream buffers,
and grass channels that treat roadway runoff.
(5) The recharge volume criterion does not apply to any portion of a
site designated as a stormwater hotspot or any project considered
as redevelopment. In addition the Borough Council may alter or
eliminate the recharge volume requirement if the site is situated on
unsuitable soils (e.g., marine clays, karst, or in an urban
redevelopment area). In this situation, nonstructural practices
(percent area method) shall be implemented to the maximum
extent practicable and the remaining or untreated Rev included in
the WQv treatment.
(6) If Rev is treated by structural or nonstructural practices separate
and upstream of the WQv treatment, the WQv is adjusted
accordingly.
C. Soils evaluation. A detailed soils evaluation of the project site shall be
performed to determine the suitability of recharge facilities. The
evaluation shall be performed by a qualified professional, and at a
minimum, address soil permeability, depth to bedrock, susceptibility to
sinkhole formation, and subgrade stability.
(1) Extreme caution shall be exercised where infiltration is proposed in
geologically susceptible areas such as strip mine or limestone
areas. Extreme caution shall also be exercised where salt or
chloride would be a pollutant since soils do little to filter this
pollutant and it may contaminate the groundwater. It is also
extremely important that the design professional evaluates the
possibility of groundwater contamination from the proposed
infiltration/recharge facility and recommend a hydrogeologic
justification study be performed if necessary. Whenever a basin will
§ 93-16 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 93-16
93:293
§ 93-17. Water quality requirements.
In addition to the general standards and design criteria requirements of
Article III of this chapter, the land developer shall comply with the following
water quality requirements unless otherwise exempted by provisions of this
chapter.
be located in an area underlain by limestone, a geological
evaluation of the proposed location shall be conducted to
determine susceptibility to sinkhole formations. The design of all
facilities over limestone formations shall include measures to
prevent ground water contamination and, where necessary,
sinkhole formation.
(a) The Borough may require the installation of an impermeable
liner in detention basins. A detailed hydrogeologic
investigation may be required by the Borough. The Borough
may require the developer to provide safeguards against
groundwater contamination for uses which may cause
groundwater contamination, should there be a mishap or spill.
(b) It shall be the developer's responsibility to verify if the site is
underlain by limestone. The following note shall be attached to
all drainage plans and signed and sealed by the developer's
engineer/surveyor/landscape architect/geologist:
"I, ____________________. certify that the proposed detention
basin (circle one) is/is not underlain by limestone."
(2) Where previous pavement is permitted for parking lots,
recreational facilities, nondedicated streets, or other areas,
pavement construction specifications shall be noted on the plan.
(3) Recharge/infiltration facilities may be used in conjunction with
other innovative or traditional BMPs, stormwater control facilities,
and nonstructural stormwater management alternatives.
(4) All recharge/infiltration facilities shall be designed to completely
drain within 72 hours of reaching maximum capacity.
A. For water quality, the objective is to provide adequate storage to
capture and treat the runoff from 90% of the average annual rainfall. P
represents the depth of rain associated with 90% of the total rainfall
events over 0.11 inches.
(1) The size of the water quality facility shall be based upon the
following equation:
WQv = (1.1) (Rv)(A)/12 P = 1.1 inches of rainfall
Where: WQv = water quality volume (in ac-ft)
§ 93-16 § 93-17
93:294
Rv = 0.05 + 0.009(I) where I is percent impervious
cover
A = area in ac
(2) Treatment of the WQv shall be provided at all developments where
stormwater management is required. A minimum WQv of 0.2
inches per acre shall be met at sites or in drainage areas that have
less than 15% impervious cover.
(3) Drainage areas having no impervious cover and no proposed
disturbance during development may be excluded from the WQv
calculations. Designers are encouraged to use these areas as
nonstructural practices for WQv treatment.
(4) The design of the facility shall consider and minimize the chances
of clogging and sedimentation potential. Orifices smaller than 3
inches diameter are not recommended. However, if the Design
Engineer can provide proof that the smaller orifices are protected
from clogging by use of trash racks, etc., smaller orifices may be
permitted.
B. To accomplish Subsection A, above, the land developer may submit
original and innovative designs to the Borough Council for review and
approval. Such designs may achieve the water quality objectives
through a combination of BMPs.
C. In selecting the appropriate BMPs or combinations thereof, the land
developer shall consider the following:
(1) Total contributing area.
(2) Permeability and infiltration rate of the site soils.
(3) Slope and depth to bedrock.
(4) Seasonal high water table.
(5) Proximity to building foundations and well heads.
(6) Erodibility of soils.
(7) Land availability and configuration of the topography.
D. The following additional factors should be considered when evaluating
the suitability of BMPs used to control water quality at a given
development site:
(1) Peak discharge and required volume control.
(2) Streambank erosion.
(3) Efficiency of the BMPs to mitigate potential water quality
problems.
§ 93-17 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 93-17
93:295
§ 93-18. Streambank protection requirements.
(4) The volume of runoff that will be effectively treated.
(5) The nature of the pollutant being removed.
(6) Maintenance requirements.
A. Streambank protection shall be considered in implementing general
standards pursuant to § 93-15. If a stormwater storage facility needs to
be constructed then, to protect channels from erosion, the outflow
structure shall be designed to provide the twenty-four-hour extended
detention of the one-year twenty-four-hour storm event. The method for
determining the Cpv requirement is detailed in Appendix C of this
chapter.54
B. Basis for determining channel protection storage volume.
(1) The models HEC-HMS, TR-55 and TR-20 (or an equivalent
approved by the Borough Council) shall be used for determining
peak discharge rates.
(2) Rainfall depth for the one-year, twenty-four-hour storm event in
Dauphin County is 2.5 inches.
(3) Off-site areas shall be modeled as present land use in good
condition for the one-year storm event.
(4) The length of overland flow used in time of concentration (tc)
calculations is limited to no more than 150 feet.
(5) The Cpv storage volume shall be computed using procedures
outlined in Appendix C of this chapter.55
(6) Cpv is not required at sites where the one-year postdevelopment
peak discharge (qi) is less than or equal to 2.0 cfs. A Cpv orifice
diameter (do) of less than 3.0 inches is subject to approval by the
Borough Council and is not recommended unless an internal
control for orifice protection is used.
(7) Cpv shall be addressed for the entire site. If a site consists of
multiple drainage areas, Cpv may be distributed proportionately to
each drainage area.
(8) Extended detention storage provided for the Cpv does not meet the
WQv requirement (i.e., Cpv and WQv shall be treated separately).
(9) The stormwater storage needed for the Cpv may be provided above
the WQv storage in stormwater ponds and wetlands; thereby
meeting all storage criteria except Rev in a single facility with
54.Editor's Note: Said appendix is included at the end of this chapter.
55.Editor's Note: Said appendix is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 93-17 § 93-18
93:296
appropriate hydraulic control structures for each storage
requirement.
(10) Infiltration is not recommended for Cpv control because of large
storage requirements.
§ 93-18 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 93-18
93:297

ARTICLE IV
Stormwater BMP Operations and Maintenance Plan Requirements
§ 93-19. General requirements.
A. No regulated earth disturbance activities within the Borough shall
commence until approval by the Borough of BMP operations and
maintenance plan which describes how the permanent (e.g.,
postconstruction) stormwater BMPs will be properly operated and
maintained.
B. The following items shall be included in the BMP operations and
maintenance plan:
(1) Map(s) of the project area, in a form that meets the requirements
for recording at the offices of the Recorder of Deeds of Dauphin
County, and shall be submitted on twenty-four-inch by thirty-sixinch
or thirty-inch by forty-two-inch sheets. The contents of the
map(s) shall include, but not be limited to:
(a) Clear identification of the location and nature of permanent
stormwater BMPs;
(b) The location of the project site relative to highways, Borough
boundaries or other identifiable landmarks;
(c) Existing and final contours at intervals of two feet, or others as
appropriate;
(d) Existing streams, lakes, ponds, or other bodies of water within
the project site area;
(e) Other physical features including flood hazard boundaries,
sinkholes, streams, existing drainage courses, and areas of
natural vegetation to be preserved;
(f) The locations of all existing and proposed utilities, sanitary
sewers, and water lines within 50 feet of property lines of the
project site;
(g) Proposed final changes to the land surface and vegetative
cover, including the type and amount of impervious area that
would be added;
(h) Proposed final structures, roads, paved areas, and buildings;
and
(i) A minimum fifteen-foot-wide access easement around all
stormwater BMPs that would provide ingress to and egress
from a public right-of-way.
§ 93-19 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 93-19
93:299
§ 93-20. Responsibilities for operations and maintenance of BMPs.
§ 93-21. Borough review of BMP operations and maintenance plan.
(2) A description of how each permanent stormwater BMP will be
operated and maintained, and the identity of the person(s)
responsible for operations and maintenance.
(3) The name of the project site, the name, address and telephone
number of the owner of the property, and the name, address,
telephone number and e-mail address of the individual or firm
preparing the Plan.
(4) A statement, signed by the landowner, acknowledging that the
stormwater BMPs are fixtures that can be altered or removed only
after approval by the Borough.
A. The BMP operations and maintenance plan for the project site shall
establish responsibilities for the continuing operation and maintenance
of all permanent stormwater BMPs, as follows:
(1) If a plan includes structures or lots which are to be separately
owned and in which streets, sewers and other public improvements
are to be dedicated to the Borough, stormwater BMPs may also be
dedicated to and maintained by the Borough.
(2) If a plan includes operations and maintenance by a single
ownership, or if sewers and other public improvements are to be
privately owned and maintained, then the operation and
maintenance of stormwater BMPs shall be the responsibility of the
owner or private management entity.
B. The Borough shall make the final determination on the continuing
operations and maintenance responsibilities. The Borough reserves the
right to accept or reject the operations and maintenance responsibility
for any or all of the stormwater BMPs.
A. The Borough shall review the BMP operations and maintenance plan for
consistency with the purposes and requirements of this chapter, and
any permits issued by DEP.
B. The Borough shall notify the applicant in writing whether the BMP
operations and maintenance plan is approved.
C. The Borough shall require an "as-built survey" of all stormwater BMPs,
and an explanation of any discrepancies with the operations and
maintenance plan.
§ 93-19 § 93-22
93:300
§ 93-22. Adherence to approved BMP operations and maintenance
plan.
It shall be unlawful to alter or remove any permanent stormwater BMP
required by an approved BMP operations and maintenance plan, or to
allow the property to remain in a condition which does not conform to an
approved BMP operations and maintenance plan, unless an exception is
granted in writing by the Borough.
§ 93-23. Operations and maintenance agreement for privately
owned stormwater BMPs.
§ 93-24. Stormwater management easements.
§ 93-25. Recording of approved BMP operations and maintenance
plan and related agreements.
A. The property owner shall sign an operations and maintenance
agreement with the Borough covering all stormwater BMPs that are to
be privately owned. The agreement shall be substantially the same as
the agreement in Appendix B of this chapter.56
B. Other items may be included in the agreement where determined
necessary to guarantee the satisfactory operation and maintenance of
all permanent stormwater BMPs. The agreement shall be subject to the
review and approval of the Borough.
A. Stormwater management easements are required for all areas used for
off-site stormwater control, unless a waiver is granted by the Borough
Council.
B. Stormwater management easements shall be provided by the property
owner if necessary for 1) access for inspections and maintenance, or 2)
preservation of stormwater runoff conveyance, infiltration, and
detention areas and other BMPs, by persons other than the property
owner. The purpose of the easement shall be specified in any agreement
under § 93-23.
A. The owner of any land upon which permanent BMPs will be placed,
constructed or implemented, as described in the BMP operations and
maintenance plan, shall record the following documents in the Office of
the Recorder of Deeds for Dauphin County, within 15 days of approval
of the BMP operations plan by the Borough:
(1) The operations and maintenance plan, or a summary thereof.
(2) Operations and maintenance agreements under § 93-23, and
(3) Easements under § 93-24.
56.Editor's Note: Said appendix is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 93-22 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 93-25
93:301
§ 93-26. Borough Stormwater BMP Operation and Maintenance
Fund.
B. The Borough may suspend or revoke any approvals granted for the
project site upon discovery of the failure of the owner to comply with
this section.
A. If stormwater BMPs are accepted by the Borough for dedication, the
Borough may require persons installing stormwater BMPs to pay a
specified amount to the Borough Stormwater BMP Operation and
Maintenance Fund, to help defray costs of operations and maintenance
activities. The amount may be determined as follows:
(1) If the BMP is to be owned and maintained by the Borough, the
amount shall cover the estimated costs for operations and
maintenance for 10 years, as determined by the Borough.
(2) The amount shall then be converted to present worth of the annual
series values.
B. If a BMP is proposed that also serves as a recreation facility (e.g., ball
field, lake), the Borough may adjust the amount due accordingly.
§ 93-25 § 93-26
93:302
ARTICLE V
Inspections and Right of Entry
§ 93-27. Inspections.
§ 93-28. Right of entry.
A. DEP or its designees (e.g., Dauphin County Conservation District)
normally ensure compliance with any permits issued, including those
for stormwater management. In addition to DEP compliance programs,
the Borough or its designee may inspect all phases of the construction,
operations, maintenance and any other implementation of stormwater
BMPs.
B. During any stage of the regulated earth disturbance activities, if the
Borough or its designee determines that any BMPs are not being
implemented in accordance with this chapter, the Borough may
suspend or revoke any existing permits or other approvals until the
deficiencies are corrected.
A. Upon presentation of proper credentials, duly authorized
representatives of the Borough may enter at reasonable times upon any
property within the Borough to inspect the implementation, condition,
or operation and maintenance of the stormwater BMPs in regard to any
aspect governed by this chapter.
B. BMP owners and operators shall allow persons working on behalf of the
Borough ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of
determining compliance with this chapter.
C. Persons working on behalf of the Borough shall have the right to
temporarily locate on any BMP in the Borough such devices as are
necessary to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the discharges
from such BMP.
D. Unreasonable delay in allowing the Borough access to a BMP is a
violation of this article.
§ 93-27 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 93-28
93:303

ARTICLE VI
Fees and Expenses
§ 93-29. Authority.
The Borough may charge a reasonable fee for review of BMP operations
and maintenance plans to defray review costs incurred by the Borough.
The applicant shall pay all such fees. The Borough Council shall establish a
schedule of fees by resolution.
§ 93-30. Expenses covered by fees.
The fees required by this chapter may cover:
A. Administrative/clerical costs.
B. The review of the BMP operations and maintenance plan by the
Borough Engineer.
C. The site inspections including, but not limited to, preconstruction
meetings, inspections during construction of stormwater BMPs, and
final inspection upon completion of the stormwater BMPs.
D. Any additional work required to monitor and enforce any provisions of
this chapter, correct violations, and assure proper completion of
stipulated remedial actions.
§ 93-29 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 93-30
93:305

ARTICLE VII
Prohibitions
§ 93-31. Prohibited discharges.
A. No person in the Borough shall allow, or cause to allow, stormwater
discharges into the Borough separate storm sewer system which are
not composed entirely of stormwater, except 1) as provided in
Subsection B below, and 2) discharges allowed under a state or federal
permit.
B. Discharges which may be allowed, based on a finding by the Borough
that the discharge(s) do not significantly contribute to pollution to
surface waters of the commonwealth, are:
(1) Discharges from fire-fighting activities.
(2) Potable water sources including dechlorinated water line and fire
hydrant flushings.
(3) Irrigation drainage.
(4) Air conditioning condensate.
(5) Springs.
(6) Water from crawl space pumps.
(7) Pavement wash waters where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous
materials have not occurred (unless all spill material has been
removed) and where detergents are not used.
(8) Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands.
(9) Uncontaminated water from foundations or from footing drains.
(10) Lawn watering.
(11) Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges.
(12) Uncontaminated groundwater.
(13)Water from individual residential car washing.
(14) Routine external building washdown (which does not use
detergents or other compounds).
C. In the event that the Borough determines that any of the discharges
identified in Subsection B significantly contribute to pollution of waters
of the commonwealth, or is so notified by DEP, the Borough will notify
the responsible person to cease the discharge.
D. Upon notice provided by the Borough under Subsection C, the
discharger will have a reasonable time, as determined by the Borough,
§ 93-31 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 93-31
93:307
§ 93-32. Prohibited connections.
The following connections are prohibited, except as provided in § 93-31B:
§ 93-33. Roof drains.
§ 93-34. Alteration of BMPs.
to cease the discharge consistent with the degree of pollution caused
by the discharge.
E. Nothing in this section shall affect a discharger's responsibilities under
state law.
A. Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which
allows any nonstormwater discharge including sewage, process
wastewater, and wash water, to enter the separate storm sewer system,
and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and
sinks; and
B. Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial
land use to the separate storm sewer system which has not been
documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records, and approved by the
Borough.
A. Roof drains shall not be connected to streets, sanitary or storm sewers
or roadside ditches, except as provided in Subsection B.
B. When it is more advantageous to connect directly to streets or storm
sewers, connections of roof drains to streets or roadside ditches may be
permitted by the Borough.
C. Roof drains shall discharge to infiltration areas or vegetative BMPs to
the maximum extent practicable.
A. No person shall modify, remove, fill, landscape or alter any existing
stormwater BMP, unless it is part of an approved maintenance program,
without the written approval of the Borough.
B. No person shall place any structure, fill, landscaping or vegetation into
a stormwater BMP or within a drainage easement, which would limit or
alter the functioning of the BMP, without the written approval of the
Borough.
§ 93-31 § 93-34
93:308
ARTICLE VIII
Enforcement and Penalties
§ 93-35. Public nuisance.
§ 93-36. Enforcement.
§ 93-37. Suspension and revocation of permits and approvals.
A. The violation of any provision of this chapter is hereby deemed a public
nuisance.
B. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
A. Whenever the Borough finds that a person has violated a prohibition or
failed to meet a requirement of this chapter, the Borough may order
compliance by written notice to the responsible person. Such notice
may require without limitation:
(1) The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting:
(2) The elimination of prohibited connections or discharges;
(3) Cessation of any violating discharges, practices, or operations;
(4) The abatement or remediation of storm water pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected
property;
(5) Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs;
(6) The implementation of stormwater BMPs; and
(7) Operation and maintenance of stormwater BMPs.
B. Such notification shall set forth the nature of the violation(s) and
establish a time limit for correction of these violation(s). Said notice
may further advise that, if applicable, should the violator fail to take the
required action within the established deadline, the work will be done
by the Borough or designee and the expense thereof shall be charged to
the violator.
C. Failure to comply within the time specified shall also subject such
person to the penalty provisions of this chapter. All such penalties shall
be deemed cumulative and shall not prevent the Borough from pursuing
any and all other remedies available in law or equity.
A. Any building, land development or other permit or approval issued by
the Borough may be suspended or revoked by the Borough for:
(1) Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of the
permit;
(2) A violation of any provision of this chapter; or
§ 93-35 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 93-37
93:309
§ 93-38. Violations and penalties.
§ 93-39. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by any action of the Borough or its designee, relevant
to the provisions of this chapter, may appeal to the relevant judicial or
administrative body according to law, within the time period allowed.
(3) The creation of any condition or the commission of any act during
construction or development which constitutes or creates a hazard
or nuisance, pollution or which endangers the life or property of
others.
B. A suspended permit or approval shall be reinstated by the Borough
when:
(1) The Borough Engineer or designee has inspected and approved the
corrections to the stormwater BMPs, or the elimination of the
hazard or nuisance; and/or
(2) The Borough is satisfied that the violation of this chapter, law, or
rule and regulation has been corrected.
C. A permit or approval which has been revoked by the Borough cannot be
reinstated. The applicant may apply for a new permit under the
procedures outlined in this chapter.
A. Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
summary offense and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine of $200
for the first violation, $400 for the second violation, and $600 for the
third and subsequent violations, recoverable with costs, or, upon failure
to pay such fine or costs, imprisonment of not more than 30 days. Each
day that the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
B. In addition, the Borough, through its Solicitor, may institute injunctive,
mandamus or any other appropriate action or proceeding at law or in
equity for the enforcement of this chapter. Any court of competent
jurisdiction shall have the right to issue restraining orders, temporary
or permanent injunctions, mandamus or other appropriate forms of
remedy or relief.
§ 93-37 § 93-39
93:310
Chapter 94
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 44.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 82.
Sewers — See Ch. 90.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 99.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 110.
§ 93-39 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 93-39
94:311

ARTICLE I
Width and Construction of Sidewalks
[Adopted 5-9-1960 by Ord. No. 60-5, approved 5-10-1960]
§ 94-1. Sidewalks established on all streets.
Sidewalks are hereby established on all streets and highways in the
Borough of Steelton, and unless specifically designated otherwise in a
particular ordinance affecting a street or highway, the width of such
sidewalks shall include all of the space between the property line and the
vehicular driveway, even though the space is not paved as a walkway.
§ 94-2. Required width. [Amended 5-16-1977 by Ord. No. 77-2,
approved 5-16-1977]
Unless specifically designated otherwise in a plan of streets approved by the
Council of the Borough of Steelton or in a particular ordinance affecting a
street or highway, the width of sidewalk pavements, the sidewalk pavement
herein designated being located between the property line and the inside of
the curbline, shall be not less than four feet.
§ 94-3. Property owners to construct upon receiving notice.
All owners of property abutting on any street or highway in the Borough of
Steelton, upon 30 days' notice so to do from the Council of the Borough of
Steelton through the Borough Secretary, shall grade, pave, curb, repave or
recurb the sidewalks along such property.
§ 94-4. Property owners to repair upon receiving notice.
All owners of property abutting on any street or highway in the Borough
of Steelton, upon 30 days' notice so to do from the Council of the Borough
of Steelton through the Borough Secretary, shall repair the sidewalks,
including curbs if specified, along such property in the manner stipulated in
such notice.
§ 94-5. Line and grade; materials.
All sidewalk pavements and curbs shall be laid to a line and grade obtained
from the Borough Secretary and constructed of cement concrete only in
accordance with specifications, copies of which may be obtained from the
Borough Secretary.
§ 94-6. Remedy when owner fails to comply with order to construct.
Upon failure of the owner or owners of property to grade, pave, curb,
repave or recurb the sidewalk along such property after 30 days' notice so
to do, as provided in § 94-3 of this article, the Council of the Borough of
Steelton shall cause the same to be done and shall levy and collect from
such owner or owners the cost thereof and 10% additional, together with
all charges and expenses. In accordance with the Acts of Assembly in such
§ 94-1 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 94-6
94:313
cases made and provided, the costs of any such grading, curbing, repaving
or recurbing, including the 10% additional, together with all charges and
expenses, shall be a lien on the premises from the time of the
commencement of the work and may be collected by action in assumpsit or
by lien filed in the manner provided by law for the filing and collection of
municipal claims.
§ 94-7. Remedy when owner fails to comply with order to repair.
Upon failure of the owner or owners of property to repair the sidewalks,
including curbs, along such property, after 30 days' notice so to do, as
provided in § 94-4 of this article, the Council of the Borough of Steelton
shall cause the same to be done, and the cost thereof and 10% additional,
together with all charges and expenses, shall be paid by such owner or
owners and may be collected by an action of assumpsit or by filing a
municipal claim against the property.
§ 94-8. Construction and repair without notice authorized.
Any property owner, upon his own initiative and without notice from any
Borough authority, may grade, pave, curb, repave, recurb and repair the
sidewalks along such property; provided, however, that such owner shall
conform to the requirements of this article as to line and grade and as to
construction in accordance with specifications as set forth in § 94-5 hereof.
§ 94-6 § 94-8
94:314
ARTICLE II
Openings and Excavations
[Adopted 11-15-1982 by Ord. No. 82-11,57 approved 11-15-1982]
§ 94-9. Permit required; blasting.
A. Application and bond. [Amended 8-16-1993 by Ord. No. 93-6,
approved 8-16-1993]
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, authority or
political subdivision to make any opening or excavation in or under
any street, alley or thoroughfare within the limits of the Borough of
Steelton unless and until a permit has been secured for each
undertaking from the Borough Code Enforcement Officer. The
charge for said permit shall be in accordance with the schedule of
fees set forth in this article. The application for the permit and
every such permit shall specify the legislative route and station
numbers of the place where said opening or excavation will be
made, the time when said opening or excavation may remain open,
together with the estimated length, width and depth thereof, the
permit expiration date, the type of facility being permitted, the fees
charged, the amount of required security, the length of the facility
(or number of facilities) being permitted within the right-of-way,
authorized work and materials and required traffic control
measures, along with any additional information that might be
requested by the Borough.
(2) At the same time an application for permit is requested to make any
opening or street excavation as aforesaid, the person, firm,
corporation, authority or political subdivision applying for said
permit shall make, execute and deliver a bond to the Borough in an
amount determined by the Borough with surety by a company duly
registered and authorized to do business in the commonwealth,
conditioned that the entire scope of work, including excavation,
backfilling, temporary and permanent restoration and any other
work required by the Borough to be performed in relation to said
permit, shall be completed in a manner acceptable to the Borough,
in default whereof the Borough may cause, or require the surety to
cause, the same to be done in a manner it deems proper, and the
expenses thereof, including any overhead expense, shall be paid by
the aforesaid principal or surety through its bond.
B. Blasting. No predrilling or blasting will be permitted within the right-ofway,
unless authorized by the permit.
(1) If the permittee proposes to blast, the permittee shall make,
execute and deliver a bond to the Borough in an amount
determined by the Borough with surety by a company duly
57.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. II, Openings and Excavations,
adopted 3-15-1971 by Ord. No. 71-6, approved 3-15-1971.
§ 94-9 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 94-9
94:315
§ 94-10. Emergency permit cards.
registered and authorized to do business in the commonwealth,
conditioned that the Borough will be saved harmless from any
damages whatsoever to the improved area until the completion of
the last work covered by the permit.
(2) An applicant who proposes to blast under authority of several
permits may execute a blanket bond with surety or without surety,
provided that the Borough accepts the applicant's financial
statement as evidence of sufficient security. The amount of each
blanket bond shall be determined by the Borough.
(3) When blasting is anticipated within 100 feet of any bridge, box or
culvert, a detailed plan of excavating, shoring, blasting and
backfilling procedures shall be submitted with the application to
the Borough office for review and approval.
(4) No blasting shall be permitted if within 25 feet of the nearest part
of a bridge, box or culvert.
(5) Only controlled blasting, as specified in Section 203.3(d). Form
408, Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Highway
Construction Specifications, latest revision, shall be permitted
within the improved area.
(6) No blasting bond will be released until the Borough has accepted
the permitted work as being satisfactorily completed.
A. General rule. Emergency repairs involving the placing of facilities or
opening of the surface within the right-of-way may be performed prior
to obtaining a permit, provided that the following procedure is adhered
to:
(1) The utility facility owner shall immediately notify the Borough
office by telephone when the necessity for an emergency repair
occurs during the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., Monday through
Friday. Emergency work occurring at other times shall be reported
to the Borough office on the following workday.
(2) Prior to opening the surface or placing utility facilities within the
right-of-way, the utility work crew shall enter the following
information on the emergency permit card in legible handwriting,
using indelible ink:
(a) Date emergency work is started.
(b) Time emergency work is started.
(c) Location of emergency work site.
(d) Description of emergency work site.
§ 94-9 § 94-10
94:316
§ 94-11. Protection of vehicles and pedestrians; liability; closing to
all traffic by permit only.
It shall be the responsibility of the permittee to adequately protect and
direct vehicles and pedestrian traffic by means of guards, barriers, lights,
signs and flagman, where necessary and in accordance with the regulations
set forth in the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Publication 90,
entitled "Handbook for Work Area Traffic Control." The permittee shall
assume all risks and be liable for all damages by reason of openings and
excavations and by reason of any failure to properly fill and maintain the
trench or ditch. No street, alley or thoroughfare may be barricaded to all
traffic unless written permission has been granted by the Borough Code
Enforcement Office and provision made for detours at the expense of the
permittee.
§ 94-12. Backfilling; stopping of work; covering of openings.
(3) The completed, original emergency permit card shall be located at
the work site and shall be available for inspection by any police
officer or representative of the Borough. Reproduced copies of the
original card are not valid.
(4) A permit shall be applied for within 15 days to confirm and set
forth, in detail, any work performed. The application number shall
then be entered on the emergency permit card by the applicant.
(5) All work performed under authority of an emergency permit card
shall conform to Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
Regulations (67 Pennsylvania Code, Chapter 41); see in particular
Sections 41.7, relating to general conditions; 41.8, relating to
special conditions, subsurface operations; and 41.9, relating to
special conditions, aboveground facilities.
B. Exceptions. Emergency repairs to utility facilities within the right-ofway
do not require an emergency permit card in the instances listed in
this subsection:
(1) Stringing overhead utility lines on nonlimited access highways.
(2) Accessing an existing utility facility through a manhole, except in
limited access highway medians or interchange areas.
(3) Modifying parts of existing permitted facilities, such as cable in
conduit on nonlimited access highways or cross arms or
transformers on poles, provided that no surface opening is
required.
A. All openings made in the improved area shall be backfilled by the
permittee in accordance with the following minimum standards.
§ 94-10 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 94-12
94:317
§ 94-13. Temporary and permanent restoration.
(1) The opening shall first be backfilled with material suitable for
insulation to a height not to exceed one foot over the top of the
facility, compacted in not more than four-inch layers.
(2) The opening shall then be backfilled with either No. 2 RC
aggregate, retained suitable material or other material specified in
the permit and compacted throughout its full width in layers not to
exceed four inches if a tamper or wacker is used or in layers not to
exceed eight inches if approved vibratory compaction equipment is
used.
(3) Compaction shall be completed to the bottom elevation of the
existing pavement. However, if subbase is part of the pavement
structure, compaction shall be completed to within eight inches of
the subbase and an approved impervious material shall then be
placed to the bottom elevation of the existing subbase in four-inch
compacted layers, prior to replacing the subbase to its existing
elevation.
(4) The Borough may require the permittee to have material proposed
for use as backfill tested for conformance to Form 408
(Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Highway Construction
Specifications, latest revision).
B. Except for emergency repairs of utility facilities, work shall be stopped
prior to peak traffic hours that exist on a particular highway on a
particular day. Steel plates or bridging shall be placed over all openings
made within the improved area which are less than six feet in either
length or width when work is stopped. The plates or bridging shall be
extended a minimum of 18 inches from each edge of the opening and
shall be secured in a safe manner.
A. Restoration of flexible base pavements. Base and surface restoration of
flexible base pavements shall be done in accordance with one of the two
methods listed below, as specified in the permit.
(1) High-early-strength concrete restoration method. Prior to
replacement of the base course, one foot from each edge of the
trench shall be sawed or cut in a neat straight line to the bottom
elevation of the existing base course, and the detached material
shall be removed. Drilling shall not be permitted.
(a) The base course shall be replaced with a minimum of eightinch,
high-early-strength concrete to the elevation of the
existing crushed aggregate base course. The high-earlystrength
concrete shall then be cured in accordance with
Section 501.3(n), Form 408. If a trench exceeds four feet in
width, No. 6 reinforcing bars shall be installed in the concrete
base course, placed at six-inch centers measured longitudinally
§ 94-12 § 94-13
94:318
in the direction of the trench, with a two-inch clearance on
each end and a three-inch clearance on the bottom.
(b) Following the concrete curing, a tack coat of E-1 bituminous
material or SR tack coat shall be applied in accordance with
Section 460, Form 408.
(c) After the tack coat has cured, the bituminous binder and/or
wearing course shall be placed so as to conform to the existing
type of road binder and wearing courses.
(2) Ninety-day temporary restoration method. Prior to making the
permanent restoration, one foot from each edge of the trench shall
be sawed or cut in a neat straight line to the bottom elevation of the
existing base course, and the detached material shall be removed.
Drilling shall not be permitted.
(a) Temporary restoration shall be made and kept in place for a
minimum of 90 days. The base material shall consist of either a
minimum eight-inch stone base, a minimum five-inch
aggregate bituminous base, a minimum five-inch aggregate
lime pozzolan or a minimum four-inch bituminous concrete,
with a surface of two-inch bituminous material. Where the
existing pavement structure includes a course of subbase
material, it shall be replaced to a depth equal to the existing
course depth with material meeting the requirements of
Section 350, Form 408.
(b) After the minimum ninety-day period, but before 210 days, the
temporary restoration shall be removed and permanent
restoration made.
(c) The permanent base course shall consist of bituminous
concrete meeting the requirements of Section 305, Form 408,
and having a minimum depth of five inches or a depth equal to
the existing base course, whichever is greater.
(d) The permanent binder and surface course shall be placed in
accordance with the depths of the existing bituminous surface,
but in no case shall the binder course be less than 1 1/2 inch
ID-2 and the wearing course be less than one inch ID-2 or FJ-1.
B. Restoration of plain or reinforced cement concrete pavements. Prior to
replacement of the base, one foot from each edge of the trench shall be
sawed or cut in a neat straight line to a depth of at least three inches,
and the detached material shall be removed. Drilling shall not be
permitted where sawing or cutting is required.
(1) The replacement base shall consist of high-early-strength concrete
equal in depth to the original concrete pavement.
§ 94-13 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 94-13
94:319
§ 94-14. Remedy for substandard work.
If the work in opening, filling and maintaining the surface shall not be
performed promptly or shall be unskillfully or improperly or incompletely
done, the Borough may cause same to be done in a manner it deems proper,
and the expense thereof, including any overhead expense, shall be charged
to the permittee, together with 25% additional as a penalty.
(2) On existing reinforced cement concrete pavements, reinforcing
steel and expansion tie bolts shall be placed in accordance with
Roadway Construction Standard RC-26.
(3) The surface shall be restored as follows:
(a) The surface shall be cured in accordance with Section
501.3(n), Form 408. After surface corrections have been
completed and just before the concrete becomes nonplastic,
the surface shall be given a textured finish in accordance with
Section 501.3(m)4, Form 408.
(b) Surface restoration of a cement concrete pavement which has
a bituminous surface shall be done in accordance with
Subsection A(1) of this section.
C. Shoulder restoration.
(1) Paved and stabilized shoulders. Paved and stabilized shoulders
shall be reconstructed and restored to a serviceable condition of
the same type as existed before the start of work.
(2) Other shoulders.
(a) Suitable material shall be used for backfill of openings in
shoulders.
(b) If the length of the facility exceeds 50 feet, the shoulder shall
be graded, rolled and penetrated with RT-2C or MC-30
bituminous material at a minimum rate of 0.25 gallon per
square yard and chipped or lightly sanded to prevent tracking
of oil onto the pavement.
D. Paint identification. Upon completion of temporary and permanent
pavement restoration, the restoration date shall be painted either on or
immediately adjacent to the restored cut. The painted date shall
indicate the month and year numerically. The numerals shall be at least
six inches in height. The paint shall be of a durable wearing quality and
shall be color-coded as follows: blue (water), yellow (gas-petroleum),
red (electric), orange (communications) and green (sewer).
§ 94-13 § 94-15
94:320
§ 94-15. Right to inspect.
The Borough reserves the right to place an inspector on any and all jobs
it deems necessary in order to ensure good workmanship, and the actual
expense of said inspection shall be charged to the permittee.
§ 94-16. Schedule of permit fees; exceptions; refunds.
A. Permit issuance fees. Issuance fees are used to defray costs incurred by
the Borough in reviewing and processing the application and plans,
including the preliminary review of the site location identified in the
application, and issuing and processing the permit.
(1) Issuance fee: $35.
(2) Supplement fee (each six-month time extension), each submitted
change: $10.
(3) Emergency permit card, each card: $5.
B. General permit inspection fees. General inspection fees are used to
defray costs incurred by the Borough in spot inspections of permitted
work or subsequent inspections, or both, after the permitted work has
been completed, to insure compliance with the permit and these
regulations.
(1) Underground facilities (for example, pipe lines, buried cable with
pedestals, conduit, manholes, headwall, inlet and grate). This fee is
calculated on the total linear feet of the facility or facilities being
permitted within the right-of-way, regardless of whether the
surface is opened.
(a) Physically connected facility or facilities (first 50 feet or
fraction thereof), each section: $20.
(b) Additional physically connected facilities, each 100 feet or
fraction thereof: $5.
(2) Surface openings of less than 25 square feet (for example, service
connections performed independently of underground facility
installation, pipe line repairs), each opening: $15.
(3) Aboveground facilities (for example, poles, guys and/or anchors if
installed independently of poles).
(a) Up to 10 physically connected aboveground facilities, each
continuous group: $20.
(b) Additional aboveground physically connected facilities, each
pole with appurtenances: $2.
(4) Crossings (for example, overhead tipples, conveyors or pedestrian
walkways and undergrade subways or mines): $80.
§ 94-15 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 94-16
94:321
(5) Seismograph-Vibroseis method (for example, prospecting for oil or
gas).
(a) First mile: $50.
(b) Each additional mile or fraction thereof: $5.
C. Exemptions. Permit issuance fees and general permit inspection fees
are not payable by any of the following:
(1) The commonwealth.
(2) Political subdivisions of this commonwealth.
(3) Governmental authorities organized under the laws of this
commonwealth.
(4) The federal government.
(5) Utility facility owners for:
(a) The installation of streetlights at the request of the Borough or
political subdivisions.
(b) The replacement or renewal of their facilities prior to a
Borough resurfacing project after notice from the Borough.
(c) The removal of poles and attached appurtenances.
(d) Facilities moved at the request of the Borough or political
subdivisions.
(e) Reconstructing or maintaining their facilities which occupy the
right-of-way under private status.
D. Additional inspection fees. If the Borough determines that the
permitted work is of sufficient magnitude or importance to warrant
assignment of one or more employees to inspect the permitted work on
a more than spot-inspection basis, the permit will so indicate, and the
permittee shall be charged for all salary, overhead and expenses
incurred by the Borough for inspection.
E. Refunds. The Borough will refund the general permit inspection fees on
unused permits. In order to be eligible to receive such a refund, the
permittee shall deliver the request with the permittee's copy of the
permit to the issuing district permit officer on or before the original
permit's expiration date.
(1) A refund processing fee of $10 will be deducted from the general
permit inspection fees.
(2) The permit issuance fee is not refundable on unused permits.
§ 94-16 § 94-16
94:322
§ 94-17. Road surface restoration fees.
Restoration fees shall be charged as follows:
§ 94-18. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article
shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding
$300 and, in default thereof, to undergo imprisonment in the county jail for
a period not exceeding 30 days.
§ 94-19. (Reserved)
F. Miscellaneous fees. The applicant shall pay for notary and recording
costs if it is determined by the Borough that the permit shall be
recorded in the County Office of the Recorder of Deeds.
A. Minimum charge for any restoration: $15.
B. Pavement opening:
(1) Under 20 square feet: $15.
(2) Over 20 square feet and up to 60 square feet: $25.
(3) Over 60 square feet: The rate shall be determined by the
Superintendent of Highways and the Code Enforcement Officer.
NOTE: Restoration: An additional 12 inches shall be cut back by
the contractor on all sides of the excavation in order to eliminate
any surface distortion. [Amended 2-22-1994 by Ord. No.
1994-2, approved 2-22-1994]
§ 94-16 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 94-19
94:323

ARTICLE III
Obstructions
[Adopted 8-3-1892 by Ord. No. 36, approved 8-3-1892; amended
3-4-1901 by Ord. No. 127, approved 3-4-1901; 11-8-1909 by Ord. No.
244, approved 11-8-1909]
§ 94-20. Obstruction of streets and sidewalks prohibited. [Amended
2-15-1919, approved 2-15-1919]
A. No person shall make or set up any building, jut window, steps, porches,
wall, fence or encumbrance whatever whereby any street or alley shall
be obstructed or shall place or cause to be placed any spout, post,
gutter or tree (except in proper position) whereby any street or alley
shall be obstructed.
B. No storekeeper or other person shall allow any barrel, box or other
obstruction to remain on the pavement, sidewalk or footwalk of any of
the streets or alleys of the Borough after he has been notified to remove
the same by any appropriate Borough official or officer, provided that,
for the exhibition of goods, storekeepers shall be allowed to use all but
the area 48 inches from the curb in towards the building between
sunrise and sunset, and provided that they be allowed to place and use
a flat cellar door not extending more than 3/7 of the width of the
pavement. Food or beverage service establishments shall be allowed to
use all but the area 48 inches from the curb in towards the building
between sunrise and sunset for the purpose of placing cafe-style tables
(maximum thirty-six-inch circumference) and chairs for the
convenience of their customers. [Amended 2-1-1999 by Ord. No.
99-1, approved 2-1-1999; 7-15-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-1,
approved 7-15-2002]
C. Obstruction of cartways; violations and penalties. [Amended
5-20-1976 by Ord. No. 76-4, approved 5-20-1976; 8-15-1988 by
Ord. No. 88-3, approved 8-15-1988]
(1) Findings and purpose. The Borough of Steelton finds that:
(a) Cartway areas of the streets, alleys and ways of the Borough of
Steelton are subjected to constant obstruction by objects other
than motor vehicles, including but not limited to snowplows,
sailboats, trailers, equipment, cement mixers and a myriad of
other like objects.
(b) The prohibition of placement of objects other than motor
vehicles on the cartways of the Borough streets, alleys and
ways will permit the proper utilization of those streets, alleys
and ways and advance the public safety of the citizens of the
Borough of Steelton.
(2) Definitions. As used in this subsection, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:
§ 94-20 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 94-20
94:325
CARTWAY — The paved, macadamized or otherwise improved
portion of a street, alley or way.
MOTOR VEHICLE — A vehicle which is self-propelled on land,
except one which is propelled solely by human power or wind.
(3) Obstructing of cartways prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any
person to park, place or, in the case of a person who is the owner,
lessee or otherwise has an interest in the object, allow to remain
any object other than a motor vehicle in the cartway of any street,
alley or way of the Borough.
(4) Authority to remove and impound. The Borough shall have the
authority to remove and impound or to order the removal and
impounding of any nonmotorized object or vehicle found in the
cartway of the streets or alleys of the Borough.
(5) Designation of approved storage areas; bonding; storage. Removal
and impounding of objects under this article shall be done only by
either Borough personnel or approved agents that shall be
designated from time to time by the Borough Council. Every such
approved agent shall submit evidence to the Borough Council that
it is bonded or has acquired liability insurance in an amount
satisfactory to the Borough Council as sufficient to indemnify
owners of impounded objects against loss or damage to those
objects in the custody of the approved agent. The approved agent
shall have an approved storage area and shall submit to the
Borough Council a schedule of charges for removal and storage of
objects under this article, and when the schedule is approved by
the Borough Council, those charges shall be adhered to by the
approved storage agent; no different schedule of charges shall be
demanded of or collected from any person whose object is removed
or impounded under this article by any approved storage agent.
The Borough Council shall delete from its list of approved storage
agents and areas any such agent that makes any unapproved
charge in connection with any objects removed or impounded
under this article.
(6) Payment of removal and storage charges. The payment of removal
and storage charges shall not relieve the owner, lessee or other
person having any interest in such an object from liability for any
fine or penalty for the violation of the provisions of this article for
which the object was removed or impounded.
(7) Reclamation costs. In order to reclaim an object removed pursuant
to the provisions hereof, the owner, lessee or other person having
an interest therein shall pay removal and storage costs according
to the schedule set forth in Subsection C(5) above.
(8) Records of objects removed and impounded. The Borough shall
cause a record to be kept of all objects impounded under this
subsection and shall be able at all reasonable times to furnish the
§ 94-20 § 94-20
94:326
§ 94-21. Violations and penalties. [Added 5-20-1976 by Ord. No.
76-4, approved 5-20-1976; amended 2-1-1999 by Ord. No. 99-1,
approved 2-1-1999]
Any person who shall violate any provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be liable for a fine for the first offense of $200, for the
second offense of $400 and for the third and any succeeding offense of $600
and, upon failure to pay said fines, upon conviction, to imprisonment in the
county jail for a term of not more than 30 days. The continuation of said
violation for each successive day shall constitute a separate offense, and the
person or persons allowing or permitting the continuation of the violation
may be punished as provided above for each separate offense.
owners, lessees or other persons having an interest in said object
with information as to the place of storage of the object.
(9) Restrictions upon removal of objects. No object shall be removed
under the authority of this subsection if, at the time of the intended
removal, the owner or the person in charge of such object is
present and expresses a willingness and intention to remove the
object immediately.
(10) Penalty. Any person who shall violate any provision of this
subsection shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a
fine of not more than $600 and/or to imprisonment for a term not to
exceed 90 days. Every day that a violation of this subsection
continues shall constitute a separate offense. The aforesaid penalty
or penalties shall be in addition to the obligation of the person to
pay any removal and storage charges as set forth in other
provisions of this subsection.
§ 94-20 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 94-21
94:327

ARTICLE IV
Snow and Ice Removal
[Adopted 5-20-1976 by Ord. No. 76-4, approved 5-20-1976]
§ 94-22. Removal of snow required. [Amended 2-21-1977 by Ord.
No. 77-1, approved 2-21-1977; 2-20-1996 by Ord. No. 96-2,
approved 2-20-1996]
The owner, occupant or tenant of every property fronting upon or alongside
of any of the streets, highways or alleys of the Borough of Steelton is hereby
required to remove or cause to be removed, from at least 1/2 (one side)
of all of the sidewalks in front of or alongside of or behind such property,
all snow or ice thereon fallen or formed within 24 hours after the same
shall have ceased to fall or to form: provided, further, that the owner of
a property shall be responsible for conforming to the requirements of this
section where such property is occupied by such owner or is unoccupied,
the tenant or occupier thereof where such property is occupied by such
tenant or occupier only, and the owner thereof where the property is a
multiple-business or multiple-dwelling property occupied by more then one
tenant or occupier; provided, further, that the owner, occupant or tenant,
in removing snow or ice as required herein or from any other place, shall
not place such snow or ice onto or in the streets, highways or alleys of the
Borough, nor shall any person shoveling snow or ice from under or around
a parked vehicle place such snow or ice in or on the streets, highways or
alleys.
§ 94-23. Removal by Borough; recovery of costs.
In any case where the owner, occupant or tenant, as aforesaid, shall fail,
neglect or refuse to comply with any of the provisions of § 94-22 within
the time limit prescribed therein, the Borough authorities may proceed
immediately to clear all snow and/or ice from the sidewalk of such
delinquents and to collect the expenses thereof, with any additional amount
allowed by law, from such owner, occupant or tenant, as the case may be,
which may be in addition to any fine or penalty imposed under § 94-24.
§ 94-24. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-20-1996 by Ord. No.
96-2, approved 2-20-1996]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be liable for a fine of not less than $300 nor more than
$600, and costs of prosecution, and in the event of nonpayment of such fine
and costs of prosecution, such persons shall be subject to imprisonment in
the county jail for a term of not more than 30 days. The continuation of such
violation for each successive day shall constitute a separate offense, and the
person or persons allowing or permitting the continuation of the violation
may be punished as provided above for each separate offense.
§ 94-22 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 94-24
94:329

ARTICLE V
Construction of Sidewalks, Curbs and Gutters
[Adopted 5-20-1976 by Ord. No. 76-4, approved 5-20-1976]
§ 94-25. Compliance with requirements.
All construction or reconstruction of any curb or sidewalk along any
ordained street or alley of the Borough of Steelton or any street or alley
intended or proposed for ordination at some future time shall be done
only according to the provisions of this article or amendments or rules and
regulations made hereunder.
§ 94-26. Enforcement.
The Lower Dauphin County Code Enforcement Agency shall act as the duly
authorized agent of the Borough Council and of the Highway Committee in
the enforcement of the provisions of this article and shall have the authority
to stop any curb or sidewalk work which violates any of the provisions of
this article or any of the rules and regulations made hereunder.
§ 94-27. Issuance of rules and regulations.
The Highway Committee shall have the right to promulgate rules and
regulations, subject to the approval of the Borough Council, as to sidewalk
and curb construction or reconstruction not inconsistent with the provisions
of this article and shall have general supervision over such construction
and reconstruction. The Inspectors of the Lower Dauphin County Code
Enforcement Agency shall report directly to and be responsible in regard to
such construction and reconstruction to this Committee.
§ 94-28. Permit required.
A. No curb or sidewalk construction or reconstruction shall be performed
by or for any property owner unless said owner or the person doing the
work shall have first obtained from the Lower Dauphin County Code
Enforcement Agency a permit for such work, which permit shall be
valid for a period of 30 days. No charge shall be made for this permit. In
applying for the permit, the applicant shall state:
(1) The name or names and address or addresses of the real owners of
the property.
(2) The number of lineal feet of curb and sidewalk to be constructed.
(3) The name and address of the contractor who will do the work.
(4) The location of the sidewalk in relation to the curb and property
line.
B. The Lower Dauphin County Code Enforcement Agency may also
request such other information in particular cases as seems to him to be
relevant and necessary in such particular cases.
§ 94-25 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 94-29
94:331
§ 94-29. Construction to line and grade specifications.
No curbs or sidewalks shall be constructed or reconstructed to any lines
or grades other than those furnished by the Highway Committee or by the
Lower Dauphin County Code Enforcement Agency under its direction.
§ 94-30. Inspections.
All curb or sidewalk construction or reconstruction shall be subject to the
inspection and approval, at any time, of the Highway Committee or of
the Inspectors of the Lower Dauphin County Code Enforcement Agency,
as its authorized representative. The interpretation of any sections, rules,
regulations or requirements of this article shall be made by the Borough
Council. Exceptions for any particular cases will be given by the Borough
Council only after written request made to the Council.
§ 94-31. Specifications for curbs.
All new curbs along any street or alley shall be built of concrete only. Where
present curbs are of stone, they may not be reset. All new curbs shall
meet the following dimension requirements: The curb shall have a minimum
thickness of eight inches at the bottom and seven inches at the top and shall
be set to a depth of at least 22 inches. Forms shall not be removed from
curbs for at least 12 hours in the period from April 15 to October 15 or for
at least 24 hours during the rest of the year but at no time shall they remain
in place for more than 48 hours. In cases deemed advisable by the Borough
Council due to present grades or ground conditions, an additional depth of
eight inches shall be excavated and coarse stone shall be laid in the trench
and be well tamped before construction of the curb. A batter of one inch
for the top eight inches of depth shall always be maintained on the street
face. The lower 14 inches of curb shall have a plumb face on both sides.
The height above the gutter line shall be seven inches with a minimum
of four inches and a maximum of eight inches under certain conditions of
the gutter line, provided such variations shall be only as permitted by the
Borough Council. All curb shall be poured as a separate unit in lengths of
not more than 10 feet with a one-fourth-inch waterproof expansion joint
approximately every 30 feet. The top of the curb shall be floated smooth
with a wooden float, and the edge of the face shall be rounded to a radius
of not more than 3/4 of an inch while the concrete is still soft. The front or
face of the curb shall have a smooth rubbed finish to the gutter line. The top
of the curb shall slope toward the street with a slope of 1/4 inch to the foot.
Except in the case of radius corners, no curbs shall be cast or poured as a
part of any sidewalk slab.
§ 94-32. Curbs at intersections.
A radius curb shall be constructed at all intersections. The minimum radius
for any curb at a street intersection shall be 10 feet. The minimum radius at
any alley shall be five feet.
§ 94-29 § 94-33
94:332
§ 94-33. Specifications for sidewalks.
A. No new sidewalks may be constructed of anything other than concrete
in accordance with the specifications of this article.
B. Present sidewalks of brick or of flagstone may not be relaid as brick
walks if their present condition is condemned or considered as unsafe
by the Highway Committee.
C. All sidewalks constructed within the street lines of any ordained street
in the Borough shall have a minimum thickness of four inches. The
width of sidewalks shall be that width as ordained by the Borough
Council or, in residential sections, only part of the ordained width must
be paved as required by the Highway Committee, but in no case shall
this width be less than four feet.
D. In the case of sidewalks not paved the full ordained width, the Highway
Committee or its authorized representative shall determine the location
of the section to be paved.
E. The top surface of all sidewalks shall have a wood float finish and slope
toward the street with a maximum slope of two inches.
F. In front of entrance steps or areaways, this cross slope may vary from a
minimum of 1/8 inch to a maximum of 1/2 inch to the foot. Transverse
expansion joints shall be provided for approximately every 30 feet.
Where the sidewalk at the building line abuts against a wall or
permanent building, a longitudinal expansion joint shall be provided for.
All sidewalks shall be poured or cast as separate blocks or with all joints
cut entirely through the slab so as to provide a separate block. The
minimum dimension of any block shall be four feet and the maximum
dimension of any block shall be eight feet, with no one single block of
more than 40 square feet. The edges of all sidewalks shall be edged
with a one-fourth-inch radius tool.
G. All sidewalk and curb construction shall make provision for surface
drainage under the sidewalk. No accumulated surface, roof area or
driveway drainage shall be carried across the surface of the sidewalk.
H. Surface drainage shall be carried under the sidewalk and through the
curb in a pipe having an inside diameter of three inches and shall be
one piece from the street face of the curb to six inches inside the
building side of the sidewalk. The building end of the conductor pipe
shall be provided with a hub, and the building storm drains shall be
properly connected to it. A piece of mesh concrete reinforcing material
six by six by six inches (opening's size) and at least 10 by 10 by 10
inches (thickness gauge) shall be installed over the rain conductor pipe
its entire length and shall extend 30 inches each side of the pipe. The
concrete shall be scored over the center line of the pipe. The invert of
the pipe at the street end shall be 5 1/2 inches exactly from the top of
the curb. The grade of the pipe to the street shall be sufficient to drain
the pipe into the street. There shall be a minimum of one such
§ 94-33 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 94-33
94:333
§ 94-34. Specifications for driveways.
conductor for each fifty-foot interval per building lot and a minimum
of two per building; provided, however, that the aforesaid spacing
requirements shall not apply to the replacement of existing drainage
facilities, and provided, further, that in the case of roof areas where,
under the provisions of any legislation, more conductors than two per
lot are required, then the number of conductors as set forth in such
legislation shall apply. Where a storm sewer is available in the street or
under the sidewalk, the above drain shall discharge into the same. If no
storm sewer is available, the drainage shall be through the face of the
curb into the street gutters.
I. Roof drains shall be directly connected to these sidewalk drains. Yard
and driveway drainage shall be directed to, and provisions made for the
same to enter, the sidewalk drains before reaching the sidewalk area.
J. The provisions of Subsections G, H and I immediately above may be
waived by the Highway Committee, or other or altered drainage devices
or methods may be specified by said Committee when it determines,
based on the advice of the Borough Engineer and the Inspectors of the
Lower Dauphin County Code Enforcement Agency, that the installation
of said underdrainage facilities would be contrary to the public interest
or tend to create a nuisance and that such altered or other drainage
devices or methods are necessary in the public interest or to prevent a
nuisance.
A. All sidewalk crossings shall be divided into four classes as follows:
Class A, crossings over public alleys
Class B, crossings over private drives
Class C, crossings over commercial drives
Class D, crossings over public drives
(1) Class A crossings shall be over alleys dedicated to the public use
and serving the rear or side of one or more lots with frontage on a
public street, and the following regulations shall apply thereto:
(a) A concrete curb shall be provided for the full width of the
sidewalk at any alley intersection by the abutting property
owner
(b) The minimum radius of the curb intersection of a public alley
shall be five feet.
(c) The paving of the sidewalk area within the lines of the public
alleys shall be provided by the Borough.
(2) Class B crossings shall be over private drives used as an entrance
to one or more lots and not dedicated to the public use, and the
following regulations shall apply thereto:
§ 94-33 § 94-34
94:334
(a) The maximum width at the street line shall be 14 feet.
(b) The curb along the street side of such a crossing may be
depressed by providing a sloping section on either side with a
slope of six inches per foot.
(c) The paving of the crossing shall be of concrete the full width of
the ordained sidewalk area. No ribbon drives will be allowed
within the sidewalk area. The paving within the sidewalk area
shall have a minimum thickness of six inches with a full
construction joint on either side of the driveway paving.
(d) The ramp or sloping section of the driveway crossing shall not
extend beyond four feet from the curbline. The paving of the
remaining width of the sidewalk area shall maintain the grade
and slope of the standard street sidewalk.
(e) Private drives serving one or more properties shall conform to
all the requirements of a private drive, except that the
maximum width may be increased to the width of the driveway
but shall not exceed 20 feet in width at the street line.
(3) Class C crossings shall be over driveways used by customers,
suppliers, employees and such other members of the public having
business transactions with the owners or occupiers of the
premises, and the following regulations shall apply thereto:
(a) The maximum width at the street line shall be 20 feet. The curb
along the street side of such a crossing shall be depressed by
providing a sloping section on either side with a slope of six
inches per foot. The minimum distance from a property line
and the edge of the drive at the street line shall be five feet.
The minimum distance from the edge of a drive to the curbline
of a side street of a corner lot shall be 12 feet.
(b) The paving of the crossing shall be of concrete eight inches
thick the full width of the sidewalk area.
(c) The minimum distance between drives on one property shall be
10 feet.
(d) The ramp or sloping section of the driveway crossing shall not
extend beyond four feet from the curbline. The paving of the
remaining width of the sidewalk area shall maintain the grade
and the slope of the standard sidewalk.
(4) Class D crossings shall be over driveways used by the general
public, including, by way of example, but not limited to schools,
parks, churches and public parking lots, and the following
regulations shall apply thereto:
(a) The maximum width at the street line shall be 20 feet.
§ 94-34 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 94-34
94:335
§ 94-35. Compulsory construction; inspections.
The Inspectors of the Lower Dauphin County Code Enforcement Agency
shall determine in each case whether a property owner shall be required to
construct, reconstruct or repair a sidewalk and curb or any part or portion
thereof, and it shall be the duty of the Inspectors of the Lower Dauphin
County Code Enforcement Agency to inspect the work as it progresses
to ascertain whether it is being done in accordance with Borough
requirements.
§ 94-36. Compliance with rules, regulations and specifications.
All sidewalks constructed, reconstructed or repaired shall be done in
accordance with the rules, regulations, resolutions and ordinances
previously passed by the Borough Council. The width of the sidewalk and
such other specifications of the sidewalk and curb as are not herein
specifically provided shall be in accordance with resolutions of the Borough
Council.
§ 94-37. Service of notice.
(b) A public drive may be a fully depressed crossing and have a
curb entering the property on both sides. This curb must
extend the full width of the sidewalk area.
(c) The minimum radius at the curb intersections shall be 10 feet
and the maximum 20 feet.
(d) The surface of a public drive shall be of concrete eight inches
thick or of a smooth hard-surface bituminous concrete
designed to withstand the traffic loads using the crossing.
(e) The minimum distance between public drives crossing the
sidewalk shall be 20 feet.
(f) The cross slope of a public drive shall be a minimum of 3/8 inch
per foot.
B. Special permits. With respect to all classes of sidewalk crossings, an
increase in the width allowed at the street line may be granted by a
special permit of the Inspectors of the Lower Dauphin County Code
Enforcement Agency, subject to the approval of the Highway
Committee, but only in cases where failure to grant such an increase
would result in an unnecessary hardship to the owner or occupier of the
premises.
A. Every owner of property in the Borough of Steelton, after 30 days'
notice so to do given by the Inspectors of the Lower Dauphin County
Code Enforcement Agency, shall construct, reconstruct, repair or
replace, as the case may be, a sidewalk or curb in the street on which
his property abuts. Such notice shall be served upon the owner of the
property to which the notice refers, if such owner is a resident of the
§ 94-34 § 94-37
94:336
§ 94-38. Violations and penalties.
§ 94-39. (Reserved)
Borough. If the owner is not a resident of the Borough, then the notice
may be served on the agent or tenant of the owner, or upon the
occupant of such premises if the owner has no agent or tenant, and if
there is no occupier of the premises, then the notice shall be posted
upon the premises.
B. Upon neglect or failure of any property owner to comply with the
aforesaid notice served as aforesaid, the Borough may cause the
required work to be done at the cost of the owner and may collect the
cost thereof and 10% additional, together with all charges and
expenses, from such owner and may file a municipal claim therefor or
collect the same by action in assumpsit.
A. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions or
regulations specified by this article shall be liable to a fine of not less
than $10 and not more than $300 upon conviction thereof before a
District Justice and, in default of payment of said fine and the costs,
shall be sentenced to imprisonment for a period not to exceed 30 days,
and in addition such offending person, firm or corporation shall be
liable and shall pay the Borough the damages caused by the violation.
B. Any property owner who shall construct or reconstruct any curb or
sidewalk other than in compliance with the specifications of this article,
upon being ordered so to do by the Inspectors of the Lower Dauphin
County Code Enforcement Agency, shall remove such of said curb or
sidewalk as does not comply and replace it to comply with the
specifications of this article.
§ 94-37 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 94-39
94:337

ARTICLE VI
Motor Vehicle Maintenance or Repair on Public Streets
[Adopted 7-15-1991 by Ord. No. 91-8, approved 7-15-1991]
§ 94-40. Definitions.
The following words shall have the meanings set forth herein, unless the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
MAINTENANCE — Those activities which are required to keep a motor
vehicle in operating condition under the state inspection laws or to maintain
a clean cosmetic appearance, including washing and waxing; the
replacement of minor exterior parts, including wiper blades, lighting
fixtures and changing tires; and the performance of minor tuneups
involving, only, replacement of points, plugs and other minor exterior
components, so long as no hazard or nuisance to passersby result, and so
long as no fluids are changed or drained.
PERSON — Any individual person, firm or corporation.
REPAIRS — Any mechanical work on a motor vehicle which is not herein
defined as "maintenance."
STREET, PUBLIC — All of the roads, streets, alleys, sidewalks or grass plots
within the legal rights-of-way of the Borough of Steelton.
§ 94-41. Repairs prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to make repairs to any motor vehicle in
the public streets of the Borough of Steelton.
§ 94-42. Maintenance permitted.
Unless it poses a nuisance or safety hazard to passersby, the routine
maintenance of motor vehicles in the public streets, as defined, is hereby
permitted to be done by the owner of the motor vehicle or the owner's
spouse, son or daughter. Motor vehicles may not be left unattended when up
on a jack or blocks or other device which raises the wheels off the ground.
§ 94-43. Storage of parts prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to store new or used motor vehicle parts
on the public streets.
§ 94-44. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $600 and, in default of payment, to imprisonment for a term not to
exceed 30 days. Every day that a violation of this article continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
§ 94-40 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 94-44
94:339
Chapter 99
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code enforcement — See Ch. 2.
Planning Commission — See Ch. 18.
Building construction — See Ch. 44.
Sewers — See Ch. 90.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 93.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 94.
Trees — See Ch. 107.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 108.
Zoning — See Ch. 120.
§ 94-44 § 94-44
99:340
ARTICLE I
Short Title
§ 99-1. Short title.
These regulations shall be known and may be cited as the "Borough of
Steelton Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance."
§ 99-1 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 99-1
99:341

ARTICLE II
Purpose, Authority, Application and Interpretation
§ 99-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this Subdivision and Land Development Chapter is to
provide for harmonious development of the Borough of Steelton and county
by:
§ 99-3. Authority.
§ 99-4. County review.
Applications for subdivision and land development located within the
Borough of Steelton shall be forwarded upon receipt, with the appropriate
review fee, to the Dauphin County Planning Commission for review and
report. The Borough Council shall not approve such applications until the
county review report is received or until the expiration of 30 days from the
date the application was forwarded to the County Planning Commission.
A. Ensuring the orderly and efficient integration of subdivisions and land
developments into the development of the Borough of Steelton.
B. Ensuring sites suitable for building purposes and human habitation.
C. Ensuring conformance of subdivision and land development plans with
public improvement plans.
D. Ensuring coordination of intermunicipal public improvement plans and
programs.
E. Ensuring the protection of water resources and drainageways.
F. Ensuring the efficient movement of traffic.
G. Ensuring the management of stormwater runoff problem areas.
H. Ensuring equitable handling of all subdivision plans by providing
uniform standards and procedures.
I. Ensuring the greater health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the
Borough of Steelton.
J. Ensuring the efficient and orderly extension of community services and
facilities at minimum cost and maximum convenience.
A. The Steelton Borough Council shall have the authority to approve or
disapprove all preliminary and final subdivision or land development
plat applications as required herein.
B. The Steelton Borough Planning Commission is hereby designated as the
agency which shall review and make recommendations on all
subdivision and land development plat applications as required herein,
prior to action on the same by Borough Council.
§ 99-2 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 99-4
99:343
As evidence of their review and report, officials of the County Planning
Commission will sign final plats which have been formally approved by the
Borough of Steelton before such plats are presented for recording.
§ 99-5. Application of regulations.
§ 99-6. Interpretation.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall be
held to be minimum requirements for the promotion of public health, safety,
comfort, convenience, and greater welfare. Where provisions of this chapter
impose greater restrictions than those of any statute, other ordinance,
restriction, or regulation, the provisions of this chapter shall be controlling.
Where the provisions of a statute, other ordinance, resolution, or regulation
imposes greater restrictions than this chapter, the provisions of such
statute, resolution, ordinance, or regulation shall be controlling.
A. No subdivision or land development of any lot, tract or parcel of land,
sewer, storm sewer, water main, or other improvements in connection
therewith shall be laid out, constructed, opened or dedicated for public
use or travel, or for the common use of occupants of buildings thereon
unless and until a final subdivision plat has been approved by the
Borough Council and publicly recorded in the manner prescribed
herein; nor otherwise; except in strict accordance with the provisions of
this chapter.
B. No lot in a subdivision may be sold; no permit to erect or alter any
building upon land in a subdivision or land development may be issued;
and no building may be erected or altered in a subdivision or land
development, unless and until a final subdivision plat has been
approved by the Borough Council and recorded, and until construction
of the improvements required in the manner prescribed herein.
C. Unit or condominium subdivision of real property is included within the
meaning of subdivision and land development as defined herein, and
must comply with these regulations. Such compliance shall include, but
not be limited to, the filing of preliminary and final plats, payment of
established fees and charges, location of each structure and clear
definition of each unit, public easements, common areas, improvement
and all easements appurtenant to each unit.
D. Preliminary and final plats shall indicate the location of each structure
and clearly define each unit and shall indicate public easements,
common areas, and improvements, all easements appurtenant to each
unit and improvements to public right-of-way.
§ 99-4 § 99-6
99:344
ARTICLE III
Definitions
§ 99-7. Facilitation of administration and enforcement.
The following words are defined in order to facilitate the interpretation of
this chapter for administrative purposes and in the carrying out of duties by
appropriate officers and by the Zoning Hearing Board.
§ 99-8. Word usage.
§ 99-9. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY BUILDING — A building subordinate to and detached from the
main building on the same lot and used for purposes customarily incidental
to the main building.
ALLEY — A public thoroughfare, other than a minor street, which affords
only secondary means of access to abutting properties and is not intended
for general traffic circulation.
APPLICANT — An owner or developer, as hereinafter defined, who has filed
an application for development, including his heirs, successors and assigns.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — Every application, whether
preliminary, tentative or final, required to be filed and approved prior
to start of construction or development, including but not limited to an
application for a building permit, for the approval of a subdivision plat or
plan or for the approval of a development plan.
AS-BUILT DRAWINGS — Plans showing cross sections and profiles of the
constructed public improvements certified by a professional land surveyor
within an acceptable coordinate system.
A. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words shall, for the
purpose of this chapter, have the meanings herein indicated.
B. Words used in the present tense include the future tense.
C. The singular includes the plural.
D. The word "person" includes any individual or group of individuals, a
corporation, partnership, or any other similar entity.
E. The word "lot" includes the words "lot" or "parcel."
F. The term "shall" is always mandatory.
G. The word "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or building shall
be construed to include the words "intended, arranged or designed to
be used or occupied."
§ 99-7 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 99-9
99:345
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION — The one-hundred-year flood elevation as
indicated on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), as revised, for the
Borough of Steelton, Dauphin County, Pennsylvania, prepared by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency, Federal Insurance
Administration.
BLOCK — An area bounded by streets.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Steelton, Dauphin County, Pennsylvania;
Borough Council, its agents or authorized representatives.
BOROUGH COUNCIL — The Steelton Borough Council, Dauphin County,
Pennsylvania, its designated agents and representatives.
BUILDING — Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls
and intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals, or
chattels, and including covered porches or bay windows and chimneys.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE — The line within a property defining the
required minimum distance permitted between any enclosed structure and
the adjacent right-of-way, and the line defining side and rear yards, where
required.
CARTWAY — That portion of a street or alley which is improved, designated,
or intended for vehicular use.
CHAIRMAN — The Chairman of the Steelton Borough Planning
Commission.
CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE — An area of unobstructed vision at street
intersections. It is defined by lines of sight between points at a given
distance from the intersection of the street center lines.
COMMISSION — The Steelton Borough Planning Commission, its agents or
authorized representatives.
COMMON ELEMENTS — Land amenities, parts of buildings, central
services and utilities, and any other elements and facilities owned and used
by all unit owners and are designated as common elements. These elements
may include but are limited to:
The land on which the building is located and portions of the building
which are not included in a unit;
A.
The foundation, structural parts, supports, main walls, roofs,
basements, halls, corridors, lobbies, stairways, entrances and exits of
the building;
B.
C. The yards, parking area, and driveways;
Portions of the land and building used exclusively for the management,
operation or maintenance of the common elements;
D.
E. Installations of all central services and utilities;
§ 99-9 § 99-9
99:346
COMMON OPEN SPACE — See definition "open space, common."
COMMUNITY WATER SYSTEM — A water system servicing at least 15
service connections used by year-round residents or regularly serves at
least 25 year-round residents, as defined by the "Pennsylvania Safe Drinking
Water Act" (Act 1984-43).58
CONDOMINIUM — Real estate, portions of which are designated for
separate ownership and the remainder of which is designated for common
ownership solely by the owners of those portions. Real estate is not a
condominium unless the undivided interests in the common elements are
vested in the unit owners.
CONDOMINIUM ASSOCIATION — The community association which
administers and maintains the common property and common elements of
a condominium.
COUNTY — County of Dauphin, Pennsylvania.
COUNTY PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of the
County of Dauphin, Pennsylvania.
CROSSWALK — A right-of-way, publicly or privately owned, intended to
furnish access to pedestrians.
CUL-DE-SAC — A minor street open at one end, for vehicular and
pedestrian access, with the opposite end terminating in a vehicular
turnaround.
CULVERT — A drain, ditch or conduit not incorporated in a closed system,
that carries drainage water under a driveway, roadway, railroad, pedestrian
walk or publicway.
CURB — A stone or concrete boundary usually marking the edge of the
roadway or paved area.
CURB CUT — The opening along the curbline at which point vehicles may
enter or leave the roadway.
CUT — An excavation. The difference between a point on the original
ground and designated point of lower elevation of the final grade. Also, the
material removed in excavation.
DECISION — Final adjudication of any board or other body granted
jurisdiction under any land use ordinance or this chapter to do so, either by
reason of the grant of exclusive jurisdiction or by reason of appeals from
determinations. All decisions shall be appealable to the court of common
pleas of the county and judicial district wherein the Borough lies.
All other elements of the building necessary or convenient to its
existence, management, operation, maintenance and safety or normally
in common use; and
F.
G. Such other facilities as are designated as common elements.
58.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 721.1 et seq.
§ 99-9 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 99-9
99:347
DEVELOPER — Any owner, agent of such owner or tenant with the
permission of such owner, who makes or causes to be made a subdivision of
land or a land development.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN — The provisions for development including a
planned residential development, a plat of subdivision, all covenants
relating to use, location and bulk of buildings and other structures, intensity
of use or density of development, streets, ways and parking facilities,
common open space and public facilities. The phrase "provisions of
development plan" when used in this chapter shall mean the written and
graphic materials referred to in this definition.
DRAINAGE —
DRAINAGE FACILITY — Any ditch, gutter, culvert, storm sewer, or other
structure designed, intended, or constructed for the purpose of diverting
surface waters from or carrying surface waters off streets, public rights-ofway,
parks, recreational areas, or any part of any subdivision or contiguous
land areas.
DRAINAGE SYSTEM — Pipes, swales, natural features and man-made
improvements designed to carry drainage.
DRIVEWAY — A private roadway providing access for vehicles to a parking
space, garage, dwelling or other structure.
DWELLING — A building or structure designed for living quarters for one or
more families, including homes which are supported either by a foundation
or are otherwise permanently attached to the land, but not including hotels,
boardinghouses, rooming houses, or other accommodations used for
transient occupancy.
DWELLING, INDUSTRIALIZED HOUSING — Any structure designed
primarily for residential occupancy, except a mobile home, which is wholly
or in substantial part made, fabricated, formed or assembled in
manufacturing facilities for installation or assembly and installation on the
building site in such a manner that all concealed parts or processes of
manufacture cannot be inspected at the site without disassembly, damage
or destruction.
DWELLING, MANUFACTURED HOME — A transportable, single-family
dwelling intended for permanent occupancy, office or place of assembly
contained in one unit, or in two units designed to be jointed into one integral
unit capable of again being separated for repeated towing, which arrives
at a site complete and ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental
unpacking and assembly operations, and constructed so that it may be used
A. Surface water runoff;
The removal of surface water or groundwater from land by drains,
grading or other means which include runoff controls to minimize
erosion and sedimentation during and after construction or
development, the means for preserving the water supply and the
prevention or alleviation of flooding.
B.
§ 99-9 § 99-9
99:348
without a permanent foundation. For floodplain management purposes, this
definition includes park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles
located on site for greater than 180 consecutive days.
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY — A building used by three or more families
living independently of each other and doing their own cooking, including
apartment houses.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY, ATTACHED (TOWNHOUSES) — A building
used by one family and having two party walls in common with other
buildings; except the end unit, which shall have one party wall.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED — A building used by one family,
having only one dwelling unit and having two side yards.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY, SEMIDETACHED — A dwelling used by one
family, having one side yard, and one party wall common with another
dwelling.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY, DETACHED (DUPLEX) — A building arranged
over the other, and having two side yards.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY, SEMIDETACHED (DOUBLE DUPLEX) — A
building used by two families, with one dwelling unit arranged over the
other, having one side yard, and one party wall in common with another
building.
EASEMENT — A grant of one or more property rights by the property owner
to and/or for the use by the public, a corporation or another person or entity.
ENGINEER, BOROUGH — A registered professional engineer in
Pennsylvania designated by the Borough to perform the duties of engineer
as herein specified.
ENGINEER, PROFESSIONAL — An individual licensed and registered
under the laws of the commonwealth to engage in the practice of
engineering. A professional engineer may not practice land surveying
unless licensed as set forth in P.L. 534, No. 23059; however, a professional
engineer may perform engineering land surveys.
ENGINEERING LAND SURVEYS — Surveys for:
The development of any tract of land including the incidental design
of related improvements, such as line and grade extension of roads,
sewers and grading but not requiring independent engineering
judgment; provided, however, that tract perimeter surveys shall be the
function of the professional land surveyor;
A.
The determination of the configuration or contour of the earth's
surface, or the position of fixed objects thereon or related thereto by
means of measuring lines and angles and applying the principals of
mathematics, photogrammetry or other measurement methods;
B.
59.Editor's Note: See 63 P.S. § 148 et seq.
§ 99-9 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 99-9
99:349
ENGINEERING SPECIFICATIONS — The Engineering Specifications of the
Borough regulating the installation of any required improvements or for any
facility installed by any owner, subject to public use.
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments, or
the wearing away of the land surface by water, wind, ice and gravity.
EXCAVATION — Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other
similar material is dug into, cut, quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced,
relocated or bulldozed. It shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.
EXISTING GRADE — The vertical location of the ground surface prior to
excavation or filling.
FILL — Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other material
is placed, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported or moved to a new location
above the natural surface of the ground or on top of the stripped surface
and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom. The difference in
elevation between a point on the original ground and a designated point or
higher elevation on the final grade. The material used to make a fill.
FINISHED GRADE — The proposed elevation of the land surface of a site
after completion of all site preparation work.
FLOOD — A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
FLOOD, BASE (ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD) — A flood that, on the
average, is likely to occur once every 100 years (i.e., that has a one-percent
chance of occurring each year, although the flood may occur in any year).
FLOOD FRINGE — That portion of the floodplain outside the floodway.
FLOOD HAZARD, AREAS OF SPECIAL — The land in the floodplain within
a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any
given year.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM) — An official map of a
community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration.
FLOODPLAIN —
Geodetic or celestial surveys, underground surveys and hydrographic
surveys;
C.
D. Sedimentation and erosion control surveys;
E. The determination of the quantities of materials;
F. Tests for water percolation in soils; and
The preparation of plans and specifications and estimates of proposed
work as described herein.
G.
A relatively flat or low land area adjoining a river, stream, or
watercourse, which is subject to partial or complete inundation;
A.
An area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of
surface waters from any source.
B.
§ 99-9 § 99-9
99:350
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes or adjustments to proposed or existing structures which
reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property,
water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The designated area of a floodplain required to carry and
discharge floodwaters of a given magnitude. For the purposes of this
chapter the floodway shall be capable of accommodating a flood of the
one-hundred-year magnitude without increasing the water surface elevation
more than one foot at any point.
FUTURE RIGHT-OF-WAY —
GOVERNING BODY — The Steelton Borough Council, Dauphin County,
Pennsylvania.
GRADE, EXISTING — See definition "existing grade."
GRADE, FINISHED — See definition "finished grade."
GRADING AND DRAINAGE PLAN — A plan showing all existing ground
features and proposed grading, including existing and proposed surface
and subsurface drainage facilities, described by grades, contours, and
topography.
IMPROVEMENTS — Any man-made immovable item which becomes part of,
placed upon, or is affixed to, real estate.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:
Right-of-way width required for the expansion of existing streets to
accommodate anticipated future traffic loads;
A.
A right-of-way established to provide future access to or through
undeveloped land.
B.
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the number of
occupants or tenure; or
(1)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of, streets,
common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other
features;
(2)
A.
B. A subdivision of land.
"Land development" does not include development which involves:
The conversion of an existing single-family detached dwelling or
single-family semidetached dwelling into not more than three
(1)
C.
§ 99-9 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 99-9
99:351
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as a
unit.
LOT, AREA — The area contained within the property lines of a lot as
shown on a subdivision plan excluding space within any rights-of-way, but
including the area of any easement.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE — An interior lot having frontage on two streets.
LOT, REVERSE FRONTAGE — A lot extending between and having frontage
on an arterial street and a minor street, and with vehicular access solely
from the latter.
LOT, WIDTH — The distance measured between the side lot lines, at the
required building setback line. In a case where there is only one side lot
line, lot width shall be measured between such side lot line and the opposite
rear lot line or street line.
MAINTENANCE GUARANTY — Any security, other than cash, which may
be accepted by the Borough of Steelton for the maintenance of any
improvements required by this chapter.
MASTER DEED — A legal instrument under which title to real estate is
conveyed and by which a condominium is created and established.
MONUMENT — A concrete, stone, or other permanent object placed to
designate boundary lines, corners of property, and rights-of-way of streets
and utilities, for the purpose of reference in land and property survey.
MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY — A body politic and corporate created pursuant
to the Act of May 2, 1945 (P.L. 382, No. 164), known as the Municipality
Authority Act of 1945.60
MUNICIPALITIES PLANNING CODE — Act of Assembly of July 31, 1968,
P.L. 805, as amended.61
residential units, unless such units are intended to be a
condominium;
The addition of an accessory building, including farm building, on
a lot or lots subordinate to an existing principal building; or
(2)
The addition or conversion of buildings or rides within the confines
of an enterprise which would be considered an amusement park.
For the purposes of this subsection, an "amusement park" is
defined as a tract or area used principally as a location for
permanent amusement structures or rides. This exclusion shall not
apply to newly acquired acreage by an amusement park until initial
plans for the expanded area have been approved by the proper
authorities.
(3)
60.Editor's Note: The Municipality Authorities Act of 1945 (53 P.S. § 301 et seq.) was repealed
2001, June 19, P.L. 287, No. 22. See now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
61.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 99-9 § 99-9
99:352
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD — A flood that, on the average, is likely to
occur once every 100 years (i.e., has a one-percent chance of occurring each
year, although the flood may occur in any year).
OPEN SPACE — The unoccupied space open to the sky on the same lot with
the building, not including parking lots.
OPEN SPACE, COMMON — A parcel or parcels of land or an area of water,
or a combination of land and water within a development site and designed
and intended for the use or enjoyment of residents of a development, not
including streets, off-street parking areas, and areas set aside for public
facilities.
OPEN SPACE, PUBLIC — Open space owned by a public agency and
maintained by it for the use and enjoyment of the general public.
OWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land, including the
holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option
or contract is subject to any condition), a lessee if he is authorized under
the lease to exercise the rights of the owner, or other persons having a
proprietary interest in the land, shall be deemed to be an owner for the
purpose of this chapter.
PERSON — An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company,
association, joint stock association, or governmental entity; includes a
trustee, a receiver, an assignee, or a similar representative.
PLAN — A drawing, diagram, or map showing the dimensions of the
proposed building(s) or other land development feature(s) and associated
amenities in relation to the physical features of a site.
PLAN, COMPREHENSIVE — The Development Policy Plan (Master Plan)
and/or Future Land Use Plan and/or Official Map or other such plans, or
portions thereof, as may be adopted, pursuant to statute, for the area of the
Borough in which the subdivision or land development is located.
PLAN, FINAL — A complete and exact subdivision plan or land development
plan, prepared for official recording as required by statute, to define
property rights and proposed streets and other improvements.
PLAN, PRELIMINARY — A tentative subdivision plan or land development
plan, in lesser detail than a final plan, showing approximate proposed street
and lot layout as a basis for consideration prior to preparation of a final
plan.
PLAN, SKETCH — An informal plan, not necessarily to exact scale,
indicating salient existing features of a tract and its surroundings and the
general layout of a proposed subdivision or land development.
PLAN, SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL — A plan for controlling
erosion and sediment during construction which shall provide all steps,
including scheduling, to assure erosion and sediment control during all
phases of construction, including final stabilization.
§ 99-9 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 99-9
99:353
PLANNING COMMISSION — Steelton Borough Planning Commission,
Dauphin County, Pennsylvania, its members, agents and authorized
representatives.
PLAT — The map or plan of a subdivision or land development, whether
preliminary or final.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING or PRINCIPAL USE — The basic purpose for which
a building or land area is occupied or intended to be opposed to accessory
or incidental uses; usually classifiable as residential, commercial,
manufacturing or public in nature.
PRIVATE ROAD — A legally established right-of-way, other than public
streets, which provides the primary pedestrian and vehicular access to one
or more lots and constructed to the design standards contained in this
chapter.
PROFILE LINE — The profile of the center line of the finished surface of the
street, which shall be midway between the side lines of the street.
PUBLIC GROUNDS — Includes:
PUBLIC HEARING — A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice by the
Borough Council or Planning Commission, intended to inform and obtain
public comment, prior to taking action in accordance with this chapter.
PUBLIC MEETING — A forum held pursuant to notice under the Act of July
3, 1986 (P.L. 388, No. 84), known as the "Sunshine Act," 53 P.S. § 271 et
seq.62
PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice published once each week for two successive
weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the Borough. Such notice
shall state the time and place of the hearing and the particular nature of
FINAL PLAT — — A complete and exact subdivision or land
development plan, prepared for official recording as required by
statute, to define property rights and proposed streets and other
improvements and meeting all of the requirements contained in this
and other related ordinances, including, but not limited to, Chapter
120, Zoning, of this Code.
A.
PRELIMINARY PLAT — — A tentative subdivision or land development
plan, in lesser detail than a final plan, showing approximate proposed
street and lot layout as a basis for consideration prior to preparation of
a final plan.
B.
Parks, playgrounds, trails, paths and other recreational areas and other
public areas;
A.
Sites for schools, sewage treatment, refuse disposal and other publicly
owned or operated facilities; and
B.
C. Publicly owned or operated scenic and historic sites.
62.Editor's Note: Said Sunshine Act was repealed 10-15-1998 by P.L. 729, No. 93; see now 65
Pa.C.S.A. § 701 et seq.
§ 99-9 § 99-9
99:354
the matter to be considered at the hearing. The first publication shall not be
more than 30 days and the second publication shall not be less than seven
days from the date of the hearing.
PUBLIC SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM — A system for the collection of
sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature, and for the treatment or
disposal of the sewage or industrial waste at a sewage treatment plant.
REAL ESTATE — Any fee, leasehold or other estate or interest in, over
or under land, including structures, fixtures and other improvements and
interests which by custom, usage or law pass with a conveyance of land
though not described in the contract of sale or instrument of conveyance.
Real estate includes parcels with or without upper or lower boundaries, and
spaces that may be filled with air or water.
REPORT — Any letter, review, memorandum, compilation or similar writing
made by any body, board, officer or consultant other than a solicitor to
any other body, board, officer or consultant for the purpose of assisting the
recipient of such report in the rendering of any decision or determination.
All reports shall be deemed recommendatory and advisory only and shall
not be binding upon the recipient, board, officer, body or agency, nor shall
any appeal lie therefrom. Any report used, received or considered by the
body, board, officer or agency rendering a determination or decision shall
be made available for inspection to the applicant and all other parties to
any proceeding upon request, and copies thereof shall be provided at cost
of reproduction.
RESERVE STRIP — A strip of land adjacent to a street intended to control
access to the street from an adjacent property.
REVERSE FRONTAGE LOT — See definition "lot, reverse frontage."
RIGHT-OF-WAY — A strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication, forced
dedication, prescription or condemnation and intended to be occupied by
a road, crosswalk, railroad, electric transmission line, oil or gas pipeline,
water line, sanitary storm sewer and other similar uses; generally, the right
of one to pass over the property of another.
RIGHT-OF-WAY STREET — A public thoroughfare for vehicular traffic and/
or pedestrian traffic, whether designated as a street, highway,
thoroughfare, parkway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, alley, or however
designated.
RUNOFF — The surface water discharge or rate of discharge of a given
watershed after a fall of rain or snow that does not enter the soil but runs
off the surface of the land.
SANITARY SEWER (PUBLIC) — A sanitary sewage collection method in
which sewage is carried from the site by a system of pipes to a central
treatment and disposal plant.
SEDIMENTATION — The process by which mineral or organic matter is
accumulated or deposited by wind, water, or gravity. Once this matter is
deposited (or remains suspended in water), it is usually referred to as
"sediment."
§ 99-9 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 99-9
99:355
SEPTIC SYSTEM — An underground system with a septic tank used for the
decomposition of domestic wastes. Also referred to as an "on-lot system."
SERVICE DRIVE (PRIVATE) — A service way providing a secondary means
of access to abutting property and not intended for general traffic
circulation.
SETBACK LINE — See definition "building setback line."
SHADOW ANALYSIS — A graphic representation of shadows cast by nature
landscaping, screening and structures plotted with regard to topography,
slope, and direction at 9:00 a.m., 12:00 noon and 3:00 p.m. on the date of
the Winter Solstice.
SIDEWALK — A paved, surfaced or leveled area, parallel to and usually
separated from the street, used as a pedestrian walkway.
SIGHT DISTANCE — The length of roadway visible to the driver of a
passenger vehicle at any given point on the roadway when the view is
unobstructed by traffic.
SLOPE — The face of an embankment or cut section; any ground whose
surface makes an angle with the plane of the horizon. Slopes are usually
expressed in a percentage based upon vertical difference in feet per 100
feet of horizontal distance.
SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL — Best management
practices (BMPs) and other measures designed to effectively minimize
accelerated erosion and sedimentation.
SOIL STABILIZATION — Chemical or structural treatment of a mass of soil
to increase or maintain its stability or otherwise to improve its engineering
properties.
SOLAR ENERGY — Radiant energy (direct, diffused or reflected) received
from the sun at wave lengths suitable for conversion into thermal, chemical
or electrical energy.
SOLAR ENERGY COLLECTOR — Any device, structure or part of a device
or structure which is used primarily to transform solar energy into thermal,
chemical or electrical energy, including any space or structural component
specifically designed to retain heat derived from solar energy.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM — A complete design or assembly consisting of
a solar energy collector, an energy storage facility (where appropriate) and
components for the distribution of transformed energy to the extent that
they cannot be used jointly with a conventional energy system. Passive
solar energy systems which use the natural properties of material and
architectural components to collect and store solar energy without using
any external mechanical power are included in this definition if they do not
fulfill structural or other functions.
SOLAR SKYSPACE — The space between a solar energy collector and the
sun which must be free of obstructions that shade the collector to an extent
which precludes its cost-effective operation.
§ 99-9 § 99-9
99:356
SOLAR SKYSPACE EASEMENT — A right, expressed as an easement,
covenant or condition or other property interest in any deed or other
instrument executed by or on behalf of any landlord which protects the
solar skyspace of an actual, proposed or designated solar energy collector
at a described location by forbidding or limiting activities or land uses that
interfere with access to solar energy.
STORMWATER DETENTION — Any storm drainage technique that retards
or detains runoff, such as detention or retention basin, parking lot storage,
roof-top storage, porous pavement, dry wells or any combination thereof.
STREAM — A watercourse having a source and terminus, banks and
channel through which waters flow at least periodically.
STREET — Includes street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway, freeway,
parkway, lane, alley, viaduct or any other ways used or intended to be used
by vehicular traffic or pedestrians whether public or private.
STREET GRADE — The officially established grade of the street upon which
a lot fronts or in its absence the established grade of the other streets upon
which the lot abuts, at the midpoint of the frontage of the lot thereon. If
there is no officially established grade, the existing grade of the street at
such midpoint shall be taken as the street grade.
STREET WIDTH — The shortest distance between the lines delineating the
right-of-way of a street.
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary
location on or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the land.
SUBDIVIDER — The owner or authorized agent of the owner of a lot, tract
or parcel of land to be subdivided for sale or development under the terms
of this chapter.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land
by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions
of land including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs
or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided,
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — — Any subdivision involving more than five
lots, parcels of land or other divisions of land whether or not they
involve new streets, additional utilities or other facilities immediate or
future.
A.
MINOR SUBDIVISION — — The subdivision of a single lot, tract or
parcel of land into five or fewer lots, tracts or parcels of ownership
or of building development, providing lots, tracts or parcels of land
thereby created have frontage on an improved public street or streets
and providing further that there is not created by the subdivision any
new street, street easement, easements of access or need therefor.
B.
§ 99-9 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 99-9
99:357
SUBSTANTIALLY COMPLETED — Where, in the judgment of the Borough
Engineer, at least 90% (based on the cost of the required improvements for
which financial security was posted pursuant to the requirements of this
chapter) of those improvements required as a condition for final approval
have been completed in accordance with the approved plan, so that the
project will be able to be used, occupied or operated for its intended use.
SURFACE DRAINAGE PLAN — A plan showing all present and proposed
grades and facilities for stormwater drainage.
SURVEYOR, PROFESSIONAL LAND — An individual licensed and
registered under the laws of this commonwealth to engage in the practice
of land surveying.
SWALE — A low-lying stretch of land characterized as a depression used to
carry surface water runoff.
TOPSOIL — Surface soils and subsurface soils which presumably are fertile
soils and soil material, ordinarily rich in organic matter or humus debris.
Topsoil is usually found in the uppermost soil layer call the "A Horizon."
TOPOGRAPHIC MAP — A map showing the elevations of the ground by
contours or elevations.
TOPOGRAPHY — The configuration of a surface area showing relative
elevations.
UNDEVELOPED LAND — Any lot, tract or parcel of land which has not been
graded or in any other manner prepared for the construction of a building.
UNIT — A part of the property, structure or building designed or intended
for any type of independent use, which has direct exit to a public street or
way or to an easement or right-of-way leading to a public street or way, and
includes a proportionate undivided interest in the common elements, which
are assigned to the property, structure or building.
UTILITY, PUBLIC OR PRIVATE —
WATERCOURSE — A permanent stream, intermittent stream, river, brook,
creek, or a channel or ditch for water, whether natural or man-made.
WATER SURVEY — An inventory of the source, quantity, yield and use of
groundwater and surface water resources within the Borough.
WETLANDS — Areas that are periodically or permanently inundated by
surface or ground water and support vegetation adapted for life in
saturated soil. Wetlands include swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas.
Any agency which under public franchise or ownership, or under
certificate of convenience and necessity, provides the public with
electricity, gas, heat, steam, communication, rail transportation, water,
sewage collection or other similar service.
A.
A closely regulated private enterprise with an exclusive franchise for
providing a public service.
B.
§ 99-9 § 99-9
99:358
WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM (WECS) — A device which converts
wind energy to mechanical or electrical energy.
WIND ROTOR — The blades, plus hub to which the blades are attached, that
are used to capture wind for purpose of energy conversion. The wind rotor
is generally used on a pole or tower and, along with other generating and
electrical storage equipment, forms a wind energy conversion system.
§ 99-9 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 99-9
99:359

ARTICLE IV
Plat Specifications and Processing Procedures
§ 99-10. General requirements.
Whenever a subdivision of land or land development is desired to be
effected in the Borough of Steelton, Dauphin County, Pennsylvania, a plat of
the layout of such subdivision or land development shall be prepared, filed
and processed according to the requirements of this chapter.
§ 99-11. Sketch plans.
A. Prior to the filing of a subdivision or land development plat for review
and approval, the applicant is encouraged to submit a sketch plan to the
Planning Commission for advice on the requirements necessary to
achieve conformity with the standards of this chapter and other
applicable Borough of Steelton ordinances, as well as to alert the
applicant to other factors which must be considered in the design of the
subdivision or land development. The submission of a sketch plan does
not constitute an official subdivision and land development application.
B. The plan shall be clearly labeled "SKETCH PLAN" and shall include
sufficient information to clearly indicate the character and extent of the
proposed subdivision or land development and its relationship to
existing conditions and facilities within the area in which it is to be
located. It is recommended that sketch plan submissions include a map
covering sufficient area to establish the location of the site and an
informal plan of any existing or proposed streets, buildings, lot
arrangement, utilities, significant natural features, wetlands, and other
elements within the subdivision or land development including
topographic contours.
C. Prior to the preparation of any plans, the applicant shall consult the
Dauphin County Conservation District representative concerning the
preparation of plans for erosion and sedimentation control.
D. The applicant shall be advised of the accessibility of public sewerage
and public water to the development site. If the site is located within an
area planned or currently receiving public water and/or sanitary sewer
services, the applicant shall consult with the appropriate utility.
E. At this stage, the Commission shall assist the applicant in determining
whether or not the site is located in an identified flood hazard area, in
which case compliance with applicable floodplain management
provisions shall be required.
F. If it is known that the parcels being created will be used for
development requiring a permit issued under authority of the Codified
Ordinances of the Borough of Steelton, county, state and/or federal
agencies, or for development that is considered dangerous to human
life, prospective developers shall check the provisions contained in
§ 99-10 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 99-11
99:361
§ 99-12. Minor subdivision and land development application.
Where five or fewer lots are proposed to be subdivided from a tract of
land or where land is being transferred to be combined with an existing
lot, the Borough Council, being advised by the Planning Commission, in
response to a written request by the applicant, may waive the requirements
of preliminary plat submission, provided such proposal is on an existing
street and no new streets are involved. In such cases the applicant shall
submit a final plat as follows:
Chapter 120, Zoning, and Chapter 44, Building Construction, of this
Code which pertain specifically to such development.
A. The final plat shall be submitted with a letter of transmittal requesting
review of the application, a descriptive narrative of the proposed
subdivision and/or land development, applicable fees, and other
necessary information. The final plat shall meet the specifications for
both the preliminary subdivision and the final subdivision. The final plat
shall be submitted and processed as required by § 99-15, Final plats;
procedure, and contain the following data and plat specifications:
(1) Submit a stormwater management/erosion and sedimentation
control plan as required by the Pennsylvania Clean Streams Law,
and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection
(DEP) Erosion and Sedimentation Pollution Control Program
Manual, as amended. The plan content shall be prepared in
accordance with the erosion control measures set forth in the
Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook prepared by the
Cumberland, Dauphin, and Perry County Conservation Districts
and applicable provisions herein.
(2) Ten copies and one reproducible Mylar (or other reproducible
material of equal quality) copy of the plat prepared by a registered
surveyor on sheets 24 inches by 36 inches clearly labeled "FINAL
PLAT" shall be submitted containing the following information:
(a) The development or property name.
(b) Outline of the property from which the lot or lots are being
subdivided.
(c) Bearings and distances of the property taken from the property
deed including the primary control point.
(d) Adjacent owners' names.
(e) Location on the property map of existing streets, streams, and
woods.
(f) A separate drawing of the proposed lot (maximum scale one
inch equals 100 feet) with lot area, and distances of lot lines,
existing street right-of-way width, cartway width, and street
§ 99-11 § 99-12
99:362
name and number, easements, existing man-made features,
building setback lines, and contours, with a two-foot interval.
(g) A location map on the plat (minimum scale one inch equals 100
feet) showing property location, streets and other pertinent
information.
(h) Name of the zoning district in which the site is located.
(i) Additional data required on the plat:
[1] Name, address, and telephone number of owner or
applicant.
[2] Name, address, and telephone number and seal of
professional engineer certifying engineering aspects and
professional land surveyor certifying accuracy of plat
survey (as defined herein). (Example contained in Exhibit I
herein.63)
[3] Date of plat preparation.
[4] Municipality and county name.
[5] North arrow, graphic scale, and numerical scale.
[6] Certification of ownership and dedicatory statement
signed by owner. (Example contained in Exhibit I herein.64)
[7] Notary public and recording statement. (Example
contained in Exhibit I herein.65)
[8] Signature blocks to be signed by the Dauphin County
Planning Commission, Borough of Steelton Planning
Commission, and the Steelton Borough Council. (Example
contained in Exhibit II herein.66)
[9] Location and description of existing and proposed
concrete survey monuments and iron pin survey markers.
[10] Locations of existing and/or proposed public utilities.
[11] Existing natural features, such as watercourses, wetlands,
marshes, rock outcrops and wooded areas.
[12] Proposed protective covenants running with the land, if
any.
63.Editor's Note: Exhibit I is included at the end of this chapter.
64.Editor's Note: Exhibit I is included at the end of this chapter.
65.Editor's Note: Exhibit I is included at the end of this chapter.
66.Editor's Note: Exhibit II is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 99-12 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 99-12
99:363
§ 99-13. Preliminary plat: procedure.
[13] Reference to recorded subdivision plats of adjoining
platted land and by record name, date, number, and
reference to deed book volume and page.
[14] When applicable, a copy of the Sewage Module for Land
Development or other equivalent documentation approved
by the DEP in compliance with the requirements of the
Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act and Chapter 71 of Title
25 of the Pennsylvania Code.
[15] When applicable, a statement shall be included on the plat
regarding the presence of wetlands. The statement shall
note that no development is proposed within wetlands or
that the necessary approvals for the disturbance of
wetlands have been obtained from the appropriate federal
and state regulating agencies. Disturbance of wetlands
shall include, but not be limited to, filling, draining or
building activities.
[16] Compliance with § 99-16 of this chapter pertaining to
applications located in a flood hazard area.
[17] Where the proposed subdivision abuts a state highway
Pennsylvania route or United States route, evidence in
writing from the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation (PennDOT) indicating their concurrence
with the proposed design for driveway access and
drainage required for issuance of the PennDOT highway
occupancy permits.
[18]Water supply. If water is to be provided by means other
than private wells owned and maintained by the individual
owners of lots within the subdivision or development,
applicants shall present evidence to the Borough Council
that the subdivision is to be supplied by a certified public
utility, a bona fide cooperative association of lot owners, or
by a municipal corporation, authority or utility. A copy of a
certificate of public convenience from the Pennsylvania
Public Utility Commission or an application for such
certificate, a cooperative agreement or a commitment or
agreement to serve the area in question, whichever is
appropriate, shall be acceptable.
[19] Zoning variances granted by the Steelton Borough Zoning
Hearing Board, if applicable.
[20] Such other data as may be required by the Planning
Commission or Borough Council in the enforcement of this
chapter.
§ 99-12 § 99-13
99:364
A. The applicant, at 14 calendar days prior to the meeting of the
Commission at which consideration is desired, shall file with the Zoning
Officer 12 copies of a preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision or
land development; a letter of transmittal requesting review of the
application, a descriptive narrative of the proposed preliminary
subdivision and/or land development, other necessary information,
applicable fees, and other required data and maps. The applicant shall
submit concurrently, with the preliminary plat, seven copies of the
sewage "Plan Revision Module for Land Development," if applicable, to
the Commission.
B. The Borough of Steelton, at least 10 calendar days prior to the meeting
of the Commission at which consideration is desired, shall file with the
Dauphin County Planning Commission two copies of a preliminary plat
of the proposed subdivision or land development, applicable fees, two
copies of the sewage "Plan Revision Module for Land Development," if
applicable, and other required data and maps. The Borough shall
submit copies of a preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision or land
development and other required data and maps to the Borough
Engineer and may submit copies to the public utilities, school board,
Dauphin County Conservation District, DEP, and other public agencies.
The Borough Council, upon the recommendation of the Commission,
shall act on any such preliminary plat not later than 90 days following
the date of the regular meeting of the Borough Council or the Planning
Commission (whichever first reviews the application) next following the
date the application is filed, or after a final order of court remanding an
application, provided that, should the said next regular meeting occur
more than 30 days following the filing of the application, or the final
order of court, the said ninety-day period shall be measured from the
30th day following the day the application has been filed. In the event
that any alteration of requirements from this chapter is requested by
the applicant or is deemed necessary by the Commission for approval,
the alteration and the reason for its necessity shall be entered in the
records of the Commission.
C. The Dauphin County Planning Commission shall review the preliminary
plat and shall provide one copy of a written review report to the
Planning Commission within 30 days.
D. The Borough Council shall determine whether the preliminary plat shall
be approved, or disapproved, and shall notify the applicant in writing
thereof, including, if approved with conditions or disapproved, a
statement of reasons for such action, not later than 15 days following
the decision.
E. Before acting on any subdivision plat, the Borough Council may hold a
public hearing thereon after public notice.
F. When an application (or plat) is approved subject to conditions, the
conditions must be based on the authority, guidelines, or provisions of
this chapter. The applicant must concur in each and every condition and
§ 99-13 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 99-13
99:365
must do so in writing or orally (if such concurrence occurs at a public
meeting where concurrence may be reflected in the official minutes).
The concurrence or rejection of the applicant on conditions must occur
in a timely fashion so as to permit approval or disapproval of the
application (or plat) within the time limitation set forth in Subsection
B above. Approval of a plat subject to conditions shall be reconciled
automatically upon the applicant's failure to accept or reject such
conditions in the timely fashion set forth above. Such automatic
recision shall be deemed a disapproval, and the applicant shall be so
notified in the manner set forth in Subsections E and G hereof.
G. When the application is not approved in terms as filed, the decision
shall specify the defects found in the application and describe the
requirements which have not been met and shall, in each case, cite the
provisions of this chapter and/or the provisions of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247.67
H. Failure of the Borough Council to render a decision and communicate it
to the applicant within the time and in the manner required herein shall
be deemed an approval of the application in terms as presented unless
the applicant has agreed in writing to an extension of time or change in
the prescribed manner of presentation of communication of the
decision, in which case, failure to meet the extended time or change in
manner of presentation of communication shall have like effect. (A
sample "Agreement to Extend the Time for Rendering and
Communicating a Decision on Certain Preliminary and/or Final
Subdivision Plans" is contained in Exhibit III herein.68)
I. Approval of the preliminary plat constitutes approval of the proposed
subdivision or land development with respect to the general design, the
approximate dimensions and other planned features. Preliminary
approval binds the developer to the general scheme of the plat as
approved. Preliminary approval does not authorize the recording, sale
or transfer of lots or the installation of improvements.
J. Preliminary approval shall expire within five years after being granted.
An extension of time may be requested by the applicant and approved
by the Borough Council in accordance with 508(4) of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247, as amended.69 Request for
extension shall be submitted to the Code Enforcement Officer 30 days
prior to any prevailing expiration date. Extensions may be granted for
no more than three one-year periods.
K. In the case of a preliminary plat calling for the installation of
improvements beyond the five-year period, a schedule shall be filed by
the owner with the preliminary plat delineating all proposed sections as
well as deadlines within which applications for final plat approval of
67.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
68.Editor's Note: Exhibit III is included at the end of this chapter.
69.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10508(4).
§ 99-13 § 99-13
99:366
§ 99-14. Preliminary plat: specifications.
each section are intended to be filed. Such schedule shall be updated
annually by the applicant on or before the anniversary of the
preliminary plat approval, until final plat approval of the final section
has been granted and any modification in the aforesaid schedule shall
be subject to approval of the Borough Council in its discretion.
L. Each section in any residential subdivision or land development, except
for the last section, shall contain a minimum of 25% of the total number
of dwelling units as depicted on the preliminary plan, unless a lesser
percentage is approved by the Borough Council in its discretion.
Provided the owner has not defaulted with regard to or violated any of
the conditions of the preliminary plat approval, including compliance
with owner's aforesaid schedule of submission of final plats for the
various sections, then the aforesaid protections afforded by
substantially completing the improvements depicted upon the final plat
within five years shall apply and for any section or sections, beyond the
initial section, in which the required improvements have not been
substantially completed within said five-year period the aforesaid
protections shall apply for an additional term or terms of three years
from the date of final plat approval for each section.
M. Failure of owner to adhere to the aforesaid schedule of submission of
final plats for the various sections shall subject any such section to any
and all changes in this chapter, zoning, and other governing ordinance
enacted by the Borough subsequent to the date of the initial preliminary
plan submission.
A. The following shall be submitted in application for review and approval
of a preliminary plat: 10 copies and one reproducible Mylar (or other
reproducible material of equal quality) copy of a map or series of maps
or sheets 24 inches by 36 inches drawn to scale not smaller than 100
feet to the inch, unless otherwise specified herein, clearly labeled
"PRELIMINARY PLAT," and showing the following:
(1) The development or property name.
(2) The owner's or applicant's name, address and telephone number.
(3) The municipality and county name.
(4) Name, address, telephone number and seal of the professional
engineer certifying engineering aspects and professional land
surveyor certifying accuracy of plat survey (as defined herein)
(Example contained in Exhibit I herein.70)
(5) North arrow, graphic scale, and numerical scale.
70.Editor's Note: Exhibit I is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 99-13 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 99-14
99:367
(6) Certification of ownership and dedicatory statement signed by
owner. (Example contained in Exhibit I herein.71)
(7) Notary public and recording statement. (Example contained in
Exhibit I herein.)
(8) Signature blocks to be signed by the Dauphin County Planning
Commission, Steelton Planning Commission, and the Steelton
Borough Council. (Example contained in Exhibit II herein.72)
(9) A diagram, at a scale not less than 1,000 feet to the inch, covering
sufficient area to establish the location of the site within the
Borough of Steelton.
(10) Existing natural features, such as watercourses, wetlands,
marshes, rock outcrops and wooded areas.
(11) All existing buildings, sanitary and storm sewers, water mains,
culverts, fire hydrants and other significant man-made features on
or adjacent to the tract.
(12) Existing contours at vertical intervals of two feet or less as
required by the Planning Commission. Where due to steep slope,
two-foot contours are not practical, contours shall be at five-foot
intervals.
(13) The layouts, names, and widths of the rights-of-way and cartway of
existing and/or proposed streets, alley, and easements on or
adjacent to the track with bearings and distances.
(14) The layout of lots and tract boundary showing approximate
dimensions, lot numbers, approximate area of each lot, bearings,
and distances.
(15) Parcels of land intended to be dedicated or reserved for schools,
parks, playgrounds, parking areas, common open space, or other
public, semipublic or community purposes.
(16) A map showing the location of the proposed subdivision and/or land
development with respect to any identified floodplain area or
district, including information on the one-hundred-year flood
elevations, space or structural component specifically designed to
retain heat derived from solar energy.
(17) When applicable, a statement shall be included on the plat
regarding the presence of wetlands. The statement shall note that
no development is proposed within wetlands or that the necessary
approvals for the disturbance of wetlands have been obtained from
the appropriate federal and state regulating agencies. Disturbance
71.Editor's Note: Exhibit I is included at the end of this chapter.
72.Editor's Note: Exhibit II is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 99-14 § 99-14
99:368
of wetlands shall include, but not be limited to, filling, draining or
building activities.
(18) Where the subdivision and/or land development lies partially or
completely within any identified floodplain area or district or where
such activities border on any identified floodplain area or district,
the preliminary plat shall include the following information:
(a) Location and elevation of proposed roads, utilities, and
building sites, fills, flood or erosion protection facilities;
(b) The one-hundred-year flood elevations; and
(c) Areas subject to special deed restrictions. All such maps shall
show contours at intervals of two or five feet depending upon
the slope of the land and identify accurately the boundaries of
the identified floodplain area or districts.
(19) Zoning variances granted by the Steelton Zoning Hearing Board, if
applicable.
(20) Zoning classification of tract and adjoining lots.
(21) Date of plan preparation.
(22) Tax parcel number and deed references.
(23) Building setback lines on all lots or parcels in unit, cooperative or
condominium subdivision and/or sites.
(24) Residential density shall be marked on the plan, not to exceed
seven units per acre.
(25) Intersection sight distance and clear sight triangles. The plat shall
show intersection sight distances and the respective clear sight
triangles for each intersection.
B. The preliminary plat shall be accompanied by the following data and
plans:
(1) A typical profile and cross section, properly labeled with the name
of each street, including grades.
(2) Location of existing and proposed utility mains.
(3) Location plans of proposed sanitary and/or stormwater sewers and
of any proposed water distribution systems.
(4) A profile of the proposed sanitary and storm sewers and water
lines, with invert elevations and connections to existing systems.
(5) Parking calculations.
(6) Street and other outdoor lighting plans, as applicable.
§ 99-14 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 99-14
99:369
(7) Landscape plan.
(8) A preliminary erosion and sedimentation control plan together with
a report of the County Conservation District indicating whether a
permit for earthmoving activity is required from the DEP under the
Rules and Regulations, Chapter 102, "Erosion Control," P.L. 1987,
June 22, 1937, as amended.73
(9) If necessary, a completed sewage "Plan Revision Module for Land
Development" to comply with the planning requirements of the
Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act and 71.16 of Chapter 71 of Title
25 of the Pennsylvania Code for submission to the DEP.
(10) Upon final approval of plat, where the proposed subdivision and/or
land development abuts a state highway (Legislative Route,
Pennsylvania Route or United States Route), the applicant shall
produce a state highway occupancy permit and the plat shall be
marked to indicate that access to the state highway shall be only as
authorized by the highway occupancy permit. If state highway
occupancy permits have not been produced, the Borough may
grant a conditional subdivision plan approval subject to a notice
being placed on the face of the plan. If the developer does not agree
in writing to this condition, the plan shall be denied. Suggested
wording of the notice is as follows:
NOTICE: No building permit will be issued for any lot or parcel
which will require access to a state highway until authorized by
a PennDOT highway occupancy permit (HOP). A HOP is required
pursuant to Section 420 of the Act of June 1, 1945 (P.L. 1242, No.
428), known as the "State Highway Law," before driveway access
to a state highway is permitted.
(11) Evidence in writing, where 100 or more dwelling units are
proposed in a subdivision or land development, from the school
district in which the subdivision or land development is located
containing the review and comments of the school district on the
proposed development.
(12) A copy of a report, where deemed necessary by the Borough
Council or Borough Engineer, indicating an estimated volume of
vehicular traffic movement and the adequacy of the proposed and
existing streets and highways to carry the traffic both within and
beyond the proposed development, including possible solutions to
such problems as may be thereby identified.
(13) Stormwater management:
(a) A stormwater management plan shall be prepared and
stormwater drainage facilities required, as necessary, to:
73.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 99-14 § 99-14
99:370
[1] Permit the unimpeded flow of natural watercourses;
[2] Ensure the drainage of all low points along the line of
streets and other applicable areas;
[3] Intercept, retain, or detain surface water runoff in a
manner reasonably related to the extent and grade of the
area drained;
[4] Provide positive drainage away from buildings;
[5] Post-development peak flows should be less than or equal
to pre-development peak flows and the discharge to
downstream properties should be in a manner similar to
the pre-development condition.
(b) General standards
[1] The stormwater management plan shall contain and
illustrate the following: the mapping of the watershed area
or areas in which the proposed subdivision or land
development is located; calculations of runoff based on
either the Soils Cover Complex Method or Rational
Method, as approved by the Borough Engineer; the
complete drainage system for the subdivision or land
development including the identification of drainage
features which will be incorporated into the design. If the
subdivision or land development is to be developed in
phases, an overall stormwater management plan for the
entire site shall be submitted with the first phase and
appropriate future development phases for the drainage
system shall be indicated; the advice of the Borough
Engineer shall be sought in designing the stormwater
management plan.
[2] The existing points of natural drainage discharge onto
adjacent property shall not be altered without the written
approval of the affected owners.
[3] Stormwater runoff or natural drainage water shall not be
diverted so as to overload existing drainage systems, or
create flooding or the need for additional drainage
structures on other private properties or public lands,
without approved provisions being made by the applicant
for properly handling such conditions.
[4] Facilities for storm drainage shall be designed to handle
the anticipated peak discharge from the property being
subdivided as well as to handle the anticipated increase in
runoff that will occur when all the property at a higher
elevation in the same watershed area is fully developed.
§ 99-14 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 99-14
99:371
[5] Where a watercourse runs across or through a subdivision,
a drainage easement, which conforms to the line of such
watercourse, shall be provided at such a width as will be
adequate to preserve the unimpeded flow of natural
drainage.
[6] All drainage structures that are located on the rights-ofway
of state highways shall be approved by PennDOT, and
a letter of approval from that office shall be directed to the
Commission.
[7] All streets shall be designed so that surface water is
discharged from their rights-of-way. The slope of the crown
on proposed streets shall not be less than 1/8 of an inch
per foot and not greater than 1/3 of an inch per foot.
[8] Storm drainage facilities, as required, shall be placed in
front of the curb or curbline when located in a street rightof-
way. When located in undedicated land, they shall be
placed within an easement, as approved by the Borough
Engineer, who may require additional width of easement
as circumstances warrant.
[9] Street drainage shall not be permitted to cross
intersections or the crown of the road.
[10] Stormwater roof drains shall not discharge water directly
over a sidewalk.
[11] Stabilized outlets shall be provided for footer drains, flood
drains, and downspouts.
[12]No person shall block, impede the flow of, alter, construct
any structure, or deposit any material or thing, or commit
any act which will affect normal or flood flow in any stream
or watercourse without having obtained prior approval
from the Borough and/or DEP or other regulatory agency,
whichever is applicable.
[13] Where a stormwater detention basin is proposed, the plan
shall include a proposal to prevent such basin from
becoming a safety hazard or public nuisance and for
regular perpetual maintenance of the basin to insure its
continuous effectiveness.
(14)Water supply.
(a) The applicant shall provide an adequate and potable water
supply and distribution system to service the proposed
subdivision or land development through one of the following
methods listed in their orders of preference:
§ 99-14 § 99-14
99:372
[1] Connection to a public water supply system where such a
system is within 1,000 feet of the proposed development
site and where the capacity of such a system can
adequately fulfill the water supply demands of the
proposed development, including fire protection. A
distribution system shall be designed to furnish an
adequate supply of water to each lot. A copy of the
approval of such a system by the appropriate public
authority or utility company shall be submitted with the
final plan.
[2] Where a public water supply system cannot feasibly be
provided to the proposed development, as evidenced by an
evaluation study, the feasibility of constructing a separate
water supply system shall be investigated and a report
submitted setting forth the findings. If such a system is
provided, it shall be reviewed and approved by the DEP
and suitable agreements including financial guaranties
shall be established for the ownership and maintenance of
the system. Also, such a system shall be designed and
constructed in a manner that would permit adequate
connection to a public water supply system in the future.
[3] Where neither of the above alternatives are possible or
feasible, either an individual on-lot or a community water
supply system may be permitted pursuant to a compliance
with this section. All such individual or community systems
shall also meet the criteria of the DEP.
[4] All water systems located in flood-prone areas shall be
floodproofed to a point on 1 1/2 feet above the onehundred-
year flood elevation.
(b) Individual on-lot wells or community water system:
[1] In subdivisions or land developments proposing to utilize
individual on-lot wells or a community water supply,
Borough Council reserves the right to require the
applicant to drill and test a well(s) and have a report
prepared on the quantity and quality of groundwater at the
site.
[2] Such requirement for a test well(s) and report may be
invoked at the discretion of the Borough Council in
situations where (1) the area is known to have actual water
yield or quality problems; or (2) the Pennsylvania State
Water Plan or U.S. Geological Survey Water Resource
Reports, or other technical study indicates a potential low
yield area or inadequate water quality area; or (3) the
development consists of 25 proposed lots or units with an
average density of less than one unit per acre or involves a
§ 99-14 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 99-14
99:373
withdrawal of 10,000 or more gallons per day. The
requirement may also be invoked when the 26th or
subsequent lots or units are proposed to be developed
from the original or parent tract. The contents of the
report or study of the proposed community water system
shall include those specific items as described in the Public
Water Supply Manual of the DEP. Where the water supply
system occurs under the jurisdiction of the Pennsylvania
Public Utilities Commission (PUC), the water supply study
shall also incorporate those items of information required
by the PUC.
[3] When individual on-lot wells are proposed, the subdivider
shall either install such facilities or put a restriction in the
deed of each lot indicating that no building intended for
residential, commercial, or industrial use shall take place
on said lot until such time that a satisfactory well is
provided or as a condition of the sale of each lot or parcel
within the same subdivision or land development, that the
facilities can be installed by the purchaser of such lot and
have minimum yield of potable water of 500 GPD prior to
sale. The owner or subdivider shall provide the Borough
Council with proof of compliance with this section.
Construction of wells for individual small water supplies
shall conform to DEP's Construction Standards Individual
Water Supplies, as revised. Individual on-site wells shall be
subject to the following standards:
(c) Location. The source of supply shall be from a water-bearing
formation not less than 25 feet from the ground surface. Cap
wells shall be located at a point free from flooding and at a
higher elevation and at the following minimum distances to
existing or potential sources of pollution:
Source of Pollution
Minimum Distance
(feet)
Lakes, ponds, streams or other surface
waters
25
Storm drains, retention basins,
stormwater stabilization ponds
25
Preparation area or storage area of
hazardous spray materials, fertilizers
or chemicals; salt piles
300
§ 99-14 § 99-14
99:374
Source of Pollution
Minimum Distance
(feet)
Gravity sewer lines and drains carrying
domestic sewage or industrial waste
(except when the sewer line is cast iron
pipe with either watertight lead
caulked joints or joints filled with
neoprene gaskets, or if solvent welded
Schedule 40 (or SDR equivalent) or
better polyvinylchloride (PVC) pipe
50
10
Sewage drains carrying domestic
sewage or industrial waste under
pressure (except welded steel pipe or
concrete encased pipe)
50
10
Septic tanks or aerobic tanks 50
Subsurface sewage disposal systems,
elevated sand mounds, etc.
100
Sewage seepage pits, cesspools 100
Farm silos, barnyards 100
Rainwater pits 25
Spray irrigation site; sewage sludge
and septage disposal sites
300
Property lines or right-of-way 10
Dedicated road right-of-way 15
Building foundations (except for
building enclosing just water wells and/
or water well pumps)
10
Any other source of pollution As approved
(d) Sources of groundwater for community water systems. It is
recommended that two sources of groundwater be provided for
each public or community water system. Each should be
capable of supplying the average daily demand of the proposed
dwelling units. Although a two-well system is ideal, there are
alternatives which would ensure an adequate water supply:
[1] A single well capable of providing twice the ultimate daily
average demand as demonstrated by a pumping test of at
least 48 hours' duration producing a stabilized draw down
of unchanging water level for at least five hours' duration.
[2] A single well capable of supplying the average daily
demand with an additional reliable surface water source.
§ 99-14 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 99-14
99:375
§ 99-15. Final plat: procedures.
[3] A single well capable of supplying the average daily
demand plus a dependable connection to another
satisfactory public water supply system.
[4] A second well is recommended for use as a monitor of the
aquifer and as a standby in the event of emergency.
A. The applicant shall, not later than five years after the date of approval
of the preliminary plat, for that portion intended to be developed, file
with the Borough Zoning Officer a final plat. Such filing shall include, as
part of the formal submission, all the material and other data required
under the final plat specifications as listed in § 99-16 of this chapter.
Failure to comply with the time limitation herein provided shall make
the approval of the preliminary plat null and void unless an extension of
time is granted in accordance with § 99-13 herein.
B. The final plat shall be submitted with a letter of transmittal requesting
review of the application a descriptive narrative of the proposed
subdivision and/or land development, and other necessary information.
The final plat shall incorporate all the changes and modifications
required by the Borough Council; otherwise it shall conform to the
approved preliminary plat, and it may constitute only that portion of the
approved preliminary plat which the applicant proposes to record and
develop at the time, provided that such portion conforms to all of the
requirements of this chapter.
C. One reproducible Mylar copy of the final plat and 10 prints shall be filed
by the applicant with the Borough's Zoning Officer 14 calendar days
prior to the meeting of the Planning Commission at which meeting
consideration is desired.
D. Completion of improvements or guaranty thereof prerequisite to final
plat approval.
(1) No plat shall be finally approved unless the streets shown on such
plat have been improved to a mud-free or otherwise permanently
passable condition, or improved as may be otherwise required by
this chapter and any walkways, curbs, gutters, streetlights, fire
hydrants, shade trees, water mains, sanitary sewers, storm sewers
and other improvements as may be required by this chapter have
been installed in accordance with this chapter. In condition for the
final approval of a plat, including improvements or fees otherwise
required by this chapter, the developer may deposit with the
Borough financial security in an amount sufficient to cover the
costs of such improvements or common amenities including basins
and other related drainage facilities, recreational facilities, open
space improvements, or buffer or screen plantings which may be
required.
§ 99-14 § 99-15
99:376
(2) When requested by the developer, in order to facilitate financing,
the Borough Council shall furnish the developer with a signed copy
of a resolution indicating approval of the final plat contingent upon
the developer obtaining a satisfactory financial security. The final
plat or record plan shall not be signed nor recorded until the
financial improvements agreement is executed. The resolution or
letter of contingent approval shall expire and be deemed to be
revoked if the financial security agreement (see Exhibit IV for a
sample security agreement74) is not executed within 90 days of the
approval of the resolution unless a written extension is granted by
the Borough Council; such extension shall not be unreasonably
withheld and shall be placed in writing at the request of the
developer.
(3) Without limitation as to other types of financial security which the
Borough may approve, which approval shall not be unreasonably
withheld, federal or commonwealth chartered lending institution
irrevocable letters of credit (see Exhibit V for a sample letter of
credit75) and restrictive or escrow accounts in such lending
institutions shall be deemed acceptable financial security for the
purposes of this section.
(4) Such financial security shall be posted with a bonding company or
federal or commonwealth chartered lending institution chosen by
the party posting the financial security, provided said bonding
company or lending institution is authorized to conduct such
business within the commonwealth.
(5) Such bond, or other security, shall provide for, and secure to the
public, the completion of any improvements which may be required
on or before the date fixed in the formal action of approval or
accompanying agreement for completion of the improvements.
(6) The amount of financial security to be posted for the completion of
the required improvements shall be equal to 110% of the cost of
completion estimated as of 90 days following the date scheduled for
completion by the developer. Annually, the Borough may adjust the
amount of the financial security by comparing the actual cost of the
improvements which have been completed and the estimated cost
for the completion of the remaining improvements as of the
expiration of the 90th day after either the original date scheduled
for completion or a rescheduled date of completion. Subsequent to
said adjustment, the Borough may require the developer to post
additional security in order to assure that the financial security
equals said 110%. Any additional security shall be posted by the
developer in accordance with this subsection.
74.Editor's Note: Exhibit IV is included at the end of this chapter.
75.Editor's Note: Exhibit V is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 99-15 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 99-15
99:377
(7) The amount of financial security required shall be based upon an
estimate of the cost of completion of the required improvements,
submitted by the applicant or developer and prepared by a
professional engineer licensed as such in this commonwealth and
certified by such engineer to be a fair and reasonable estimate of
such cost. The Borough, upon the recommendation of the Borough
Engineer, may refuse to accept such estimate for good cause
shown. If the applicant or developer and the Borough are unable to
agree upon an estimate, then the estimate shall be recalculated,
and recertified by another professional engineer licensed as such in
this commonwealth and chosen mutually by the Borough and the
applicant or developer. The estimate certified by the third engineer
shall be presumed fair and reasonable and shall be the final
estimate. In the event that a third engineer is so chosen, fees for
the services of said engineer shall be paid equally by the Borough
and the applicant or developer.
(8) If the party posting the financial security requires more than one
year from the date of posting of the financial security to complete
the required improvements, the amount of financial security may
be increased by an additional 10% for each one-year period beyond
the first anniversary date from posting of financial security or to an
amount not exceeding 110% of the cost of completing the required
improvements as reestablished on or about the expiration of the
preceding one-year period by using the above bidding procedure.
(9) In the case where development is projected over a period of years,
the Borough Council may authorize submission of final plats by
sections or stages of development subject to such requirements or
guaranties as to improvements in future sections or stages of
development as it finds essential for the protection of any finally
approved section of the development.
(10) As the work of installing the required improvements proceeds, the
party posting the financial security may request the Borough
Council to release or authorize the release, from time to time, of
such portions of the financial security necessary for payment to the
contractor or contractors performing the work. Any such requests
shall be in writing addressed to the Borough Council, and the
Borough Council shall have 45 days from receipt of such request
within which to allow the Borough Engineer to certify, in writing, to
the Borough Council that such portion of the work upon the
improvements has been completed in accordance with the
approved plat. Upon such certification the Borough Council shall
authorize release by the bonding company or lending institution of
an amount as estimated by the Borough Engineer fairly
representing the value of the improvements completed or, if the
Borough Council fails to act within said forty-five-day period, the
Borough Council shall be deemed to have approved the release of
funds as requested. The Borough Council may, prior to final release
§ 99-15 § 99-15
99:378
at the time of completion and certification by its engineer, require
retention of 10% of the estimated cost of the aforesaid
improvements.
(11) Where the Borough Council accepts dedication of all or some of the
required improvements following completion, the Borough Council
may require the posting of financial security to secure structural
integrity of said improvements as well as the functioning of said
improvements in accordance with the design and specifications as
depicted on the final plat for a term not to exceed 18 months from
the date of acceptance of dedication. Said financial security shall
be of the same type as otherwise required in this section with
regard to installation of such improvements, and the amount of the
financial security shall not exceed 15% of the actual cost of
installation of said improvements.
(12) If water mains or sanitary sewer lines, or both, along with
apparatus or facilities related thereto, are to be installed under the
jurisdiction and pursuant to the rules and regulations of a public
utility or municipal authority separate and distinct from the
Borough, financial security to assure proper completion and
maintenance thereof shall be posted in accordance with the
regulations of the controlling public utility or municipal authority
and shall not be included within the financial security as otherwise
required by this chapter.
(13) If financial security has been provided in lieu of the completion of
improvements required as a condition for the final approval of a
plat as set forth in this section, the Borough shall not condition the
issuance of building, grading or other permits relating to the
erection or placement of improvements, including buildings, upon
the lots or land as depicted upon the final plat upon actual
completion of the improvements depicted upon the approved final
plat. Moreover, if said financial security has been provided,
occupancy permits for any building or buildings to be erected shall
not be withheld following the improvement of the streets providing
access to and from existing public roads to such building or
buildings to a mud-free or otherwise permanently passable
condition, as well as the completion of all other improvements as
depicted upon the approved plat, either upon the lot or lots or
beyond the lot or lots in question if such improvements are
necessary for the reasonable use of or occupancy of the building or
buildings.
E. Release from improvement bond.
(1) When the developer has completed all of the necessary and
appropriate improvements, the developer shall notify the Borough
Council, in writing, by certified or registered mail, of the
completion of the aforesaid improvements and shall send a copy
thereof to the Borough Engineer. The Borough Council or its
§ 99-15 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 99-15
99:379
designated agents shall, within 10 days after receipt of such notice,
direct and authorize the Borough Engineer to inspect all of the
aforesaid improvements. The Borough Engineer shall, thereupon,
file a report in writing, with the Borough Council, and shall
promptly mail a copy of the same to the developer by certified
or registered mail. The report shall be made and mailed within
30 days after receipt by the Borough Engineer of the aforesaid
authorization from the Borough Council; said report shall be
detailed and shall indicate approval or rejection of said
improvements, either in whole or in part, and if said improvements,
or any portion thereof, shall not be approved or shall be rejected
by the Borough Engineer, said report shall contain a statement of
reasons for such nonapproval or rejection.
(2) The Borough Council shall notify the developer, within 15 days of
receipt of the engineer's report, in writing by certified or registered
mail of the action of said Borough Council with relation thereto.
(3) If the Borough Council or the Borough Engineer fails to comply
with the time limitation provisions contained herein, all
improvements will be deemed to have been approved and the
developer shall be released from all liability, pursuant to its
performance guaranty bond or other security agreement.
(4) If any portion of the said improvements shall not be approved or
shall be rejected by the Borough Council, the developer shall
proceed to complete the same and, upon completion, the same
procedure of notification, as outlined herein, shall be followed.
(5) Nothing herein, however, shall be construed in limitation of the
developer's right to contest or question, by legal proceedings or
otherwise, any determination of the Borough Council or the
Borough Engineer.
(6) Where herein reference is made to the Borough Engineer, he shall
be as a consultant thereto.
(7) The applicant or developer shall reimburse the Borough for the
reasonable and necessary expense incurred for the inspection of
improvements according to a schedule of fees adopted by
resolution of the Borough Council and as from time to time
amended. Such expense shall be reasonable and in accordance
with the ordinary and customary fees charged by the Borough
Engineer or consultant for work performed for similar services in
the community, but in no event shall the fees exceed the rate or cost
charged by the engineer or consultant to the Borough when fees
are not reimbursed or otherwise imposed on applicants.
(a) In the event the applicant disputes the amount of any such
expense in connection with the inspection of improvements,
the applicant shall, within 10 working days of the date of
billing, notify the Borough that such expenses are disputed as
§ 99-15 § 99-15
99:380
unreasonable or unnecessary, in which case the Borough shall
not delay or disapprove a subdivision or land development
application or any approval or permit related to development
due to the applicant's request over disputed engineer
expenses.
(b) If, within 20 days from the date of billing, the Borough and the
applicant cannot agree on the amount of expenses which are
reasonable and necessary, then the applicant and the Borough
shall jointly, by mutual agreement, appoint another
professional engineer licensed as such in the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania to review the said expenses and make a
determination as to the amount thereof which is reasonable
and necessary.
(c) The professional engineer so appointed shall hear such
evidence and review such documentation as the professional
engineer in his or her sole opinion deems necessary and render
a decision within 50 days of the billing date. The applicant shall
be required to pay the entire amount determined in the
decision immediately.
(d) In the event that the Borough and applicant cannot agree upon
the professional engineer to be appointed within 20 days of the
billing date, then, upon application of either party, the
President Judge of the Court of Common Pleas of judicial
district in which the Borough is located (or if at the time there
be no President Judge, then the senior active judge then
sitting) shall appoint such engineer, who, in that case, shall be
neither the Borough Engineer nor any professional engineer
who has been retained by, or performed services for, the
Borough or the applicant within the preceding five years.
(e) The fee of the appointed professional engineer for determining
the reasonable and necessary expenses shall be paid by the
applicant if the amount of payment required in the decision is
equal to or greater than the original bill. If the amount of
payment required in the decision is less than the original bill by
$1,000 or more, the Borough shall pay the fee of the
professional engineer, but otherwise the Borough and the
applicant shall each pay 1/2 of the fee of the appointed
professional engineer.
F. Before acting on any subdivision plat, the Borough Council may hold a
public hearing thereon after public notice.
G. The Borough Council, upon the recommendation of the Commission,
shall act on any such final plat not later than 90 days following the date
of the regular meeting of the Borough Council or the Planning
Commission (whichever first reviews the application) following the date
the application is filed, provided that, shall the said next regular
§ 99-15 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 99-15
99:381
meeting occur more than 30 days following the filing of the application,
the said ninety-day period shall be measured from the 30th day
following the day the application has been filed. In the event that
any alteration of requirements from this chapter is requested by the
applicant or is deemed necessary by the Commission for approval,
the alteration and the reason for its necessity shall be entered in the
records of the Commission.
H. The Borough Council shall determine whether the final plat shall be
approved, or disapproved, and shall notify the applicant in writing
thereof, including, if approved with conditions or disapproved, a
statement of reasons for such action, not later than 15 days following
the decision.
I. When the application is not approved in terms as filed, the decision
shall specify the defects found in the application and describe the
requirements which have not been met and shall, in each case, cite the
provisions of this chapter.
J. Failure of the Borough Council to render a decision and communicate it
to the applicant within the time and in the manner required herein shall
be deemed an approval of the application in terms as presented unless
the applicant has agreed in writing to an extension of time or change in
the prescribed manner of presentation of communication of the
decision, in which case, failure to meet the extended time or change in
manner of presentation of communication shall have like effect. (A
sample "Agreement to Extend the Time for Rendering and
Communicating a Decision on Certain Preliminary and/or Final
Subdivision/Land Development Plans" is contained in Exhibit III
herein.76)
K. No changes, erasures, modifications, or revisions shall be made on any
final plat of a subdivision or land development after approval has been
given by the Borough Council, and endorsed in writing on the plat,
unless the plat is first resubmitted to the Borough Council.
L. Upon the approval of a final plat the Borough of Steelton shall within 90
days of such final approval record such plat in the Office of the
Recorder of Deeds of Dauphin County.
M. Whenever plat approval by the Borough Council is required, the
Dauphin County Recorder of Deeds shall not accept any plat for
recording unless such plat officially indicates the approval of the
Borough Council and review by the Dauphin County Planning
Commission.
N. In accordance with 508(4) of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, Act 247, as amended,77 when an application for approval of a
plat, whether preliminary or final, has been approved or approved
76.Editor's Note: Exhibit III is included at the end of this chapter.
77.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10508(4).
§ 99-15 § 99-15
99:382
§ 99-16. Final plat: specifications.
Ten copies and one Mylar of the final plat in the form of a map or series
of maps on sheets 24 inches by 36 inches, drawn to scale not smaller than
100 feet to the inch and clearly labeled "FINAL PLAT," shall be submitted in
application for review and approval. When more than one sheet is required,
an index sheet of the entire subdivision or land development shall be shown
on a sheet of the same size. The final plat shall be drawn in ink and
shall show the following information in addition to those items previously
specified in § 99-14, Preliminary plat: specifications):
subject to conditions acceptable to the applicant, no subsequent change
or amendment in the zoning, subdivision or other governing ordinance
or plan shall be applied to adversely affect the right of the applicant to
commence and to complete any aspect of the approved development in
accordance with the terms of such approval within five years from such
approval.
O. Borough Council may delegate its authority under subsections A
through D hereof except for final action approving or denying release
from the improvement bond to the Borough Manager or other Borough
officer or employee.
A. Primary control points, or description and "ties" to such control points,
to which all dimensions, angles, bearings, and similar data on the
subdivision or land development plat shall be referred.
B. Tract boundary lines, right-of-way lines of streets, easements (with
bearings and distances), and other right-of-way and property lines of
residential lots or parcels in unit, cooperative or condominium
subdivisions, and other sites with accurate dimensions, bearings, or
deflection angles, and radii, arcs, and central angles of all curves.
C. Locations and descriptions of survey monuments. All permanent
reference monuments shown and described on the plat.
D. Certification of title showing that the applicant is the owner of land,
agent of the owner or tenant with permission of the owner. (Example
contained in Exhibit I herein.78)
E. Statement by the owner dedicating streets, rights-of-way and any sites
for public uses which are to be dedicated. (Example contained in
Exhibit I herein.79)
F. Proposed protective covenants running with the land, if any.
G. Purpose for which sites other than residential lots or parcels in unit,
cooperative or condominium subdivisions are dedicated or reserved.
78.Editor's Note: Exhibit I is included at the end of this chapter.
79.Editor's Note: Exhibit I is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 99-15 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 99-16
99:383
H. Names of record owners of adjoining unplatted land.
I. Reference to recorded subdivision plats of adjoining platted land by
record name, date, and number.
J. A final stormwater management/erosion and sedimentation control plan
pursuant to the rules and regulations of the DEP (Title 25, Part 1,
Subpart C, Article II, Chapter 102 of the Pennsylvania Code) and
evidence that any required erosion and sedimentation control permit
has been issued. If an erosion and sedimentation control permit is not
required, the applicant shall provide evidence that the stormwater
management/erosion and sedimentation control plan has been
reviewed and approved by the County Conservation District Office.
However, if the District Office does not desire to review the plan, the
Borough Council may, at its discretion, have the plan reviewed by the
Borough Engineer. The cost of the review shall be paid by the applicant.
K. The final plat shall be accompanied by the following data and plans as
prescribed by the Borough Council or as required by the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania:
(1) Profiles of streets and alleys showing grades.
(2) Typical cross sections of each type of street, minor streets,
collector, etc., showing the width of right-of-way, width of cartway,
location and width of curbs and sidewalks, if required, and location
and size of utility mains. Each cross section shall be properly
labeled with the name of each street.
(3) Plan and profiles of proposed sanitary and stormwater sewers, with
grades and pipe size indicated, and a plan of any proposed water
distribution system showing pipe sizes and location of valves and
fire hydrants.
(4) Certificates of agreement to provide service from applicable utility
companies.
(5) In the case of subdivision and land development plans proposed for
the sale of lots only, the subdivider shall include on the final plat a
covenant with the land assuring the implementation of the erosion
and sedimentation control plan by the lot owners.
(6) A copy of the sewage "Plan Revision Module for Land
Development" approved by the DEP in compliance with the
requirements of the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act and 71.16
of Chapter 71 of Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code.
(7) When any portion of the tract proposed for subdivision or land
development is located within an identified flood district or
floodplain area, the following information shall be required as part
of the final plat and shall be prepared by a registered engineer or
surveyor:
§ 99-16 § 99-16
99:384
§ 99-17. As-built drawings.
When a facility is proposed for dedication to the Borough of Steelton, asbuilt
drawings shall be provided to the Borough of Steelton within 90 days
of construction completion.
(a) The exact location and elevation of all proposed buildings,
structures, roads, and public utilities to be constructed within
any identified floodplain area or district. All such maps shall
show contours at intervals of two feet and identify accurately
the boundaries of the floodplain areas, and shall be verified by
the Borough Engineer.
(b) Submission of the final plat shall also be accompanied by all
required permits and related documentation from the DEP, and
any other commonwealth agency, or the Borough of Steelton
where any alteration or relocation of a stream or watercourse
is proposed. In addition, documentation shall be submitted
indicating that all affected adjacent municipalities have been
notified of the proposed alteration or relocation. The
Department of Community Affairs and the Federal Insurance
Administrator shall also be notified whenever any such activity
is proposed.
(8) A final stormwater management plan, approved by the Borough
Engineer.
(9) Such other certificates, affidavits, endorsements, or dedications as
may be required by the Borough Council in the enforcement of
these regulations.
L. Water supply. If water is to be provided by means other than private
wells owned and maintained by the individual. Owners of lots within the
subdivision or development, applicants shall present evidence to the
Borough Council that the subdivision is to be supplied by a certified
public utility, a bona fide cooperative association of lot owners, or by a
municipal corporation, authority or utility. A copy of a certificate of
public convenience from the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission or
an application for such certificate, a cooperative agreement or a
commitment or agreement to serve the area in question, whichever is
appropriate, shall be acceptable.
§ 99-16 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 99-17
99:385

ARTICLE V
Design Standards
§ 99-18. Application.
§ 99-19. Streets.
A. The following principles, standards, and requirements will be applied
by the Borough Council and Planning Commission in their review and
evaluation of all subdivision and land development plat applications.
B. The standards and requirements contained herein shall be considered
the minimum for the promotion of the public health, safety,
convenience, and general welfare.
C. Where literal compliance with the standards and requirements
contained herein is clearly impractical, the Borough Council may
modify or waive such through the alteration of requirements process
set forth in Article VIII of this chapter.
D. Subdivision and land development plats shall give due consideration to
official plans of the Borough of Steelton, Dauphin County and region, or
to such parts thereof as may be adopted pursuant to statute.
E. Proposed land uses shall conform to Chapter 120, Zoning, of this Code,
as amended.
F. Land subject to hazards to life, health, or property, such as may arise
from fire, flood, disease, or other causes, shall not be platted for
development purposes unless such hazards have been eliminated or
unless the plat shall show adequate safeguards against them, which
shall be approved by the appropriate regulatory agencies.
A. General standards.
(1) Proposed streets shall be properly related to such street plans or
parts thereof as have been officially adopted by the Borough of
Steelton and shall be coordinated with existing or proposed streets
in adjoining subdivisions or land developments. Further, proposed
streets shall be properly related to county, regional or state
transportation plans as have been prepared and adopted as
prescribed by law.
(2) Streets shall be laid out to preserve the integrity of their design.
Local access streets shall be laid out to discourage their use by
through traffic and, where possible, collector and arterial streets
shall be designed for use by through traffic.
(3) Streets shall be related to the topography so as to establish usable
lots and satisfactory street grades.
(4) Proposed street arrangements shall make provisions for the
continuation of existing streets in adjoining areas; the proper
§ 99-18 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 99-19
99:387
projection of streets into adjoining undeveloped or unplanted
areas; and the continuation of proposed streets to the boundaries
of the tract being subdivided.
(5) New half or partial streets shall be prohibited except where
essential to reasonable subdivision of a tract in conformance with
the other requirements and standards of these regulations and
where, in addition, satisfactory assurance for dedication of the
remaining part of the street can be obtained.
(6) Names of new streets shall not duplicate existing or platted street
names, or approximate such names by the use of suffixes such as
"lane," "way," "drive," "court," "avenue." In approving the names of
streets, cognizance shall be given to existing or platted street
names within the postal delivery district served by the local post
office. New streets shall bear the same name or number of any
continuation of alignment with an existing or platted street.
(7) Insofar as possible, streets on which structures utilizing solar
access are proposed to front upon shall be oriented along an eastwest
axis with maximum deviations permitted up to 25 degrees;
provided that such orientations are feasible based on soil and slope
conditions and are a practical means of providing safe and
convenient access and circulation.
(8) Proposed private streets (streets not offered for dedication) are
prohibited.
(9) Proposed private service access for purposes of providing a means
of secondary access to a lot are permitted as deemed appropriate
by the Borough Council and Borough Engineer.
B. Street classification. Three functional classifications of streets and
roads, as classified in the Borough of Steelton Comprehensive Plan, are
established as follows:
(1) Arterial. This classification includes highways which provide
intracounty or intermunicipal traffic of substantial volumes.
Generally, these highways shall accommodate operating speeds of
55 miles per hour.
(2) Collector. This classification is intended to include those highways
which connect minor streets to arterial highways and generally
serve intracounty and intramunicipal traffic. They may serve as
traffic corridors connecting residential areas with industrial,
shopping and other services. They may penetrate residential areas.
Generally, these highways will accommodate operating speeds of
35 to 45 miles per hour or under.
(3) Minor. This classification is intended to include streets and roads
that provide direct access to abutting land and connections to
higher classes of roadways. Traffic volumes will be low and travel
§ 99-19 § 99-19
99:388
distances generally short. These streets and roads shall be
designed for operating speeds of 25 miles per hour or under.
C. Street widths.
(1) Minimum street right-of-way and cartway widths shall be required
as presented in Table 1.
(2) Provision for additional street width (right-of-way) may be required
when determined to be necessary by the Borough Council in
specific cases for:
(a) Public safety and convenience.
(b) Parking in commercial and industrial areas and in areas of high
density development (see Table 1).
TABLE 1
STREETS
Arterial Streets
Row width 80 feet to 120 feet
Shouldersa As determined by the governing body and
Planning Commission after consultation with
PennDOT
Without curbs As determined by the governing body and
Planning Commission after consultation with
PennDOT
With curbs As determined by the governing body and
Planning Commission after consultation with
PennDOT
Base materials As determined by the governing body and
Planning Commission after consultation with
PennDOT
Paving As determined by the governing body and
Planning Commission after consultation with
PennDOT
TABLE 1
STREETS
Collector Streets
Row width 60 feet
Shouldersa 6 feet each
Without curbs 28 feet
With curbs 34 feet
§ 99-19 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 99-19
99:389
TABLE 1
STREETS
Collector Streets
Base materials 10 inches — #4 crushed aggregate
or
6 feet — 2A subbase and 6 inches BCBC
Paving 1 1/2 inches — ID-2 wearing course
TABLE 1
STREETS
Minor Streets
(General)
Row width 50 feet
Shouldersa 4 feet each
Without curbs 24 feet
With curbs 30 feet
Base materials 6 inches — #4 crushed aggregate
or
6 inches — 2A subbase and 5 inches BCBC
Paving 1 1/2 inches — ID-2 wearing course
TABLE 1
STREETS
Minor Streets
(Industrial/Commercial Uses)
Row width 60 feet
Shouldersa 6 feet each
Without curbs 28 feet
With curbs 34 feet
Base materials 8 inches — #4 crushed aggregate
or
6 inches — 2A subbase and 5 inches BCBC
Paving 1 1/2 inches — ID-2 wearing course
§ 99-19 § 99-19
99:390
TABLE 1
STREETS
Cul-de-sac
Row width (diameter) 100 feet
Shouldersa 4 feet each
Without curbs
(diameter)
80 feet
With curbs (diameter) 80 feet
Base materials 6 inches — #4 crushed aggregate
or
6 inches — 2A subbase and 5 inches
BCBC
Paving 1 1/2 inches — ID-2 wearing course
TABLE 1
STREETS
Service Drive
(Private)
Row width N/A
Shouldersa N/A
Without curbs 20 feet
With curbs 20 feet
Base materials 8 inches — #3A crushed aggregate
Paving: 1 1/2 inches — ID-2 binder
1 1/2 inches — ID-2 wearing course
a NOTE: Required only in absence of curbing.
(3) Minimum requirements may be adjusted for traffic volume or loads
by the Borough Engineer.
D. Dead-end streets.
(1) Dead-end streets are prohibited unless designed for future access
to adjoining properties.
(2) Any dead-end streets, for access to an adjoining property or
because of authorized phased development, shall be provided with
a temporary, all-weather turnaround within the subdivision or/and
land development; and the use of such turnaround shall be
guaranteed to the public until such time as the street is extended.
§ 99-19 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 99-19
99:391
(3) Unless future extension is clearly impractical or undesirable, the
turnaround right-of-way shall be placed adjacent to the tract
boundary with sufficient additional width provided along the
boundary line to permit extension of the street at full width.
E. Culs-de-sac.
(1) Cul-de-sac streets serving residential uses, permanently designed
as such, shall not exceed 800 feet in length and shall not furnish
access to more than 24 dwelling units.
(2) Cul-de-sac streets servicing commercial and/or industrial uses shall
be adequate for the type of use to be serviced as approved by the
Borough Engineer, but in no case shall it exceed 800 feet in length.
Unless future extension is clearly impractical or undesirable, the
turnaround right-of-way shall be placed adjacent to the tract
boundary with sufficient additional width provided along the
boundary line to permit extension of the street at full width.
(3) All cul-de-sac streets, whether permanently or temporarily
designed as such, shall be provided at the closed end with a fully
paved turnaround.
(4) The minimum width to the pavement edge or curbline shall be 40
feet, and the minimum width of the right-of-way line shall be 50
feet.
(5) Drainage of cul-de-sac streets shall preferably be towards the open
end. If drainage is toward the closed end, it shall be conducted
away in an underground storm sewer.
(6) The center-line grade on a cul-de-sac street shall not exceed 10%,
and the grade of the diameter of the turnaround shall not exceed
5%.
F. Driveways.
(1) Private driveways on corner lots shall be located at least 40 feet
from the point of intersection of the nearest street right-of-way
lines or past the minimum sight triangle, whichever is greater.
(2) In order to provide a safe and convenient means of access, grades
on private driveways shall be so designed to allow for the
unimpeded flow of stormwater runoff. In addition, driveways must
be stabilized to their full width to prevent erosion. Entrances shall
be rounded at a minimum radius of 10 feet, or shall have a flare
construction that is equivalent to the radius at the point of
intersection with the cartway edge (curbline) (Refer to PennDOT,
Guidelines for Design of Local Roads and Streets, Publication
Number 70, as revised.)
(3) All driveways shall be located, designed and constructed in such a
manner as not to interfere or be inconsistent with the design and
§ 99-19 § 99-19
99:392
maintenance and drainage of or the safe and convenient passage of
traffic.
G. Horizontal and vertical curves. In order to provide adequate sight
distance and ensure proper alignment of streets, horizontal and vertical
curve design shall be in accordance with PennDOT, Guidelines for
Design of Local Roads and Streets, Publication Number 70, as revised.
H. Intersections.
(1) Streets shall intersect as nearly as possible at right angles, and no
street shall intersect another at an angle of less than 75 degrees.
(2) Intersections involving the junction of more than two streets are
prohibited.
(3) Streets intersecting another street shall either intersect directly
opposite to each other, or shall be separated by at least 150 feet
between center lines, measured along the center line of the street
being intersected.
(4) Intersections shall be approached on all sides by a straight leveling
area, the grade of which shall not exceed 5% within 60 feet of the
intersection of the nearest right-of-way lines.
(5) Intersections with major streets shall be located not less than 800
feet apart, measured from center line to center line, along the
center line of the major street.
(6) At intersections of streets the curb or edge of pavement radii shall
not be less than the following:
Intersection
Minimum Simple Curve Radii of
Curb or Edge of Pavement
(feet)
Collector with collector
street
35
Collector with minor
street
25
Minor street with minor
street
20
(7) Radius corners or diagonal cutoffs must be provided on the
property lines substantially concentric with or parallel to the chord
of the curb radius corners.
I. Intersection sight distance and clear sight triangles. Adequate sight
distances shall be provided at all intersections of streets and for
driveways intersecting a street in accordance with the guidelines
established in the PennDOT publication entitled "Guidelines for the
§ 99-19 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 99-19
99:393
Design of Local Roads and Streets" (Publication Number 70M, as
revised).
J. Street grades.
(1) The grades of streets shall not be less than the minimum or more
than the maximum requirements listed below:
Type of Street
Minimum
Grade Maximum Grade
All streets 0.58 As determined by the
governing body after
consultation with the
Commission and PennDOT
Collector
streets
0.58 8%
Minor streets 0.58 10%
Service drives 0.58 12%
Street
intersection
0.58 5%
(2) On minor streets and service drives, grades greater than 10% shall
not be more than 400 feet in length, or as determined by the
Borough Council.
K. Slopes of banks along streets. The slope of banks along streets
measured perpendicular to the street center line shall be no steeper
than the following:
(1) One foot of vertical measurement for three feet of horizontal
measurement for fills.
(2) One foot of vertical measurement for two feet of horizontal
measurement for cuts.
L. Access roads and drives.
(1) Direct access from residential lots to an arterial street shall be
avoided whenever possible. Where such direct access cannot be
avoided, adequate turnaround space shall be provided behind the
right-of-way line.
(2) A valid highway occupancy permit shall be obtained from PennDOT.
Driveways serving single-family residences shall intersect streets
at angles of no less than 60 degrees. All other driveways or access
roads shall intersect streets at right angles, where possible, and in
no instance shall such intersection be less than 75 degrees.
(3) The width of access roads or driveways shall be in accordance with
the following standards:
§ 99-19 § 99-19
99:394
§ 99-20. Easements.
(a) For multifamily residential and all nonresidential
developments or subdivisions, access roads shall be no less
than 22 feet in width at the street line, and shall clearly be
defined by the use of curbing.
(b) For single-family residential subdivisions, driveways shall be
not less than 10 feet in width and no greater than 20 feet in
width at the street line.
(4) In order to provide for safe and convenient ingress and egress
points, access roads and driveway entrances shall be rounded at
the following minimum radii:
(a) For multifamily residential and all nonresidential
developments or subdivisions, access road entrances shall be
rounded at minimum radius of 10 feet.
(b) For single-family residential subdivisions, driveway entrances
shall be rounded at a minimum radius of five feet.
(5) The grades on access roads or driveways shall not exceed the
following:
(a) Eight percent when access is to an arterial street.
(b) Ten percent when access is to a collector or minor street.
A. Easements shall be provided for drainage facilities, overhead or
underground public utility facilities in consultation with the Borough
Engineer, the electrical, telephone, cable and water utilities, PennDOT,
and the Borough authority. Easements for sanitary sewers that are not
in the street right-of-way shall be exclusive for that purpose, and shall
be subject to approval by the Borough Authority and Borough Council.
(1) The minimum width of such easements shall be 20 feet. Additional
width may be required by the Commission and/or Authority. There
shall be a minimum ten-foot building setback from such easements.
(2) Wherever possible all easements for utilities above-ground shall be
centered on the side or rear lot lines, or along the front lot lines. All
sanitary sewer easements shall be placed in the street right-of-way
wherever possible.
B. Where a subdivision and/or land development is traversed by a
watercourse, drainageway channel or stream, there shall be provided a
drainage easement width to be determined by Borough Council based
on recommendation of the Borough Engineer, and/or other regulatory
agencies, conforming substantially with the line of such watercourse,
drainageway, channel or stream and such width as will be adequate to
preserve the unimpeded flow of natural drainage or for the purpose of
widening, deepening, relocating, improving or protecting such
§ 99-19 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 99-20
99:395
§ 99-21. Blocks.
drainage facilities or for the purpose of installing a stormwater sewer.
Under no circumstances shall the easement be less than 25 feet.
C. Where a subdivision or land development involves the use of solar
access, solar skyspace easements will be provided, shall be in writing,
and shall be subject to the same conveyancing and instrument
recording requirements as other easements. Any such easements shall
be appurtenant; shall run with the land benefited and burdened; and
shall be defined and limited by conditions stated in the instrument of
conveyance. Instruments creating a solar skyspace easement shall
include but not be limited to:
(1) A permanently identifiable description of the skyspace above the
burdened land into which trees, buildings and/or other
obstructions as specified by the easement shall not be permitted to
encroach;
(2) Any terms or conditions under which the solar skyspace easement
is granted or will be terminated; and
(3) Any provision for compensation by the owner of the land benefiting
from the solar skyspace easement, or compensation of the owner of
the land burdened by the solar skyspace easement for maintaining
the easement.
D. Where necessary for access to public or common lands, a pedestrian
easement shall be provided with a width of no less than 10 feet.
Additional width may be required by the Commission depending on the
purpose and use of the easement.
A. The length, width, shape, and design of blocks shall be determined with
due regard to the provision of adequate sites for buildings of the type
proposed, to the land use and/or zoning requirements of the
municipality, the topography of the land being subdivided or developed,
and the requirements for safe and convenient vehicular and pedestrian
circulation.
B. Blocks shall not exceed 1,200 feet in length, nor be less than 600 feet in
length. Where practical, blocks along collector or arterial streets shall
be not less than 1,000 feet in length.
C. Residential blocks shall generally be of sufficient depth to
accommodate two tiers of lots, except where reverse frontage lots
bordering an arterial or collector street are used or where, due to the
contour of the land, or the necessary layout of the subdivision, there is
insufficient depth between intersecting streets for such two-tier design.
D. Blocks for commercial and industrial areas may vary from the elements
of design contained in this section if the nature of use requires other
treatment. In such cases, off-street parking for employees and
§ 99-20 § 99-21
99:396
§ 99-22. Lots.
customers shall be provided along with safe and convenient limited
access to the street system. Space for off-street loading shall also
be provided with limited access to the street system. Extension of
streets, railroad access rights-of-way, and utilities shall be provided as
necessary.
E. Crosswalks or interior pedestrian walks shall be required in blocks
exceeding 1,000 feet in length to provide for pedestrian circulation or
access to community facilities. Such walks shall be stabilized for a
width of not less than four feet, shall be located in easements not less
than 10 feet in width, and shall, insofar as possible, be located in the
center of any such block.
A. General standards.
(1) The size, depth, width and orientation of lots shall conform to
applicable regulations of Chapter 120, Zoning, of this Code.
(2) Side lot lines shall, insofar as practical, run from due north to south
where the resulting angle of incidence with the street is not less
than 30 degrees. A variation of up to 25 degrees east or west of the
north/south axis is permitted.
(3) Where feasible, lot lines shall follow Borough of Steelton
boundaries rather than cross them, in order to avoid jurisdictional
problems.
(4) If, after subdividing, there exists remnants of land, they shall be
either:
(a) Incorporated in existing or proposed lots; or
(b) Legally dedicated to public use, if acceptable to the
municipality.
B. Lot frontage.
(1) All lots shall abut a public street, existing or proposed.
(2) Double or reverse frontage lots shall be avoided except where
required to provide separation of residential development from
major streets or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography
or orientation.
(3) No residential lots shall be created which front upon a limited
access highway. Furthermore, no major subdivisions and/or land
developments shall be created which front upon an arterial street.
C. Building setback.
(1) Front, side, and rear setbacks shall be in conformance with the
Chapter 120, Zoning, of this Code, as amended.
§ 99-21 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 99-22
99:397
§ 99-23. Erosion and sedimentation control.
(2) Buildings shall be oriented such that their longest axis faces within
25 degrees of true south whenever lot size, street orientations, soil,
and slope conditions make this practical.
A. In the event that any person shall intend to make changes in the
contour of any land or engage in earthmoving activity, whether for
subdivision, land development or any purpose, such person, who is
required to obtain a permit, shall obtain such a permit from the DEP in
accordance with the requirements of the "Rules and Regulations,"
Chapter 102, Erosion Control, authorized under P.L. 1987, June 22,
1937.80
B. Furthermore, under the requirements noted above, the Borough of
Steelton shall notify the DEP immediately upon receipt of an application
for a building permit involving earthmoving activity which affects five
acres or more of land.
C. The Borough shall not issue a building permit to those engaged in
earthmoving activities requiring a DEP permit until the DEP has issued
the permit.
D. An erosion and sedimentation control plan must be prepared for a
single lot or more where subdivision, land development or other
earthmoving activity is proposed. The plan must be submitted:
(1) As required by the rules and regulations of the DEP noted above;
and
(2) As required by the Pennsylvania Clean Streams Law, Act 222, July
31, 1970, as amended.81
E. Such erosion and sedimentation control plan shall be submitted to the
Borough Engineer and County Conservation District for review, and a
copy of the plan and review comments shall be submitted to the
Commission as part of the preliminary and final plat applications.
F. In the preparation of erosion and sedimentation control plans, the
person preparing such plans shall consult with the County Conservation
District to determine the measures needed to control erosion and
sedimentation. The current DEP "Erosion and Sedimentation Pollution
Control Program Manual," as amended, shall be used in the preparation
of such plans. Copies are available in the Dauphin County Conservation
District office.
80.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
81.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 99-22 § 99-24
99:398
§ 99-24. Stormwater management.
A stormwater management plan shall be prepared in accordance with the
provisions established in the Borough of Steelton Stormwater Management
Ordinance (Chapter 93).
§ 99-25. Natural features preservation.
The design and development of all subdivision and land development plans
preserve, whenever possible, natural features which will aid in providing
open space for recreation and conditions generally favorable to the health,
safety and welfare of the residents of the Borough. These natural features
include the natural terrain of the site, woodland areas, large trees, natural
watercourses and bodies of water, wetlands, rock outcroppings and scenic
views.
§ 99-26. Design standards in floodplains.
A. Tree preservation and planting.
(1) Trees, with a caliper of six inches or more as measured at a height
of 4 1/2 feet above existing grade, shall not be removed unless they
are located within the proposed cartway or sidewalk portion of the
street right-of-way, or within 15 feet of the foundation area of a
proposed building. In areas where trees are retained, the original
grade level shall be maintained, if possible, so as not to disturb the
trees. Trees shall not be planted in the street right-of-way.
(2) Where existing trees are removed along the street right-of-way,
supplemental planting, in the form of appropriate street trees, shall
be introduced. See § 99-39 for additional details concerning
landscaping.
(3) The location and species of trees and other landscaping elements
shall be such that when grown to full maturity shall not impede
access to solar energy collectors on neighboring structures.
B. Lake, stream, and river frontage preservation.
(1) A maintenance easement for the Borough or its designee, with a
minimum width of 25 feet, shall be provided along all stream and
river banks and lake edges. Such easement, in all cases, shall be of
sufficient width to provide proper maintenance.
(2) Lake, stream, and river frontage shall be preserved as open space
whenever possible.
(3) Access shall be provided to the water and maintenance easement
area. The width of such access points shall not be less than 50 feet.
C. Topography. The existing natural terrain of the proposed subdivision
tract shall be retained whenever possible. Cut and fill operations shall
be kept to a minimum.
§ 99-24 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 99-26
99:399
A. General standards.
(1) Where not prohibited by this or any other laws or ordinances, land
located in any identified floodplain area or district may be platted
for development with the provision that the developer construct all
buildings and structures to preclude flood damage in accordance
with this and any other local, state and federal laws and ordinances
regulating such development.
(2) Building sites for residences or any other type of dwelling or
accommodation shall not be permitted in any identified floodway
area or district. Sites for these uses may be permitted outside the
elevated 1 1/2 feet above the regulatory flood elevation. If fill is
used to raise the elevation of a site, the fill area shall extend out
laterally for a distance of at least 15 feet beyond the limits of the
proposed structures.
(3) Building sites for structures or buildings other than for residential
uses shall not be permitted in any identified floodway area or
district. Also, such sites for structures or buildings outside the
floodway shall be protected as provided for in Subsection A(2)
above. However, the Borough Council may allow the subdivision
and/or development of areas or sites for commercial and industrial
uses at an elevation below the regulatory flood elevation if the
developer otherwise protects the area to that height or assures that
the buildings or structures will be floodproofed at least up to that
height.
(4) If the Zoning Officer determines that only a part of a proposed plat
can be safely developed, he shall limit development to that part and
shall require that development proceed consistent with this
determination.
(5) When a developer does not intend to develop the plat himself and
the Borough determines that additional controls are required to
insure safe development, it may require the developer to impose
appropriate deed restrictions on the land. Such deed restrictions
shall be inserted in every deed and noted on every recorded plat.
B. Where any excavation or grading is proposed or where any existing
trees, shrubs or other vegetative cover will be removed, the developer
shall consult the County Conservation District representative
concerning plans for erosion and sediment control and to also obtain a
report on the soil characteristics of the site so that a determination can
be made as to the type and degree of development the site may
accommodate. Before undertaking any excavation or grading, the
developer shall obtain a grading and excavation permit, if such is
required.
C. Drainage facilities.
§ 99-26 § 99-26
99:400
§ 99-27. Recreation and open space.
(1) Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to convey the flow of
stormwater runoff in a safe and efficient manner. The system shall
insure proper drainage along streets and provide positive drainage
away from buildings.
(2) Plans shall be subject to the approval of the Borough. The Borough
may require a primarily underground system to accommodate
frequent floods and a secondary surface system to accommodate
larger, less frequent floods. Drainage plans shall be consistent with
local and regional drainage plans. The facilities shall be designed to
prevent the discharge or excess runoff onto adjacent properties.
D. Streets. The finished elevation of proposed streets and driveways shall
not be more than one foot below the regulatory flood elevation. The
Borough may require profiles and elevations of streets to determine
compliance with the requirements. Drainage openings shall be
sufficient to discharge flood flows without unduly increasing flood
heights.
E. Sanitary sewer facilities. All sanitary sewer systems located in any
designated floodplain district shall be floodproofed up to the regulatory
flood elevation.
F. Water facilities. All water systems located in any designated floodplain
district shall be floodproofed up to the regulatory flood elevation.
G. Other utilities and facilities. All other public and private utilities
including gas and electric shall be elevated or floodproofed to not less
than 1 1/2 feet above the regulatory flood elevation.
A. All residential subdivisions or land development plats submitted after
the effective date of this chapter shall provide for suitable and adequate
recreation in order to:
(1) Insure adequate recreational areas and facilities to serve the future
residents of the Borough;
(2) Maintain compliance with recreational standards as developed by
the National Recreation and Parks Association;
(3) Reduce increasing usage pressure on existing recreational areas
and facilities;
(4) Insure that all present and future residents have the opportunity to
engage in many and varied recreational pursuits; and to
(5) Reduce the possibility of the Borough becoming overburdened with
the development and maintenance of many very small, randomly
planned and widely separated recreation areas.
B. Exemptions and requirements.
§ 99-26 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 99-27
99:401
(1) The following are exempt or partially exempt from the provisions of
this chapter:
(a) Any single- and/or multifamily residential subdivision or land
development plan in a residential zone classification for which
a preliminary plan has been submitted prior to the effective
date of this chapter.
(b) Any residential subdivision or land development plan, whether
single and/or multifamily, that contains less than 30 dwelling
units may be exempted by the Borough Council from
dedicating land for recreational purposes, but shall pay the fee
in lieu of dedication as provided in this chapter. Yard
extensions shall be excluded from this requirement.
(2) The amount of land required to be provided for recreational
purposes for residential subdivisions or land development plans not
exempted from the provisions of this chapter shall be as follows:
(a) Single-family developments. In the case of a single-family
subdivision, the developer shall provide a minimum of 1,500
square feet per lot.
(b) Multiple-family developments. In multiple-family
developments, a minimum contiguous area of 10% of the total
area shall be provided for recreation exclusive of roadways of
the land being developed.
(3) A maximum of 25% of the total land area required by this chapter
to be provided for recreation may consist of floodplain areas.
(4) Such land set aside shall be suitable to serve the purpose of active
and/or passive recreation by reason of its size, shape, location and
topography and shall be subject to the approval of the Borough
Council.
(5) The developer shall satisfy the Borough Council that there are
adequate provisions to assure retention and all future maintenance
of such recreation area by maintaining ownership, or by providing
for and establishing an organization (e.g., homeowners'
association) for the ownership and maintenance of the recreation
area and such organization shall not be dissolved nor shall it
dispose of the recreation area by sale or otherwise, except to an
organization conceived and established to own and maintain the
recreation area without first offering to dedicate the same to the
Borough.
C. Recreation area location criteria. The Planning Commission and the
Borough Council, in exercising their duties regarding the approval of
subdivision and land development plans, shall consider the following
criteria in determining whether to approve the proposed location of
§ 99-27 § 99-27
99:402
recreation areas in the developer's subdivision and land development
plans:
(1) Site or sites shall be easily and safely accessible from all areas of
the development to be served, have good ingress and egress and
have access to a public road; however, no public road shall traverse
the site or sites.
(2) Site or sites shall have suitable topography and soil conditions for
use and development as a recreation area.
(3) Size and shape for the site or sites shall be suitable for
development as a particular type of park. Sites will be categorized
by the Borough using the standards established by the National
Recreation and Parks Association. (Publication Number 10005, as
revised).
(4) When designing and developing these recreation areas, it shall be
done according to the standards established by the National
Recreation and Parks Association.
(5) Site or sites shall, to the greatest extent practical, be easily
accessible to essential utilities, such as water, sewer and electric.
(6) Site or sites shall meet minimum size requirements for usable
acreage with respect to National Recreation and Parks Association
standards with 75% of such area having a maximum slope of 7%.
(7) Recreation sites shall be located in such a manner which allows
maximum practical solar access to neighboring structures.
(8) Where open space is being provided, it shall be located, wherever
possible, to provide a buffer from the shading effects of taller
structures or obstructions on existing or proposed shorter
buildings.
D. Dedication to municipality.
(1) In a case where the developer does not wish to retain the required
recreation area, such area may be offered for dedication to the
Borough for public use.
(2) In addition to approving the recreation site areas to be dedicated to
the Borough, the Planning Commission shall make its
recommendation to the Borough Council as to whether the
dedication shall be accepted by the Borough.
(3) Such areas dedicated to the Borough for public use shall be
suitable for recreational purposes by reason of size, shape,
location, topography and access.
(4) The Planning Commission may find dedication to be impractical
because of the size, shape, location, access, topography, drainage
§ 99-27 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 99-27
99:403
or other physical features of the land and that such dedication
would adversely affect the subdivision or land development and
its future residents or occupants, or that there is no land area
within the proposed subdivision which is practical for dedication
to the public because of size, access, topography or other physical
characteristics.
(5) When the Borough Council deems it to be in the public interest to
accept dedicated land, such acceptance shall be by means of a
signed resolution to which the property description of the
dedicated recreation area shall be attached.
E. Fee in lieu of dedication.
(1) Where the Borough Council agrees with the developer that because
of the size, shape, location, access, topography or other physical
features of the land that it is impractical to dedicate land to the
Borough or set aside a recreation area as required by this section,
the Borough Council shall require a payment of a fee in lieu of
dedication of such land which shall be payable to the Borough prior
to approval of each final section of the overall plan by the Borough
Council. Such fee shall be calculated by multiplying the number of
dwelling units in each section by the fee per dwelling unit.
(2) The amount of the fee shall be set from time to time by resolution of
the Borough Council.
(3) All monies paid to the Borough Council pursuant to this section
shall be used only for the acquisition of and/or capital
improvements for park and recreation purposes.
§ 99-27 § 99-27
99:404
ARTICLE VI
Improvements and Construction Requirements
§ 99-28. Improvements required.
The applicant shall provide all improvements required by these regulations.
The specifications for the improvements contained herein shall apply.
§ 99-29. Monuments and markers.
§ 99-30. Street construction.
Pavements and construction. Streets shall be designed in accordance with
Article V herein and shall be surfaced to the grades and dimensions drawn
on the plans, profiles, and cross sections submitted by the applicant and
A. Monuments must be set:
(1) At the intersection of all street and right-of-way lines;
(2) At the intersections of lines forming angles in the boundaries of the
subdivision or land development;
(3) At such intermediate points as may be required by the Borough
Engineer.
B. Markers must be set:
(1) At all corners except those monumented;
(2) By the time the property is offered for sale.
C. Monuments and markers shall be the following sizes and made of the
following materials:
(1) Monuments shall be six inches square or four inches in diameter
and shall be 30 inches long. Monuments shall be made of concrete,
stone or by setting a four-inch cast iron or steel pipe filled with
concrete.
(2) Markers shall be 3/4 of an inch square or 3/4 of an inch in diameter
and 30 inches long. Markers shall be made of iron pipes or iron or
steel bars.
D. Monuments and markers must be placed so that the scored or marked
point coincides exactly with the point of intersection of the lines being
monumented. They must be set so that the top of the monument or
marker is level with the finished grade of the surrounding ground.
Monuments must be marked on top with a copper or brass plate or
dowel set in the concrete.
E. Removal. Any monuments or markers that are removed must be
replaced by a registered surveyor at the expense of the person
removing them.
§ 99-28 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 99-30
99:405
approved by the Borough Council. Before paving the street surface, the
developer shall install the required utilities and provide, where necessary,
adequate underdrains and stormwater drainage for the streets, as
acceptable to the Borough Council. The pavement base and wearing surface
must be constructed according to the following specifications and as
outlined in Table 1, § 99-19, entitled "Streets," herein and in accordance
with the latest edition of PennDOT Publication Number 408.
A. Subgrade.
(1) No base course shall be placed on wet, frozen or unsuitable
material. Unsuitable material is defined in PennDOT, Publication
Number 408, as amended.
(2) Subgrade in fill area shall be compacted in not more than twelveinch
layers with a minimum roller weight of 10 tons or equivalent
compaction.
(3) Subgrade that has been distributed by trenching shall be backfilled
and compacted in eight-inch layers and inspected by the Borough
Engineer or his designated agent.
(4) Unsuitable material in subgrade shall be removed and replaced
with material acceptable to the Borough Engineer.
(5) The moisture content at the time of compaction and density of the
finished subgrade shall be in accordance with the specifications as
set forth in PennDOT, Publication Number 408, as amended.
(6) Any springs or spongy areas shall be provided with a proper
underdrain system, which is connected to the storm sewer system.
(7) Subgrade shall be inspected by the Borough Engineer or his
designated agent prior to the placement of the base course.
B. Base course.
(1) Minor streets. Base course shall be consistent with Table 1,
§ 99-19, entitled "Streets" herein, in accordance with the
specifications as set forth in PennDOT, Publication Number 408, as
amended.
(2) Collector streets. Base course shall be consistent with Table 1,
§ 99-19, entitled "Streets" herein, in accordance with the
specifications as set forth in PennDOT, Publication Number 408, as
amended.
(3) Arterial streets. For the construction of arterial roads or highways,
the applicant shall consult the Planning Commission and Borough
Council and be governed by PennDOT for the method of
construction to be used.
§ 99-30 § 99-30
99:406
(4) Base course shall be inspected by Borough Engineer or his
designated agent prior to the placing of wearing course.
(5) Base shall have wearing course applied as soon as possible to avoid
damage to base.
(6) All foreign material shall be removed from base course prior to
placing wearing course.
(7) Base shall be compacted with a vibrating tamper or vibrating roller.
(8) The Borough Council shall decide if a collector or arterial street is
required as a direct result of the subdivision or land development in
which case the developer is responsible for paving the additional
width required.
C. Surface course.
(1) Minor and collector streets. Surface course shall be consistent with
Table 1, § 99-19, entitled "Streets" herein, in accordance with the
specifications as set forth in PennDOT, Publication Number 408, as
amended.
(2) Surface course shall be sealed wherever it comes in contact with
another structure (i.e., curb, manhole, inlet, etc.). This work shall
be done in accordance with the specifications as set forth in
PennDOT, Publication Number 408, as amended.
(3) Surface course shall be inspected by the Borough Engineer or his
designated agent after completion of all work.
D. Shoulders. The base course shall consist of six inches of compacted
stone, gravel or slag constructed in accordance with the specifications
as set forth in PennDOT, Publication Number 408, as amended. The
bituminous seal coat shall be constructed in accordance with the
applicable requirements of PennDOT, Publication Number 408, as
amended.
E. Driveway entrances. Driveway entrances or aprons within the street
right-of-way shall be surfaced to their full width, and in no case shall be
less than 12 feet wide for residential development and 18 feet wide for
commercial or industrial developments. In no case shall the driveway
entrance be more than two feet wider than the driveway. The type of
surface to be either plain cement concrete, minimum depth of four
inches or the same as specified above. Where sidewalks are installed,
the required driveway surfacing shall end at the street side of the
sidewalk.
(1) Driveway entrances along streets where curbs are not required
shall be constructed to provide proper drainage along the streets
and from the streets by the continuation of gutters, swales or
ditches. Such continuation may be provided by having an approved
§ 99-30 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 99-30
99:407
pipe of not less than 15 inches in diameter across such driveway
entrances.
(2) Driveway entrances along streets, where curbs are not required,
shall be constructed so that the driveway meets the edge of the
cartway as a continuation of at least the slope from the crown of the
street for not less than five feet.
(3) Access to public driveways.
(a) Where proposed driveways provide access onto a state
highway (Pennsylvania route or United States route), the
design of such driveway access and drainage shall be prepared
in accordance with PennDOT and shall be subject to the
approval and issuance of permits by PennDOT.
(b) A note shall be placed on the plan stating, "NOTICE: No
building permit will be issued for any lot or parcel which will
require access to a state highway until authorized by a
PennDOT Highway Occupancy Permit (HOP). A HOP is
required pursuant to Section 420 of the Act of June 1, 1945
(P.L. 1242, No. 428), known as the "State Highway Law," before
driveway access to a State highway is permitted."
(c) The Borough Council may issue a final plat approval if a permit
has been secured or the notice of requirement for such a
permit is placed on the plan. No building permit will be issued
for affected lots until such a highway occupancy permit has
been secured.
(4) The curb height at driveway entrances may be reduced to a
minimum of 1 1/2 inches for driveway entrances along streets
where curbs are required. The maximum width of reduced curb
height shall be 20 feet for residential driveways and 35 feet for
commercial or industrial driveways. Sidewalks across driveway
entrances, where required, shall be constructed in accordance with
the requirements in § 99-34 herein.
F. Underdrain.
(1) Underdrain shall be constructed in accordance with the
specifications as set forth in PennDOT, Publication Number 408, as
amended, and as detailed on the Roadway Construction Standard
Drawings (RC-30).
(2) Combination storm sewer and underdrain shall be constructed in
accordance with the specifications as set forth in PennDOT,
Publication Number 408, as amended, and as detailed on the
Roadway Construction Standard Drawings (RC-30).
(3) Perforated underdrain pipe shall be a minimum of six inches in
diameter.
§ 99-30 § 99-30
99:408
§ 99-31. Sewer systems.
(4) Underdrains or combination storm sewer and underdrain shall be
constructed where required by the Borough Engineer or the
Borough Council.
(5) Underdrain shall be installed by the applicant and inspected by the
Borough Engineer or his designated agent after completion of all
work, just prior to the subgrade placement.
G. Handicapped accessibility. Intersection curb cuts and sidewalks shall
be required. Handicapped access shall meet all requirements set forth
in the current edition of the American National Standard A117.1
manual and the Pennsylvania Physically Handicapped Act, Act 235 of
1965, as amended 1988, and all other state and federal laws.
A. Sewers.
(1) The developer shall provide the subdivision or land development
with a complete sanitary sewerage system to be connected to the
existing sanitary sewerage system in accordance with municipal
authority and Borough specifications. The sanitary sewer shall be
installed in the street bed or approved right-of-way; lateral
installations shall be to the right-of-way lines of streets, lot or
parcel property lines or sewer easement right-of-way lines,
whichever pertains to individual situations. All termini shall be
capped in a manner which will insure that all laterals and house
connections shall be water tight, pending connections with a public
sanitary sewerage system. The system shall be designed by a
registered engineer and approved by the Borough Authority
Engineer. The Borough Authority Engineer shall also inspect
construction of all sanitary sewers to insure that said sewers have
been installed in accordance with municipal authority and Borough
specifications.
(2) Review of design, supervision and inspection fees for services
rendered on behalf of the developer by the Borough Authority
Engineer shall be paid by the developer. The developer shall
establish an escrow account with the Borough, and the account
shall be established in accordance with the developer's agreement.
(3) Sanitary sewers and sewage disposal systems shall not be
combined with stormwater sewers and shall not be constructed to
receive effluent from any stormwater collection system.
B. Water. The developer shall provide the subdivision or land development
with a complete water main supply system to be connected to the
existing or proposed water main supply system in accordance with
Borough and/or utility specifications.
§ 99-30 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 99-32
99:409
§ 99-32. Storm sewers.
Whenever the evidence available to the Borough Council indicates that
natural surface drainage is inadequate, the developer shall install a
stormwater sewer system in accordance with approved plans and profiles.
The system shall be designed by a registered engineer and be approved by
the Borough Engineer. The developer shall submit engineering calculations
upon which the size of conduits, culverts, and other portions of the proposed
storm sewer system have been based.
A. Pipe.
(1) Pipes shall be constructed in accordance with the specifications as
set forth in PennDOT, Publication Number 408, as amended.
(2) Pipes shall be galvanized corrugated metal pipe (CMP) helical in
design, unless otherwise specified.
(3) All pipe joints shall be connected with metal bands.
(4) Pipes shall be placed on class B bedding.
(5) Pipe gauge shall be in accordance with approved engineering
calculations. Minimum pipe gauge for CMP shall be 16 gauge.
(6) Pipe sizes shall be in accordance with that shown on approved
drawings. Minimum pipe size shall be 15 inches in diameter.
(7) Pipe shall be constructed and set to line and grade as shown on
approved drawings.
(8) Pipes shall be inspected by the Borough Engineer or his agent prior
to backfilling.
B. Inlets.
(1) Inlets shall be constructed in accordance with the specifications as
set forth in PennDOT, Publication Number 408, as amended, and as
detailed on the Roadway Construction Standard Drawings (RC-34).
(2) Inlet tops shall be precast concrete top units with a ten-inch hood
or equivalent in order to place inlet in a two-inch sump condition,
and shall be compatible with type of curbing installed.
(3) Inlet boxes shall be precast concrete box units.
(4) All inlets shall have weep holes placed at the appropriate elevations
to completely drain the subgrade prior to placing the base course
and surface course.
(5) Inlets shall be inspected by the Borough Engineer or his designated
agent after completion of all work.
C. Manholes.
§ 99-32 § 99-32
99:410
§ 99-33. Curbs.
Curbs shall be required for all subdivisions and land development.
§ 99-34. Sidewalks.
Sidewalks shall be required for all subdivision and land development.
(1) Manholes shall be constructed in accordance with the
specifications as set forth in PennDOT, Publication Number 408, as
amended, and as detailed on the Roadway Construction Standard
Drawings (RC-39).
(2) Manholes shall be precast concrete units.
(3) Manholes shall be inspected by the Borough Engineer or his
designated agent after completion of all work.
A. Curbs shall be constructed in accordance with the specifications as set
forth in PennDOT, Publication Number 408, as amended, and as
detailed on the Roadway Construction Standard Drawings (RC-64). All
curbs shall have premolded expansion joints; saw cutting of new
curbing shall not be allowed.
B. Rolled curbs will not be acceptable.
C. Curbs shall be constructed in accordance with the cross section details
shown on the approved drawings.
D. Curbs shall be set and finished to the line and grade as shown on
approved drawings.
E. Backfill must be placed within 48 hours after form removal, and this
backfill shall be compacted in place along the rear face to within six
inches of the top of the curb.
F. When curbing is to be removed to construct a driveway, the removal
shall be done on the complete curb section. The length of curbing to be
removed shall be carried to the nearest expansion joint if the joint is
located more than five feet from the end of the curb removal. Curb
replacement shall be formed and shaped to the required driveway
width. The driveway shall be depressed to a height of 1 1/2 inches
above the finished paving grade.
G. No partial breaking out of the curb shall be permitted without approval
by the Borough Engineer or his designated agent.
H. Curbs shall be inspected by the Borough Engineer or his designated
agent after the forms have been placed, just prior to the pouring of
concrete and after completion of all work.
A. Sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with the specifications as
set forth in PennDOT, Publication Number 408, as amended.
§ 99-32 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 99-34
99:411
§ 99-35. Fire hydrants.
Fire hydrants shall be installed within 600 feet of all existing and proposed
structures measured by way of accessible streets (as specified by the Middle
Department Association of Fire Underwriters).
§ 99-36. Street signs.
The subdivision or land development shall be provided with street signs
to include, but not be limited to, street name signs at all intersections,
directional and informational signs. Such signs shall conform to applicable
PennDOT and Borough specifications, and shall be purchased and installed
by the developer in a manner specified by the Borough Engineer.
§ 99-37. Electric and telephone lines.
All electric and telephone service lines, including streetlighting, shall be
placed underground within any subdivision or land development of seven or
more lots and/or dwelling units.
§ 99-38. Lighting.
These lighting requirements provide appropriate standards to ensure
adequate night time safety and security while minimizing the spillover of
light and glare on operators of motor vehicles, pedestrians and land uses
near the light source. It is the safety, welfare, nuisance, and hazardous
aspects of lighting that form the basis of these regulations.
B. Four inches of 2B aggregate shall be placed under all sidewalks.
C. Sidewalks shall be within the right-of-way of the street and shall extend
in width from the right-of-way line toward the curbline.
D. Sidewalks shall be at least four feet wide, unless otherwise specified.
E. Where a sidewalk abuts a curb, wall, building or any other structure, a
premolded expansion joint, 1/4 inch of thickness, shall be placed
between the sidewalk and said structure for the full length of said
structure.
F. Sidewalks shall be boxed out around light standards, fire hydrants, etc.,
with a premolded expansion joint, 1/4 inch in thickness.
G. Sidewalks shall be inspected by the Borough Engineer or his designated
agent after the forms have been placed, just prior to the pouring of
concrete and after completion of all work.
A. Lighting shall be required in subdivisions and land developments.
B. Streetlights shall be provided with the construction of all new streets. A
plan for streetlights, approved by the local utility company, shall be
provided by the applicant upon submission of final subdivision or land
development plans.
§ 99-34 § 99-38
99:412
C. Streetlights shall be provided at locations designated by the local utility
company, consistent with current policy, at all street intersections and
all other locations considered necessary for safety reasons as approved
by Borough Council.
D. Requirements. Exterior lighting shall be provided in parking areas,
pedestrian sidewalks and walkways, and nonresidential driveway
intersections in accordance with the following standards. Lighting used
for security purposes shall also conform to the following standards.
These regulations permit an option of providing a lower lightpost for
luminaries with a no cutoff design or a higher pole, up to 60 feet, for
luminaries that totally cut off light spillover at a cutoff angle smaller
than 90 degrees. The maximum height lightpost permitted shall be
dependent upon the amount of cutoff provided. Exterior lighting shall
meet one of the following standards:
(1) When the light source or luminaire has no cutoff:
Maximum Permitted
Illumination
(footcandles)
Maximum Permitted Height
of Luminaire
(feet)
Residential equals 0.2 10
Nonresidential equals 0.3 20
(2) When a luminaire has a total cutoff angle greater than 90 degrees,
the maximum illumination and the maximum permitted luminaire
height shall be:
Zoning District
Maximum
Permitted
Illumination
(footcandles)
Maximum
Permitted Height
at Illumination
(feet)
Residential Two-Family
Suburban
0.75 25
Residential Single-
Family Urban
1.0 30
Residential Two-Family
Urban
1.0 30
Residential Multifamily
Urban
1.0 30
Commercial Central 1.5 35
Commercial
Neighborhood
1.5 35
Commercial Highway 1.5 35
Manufacturing Heavy 2.0 40
§ 99-38 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 99-38
99:413
(3) When a luminaire has a total cutoff of light at an angle less than 90
degrees and is located so that the bare lightbulb, lamp, or light
source is completely shielded from the direct view of an observer
five feet above the ground at the point where the cutoff angle
intersects the ground, then the maximum permitted illumination
and maximum permitted height at the luminaire shall be:
Zoning District
Maximum
Permitted
Illumination
(footcandles)
Maximum
Permitted Height
at Illumination
(feet)
Residential Two-
Family Suburban
1.5 30
Residential Single-
Family Urban
2.0 35
Residential Two-
Family Urban
2.0 35
Residential
Multifamily Urban
2.0 35
Commercial Central 3.0 40
Commercial
Neighborhood
3.0 40
Commercial Highway 3.0 40
Manufacturing Heavy 5.0 60
(4) Exemption for specified uses.
(a) Because of their unique requirements for nighttime visibility
and their limited hours of operation, public and private
recreational uses such as ball diamonds, playing fields, tennis
courts, and volleyball courts are exempt from the above
requirements.
(b) Outdoor public and private recreational uses specified above
shall not exceed a maximum permitted post height of 80 feet.
(c) Outdoor public and private recreational uses may exceed a
total cutoff angle of 90 degrees, provided that the luminaire is
shielded to prevent light and glare spill over to adjacent
residential uses. The maximum permitted illumination at the
interior buffer yard line shall not exceed two footcandles.
(d) Low level pedestrian lighting for sidewalks should be provided
as necessary for safety. Low level sidewalk illumination for
nonresidential uses shall be between 0.5 to 0.1 footcandle. Low
level sidewalk illumination for residential uses shall be
between 0.2 to 0.13 footcandle.
§ 99-38 § 99-38
99:414
§ 99-39. Landscaping.
It is the intent of this section to provide a set of minimum standards
for landscaping to improve and maintain community appearance, the
environment, rural character and value of properties within the Borough
of Steelton in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan. Landscaping shall
be required for any land development or major preliminary or major final
subdivision.
(5) Additional requirements.
(a) Flickering or flashing lights shall not be permitted.
(b) Light sources or luminaries shall not be located within buffer
yard areas except for pedestrian walkways.
(c) The location and type of lighting required by this chapter shall
be shown on the site plan submitted for development.
(d) Low level pedestrian lighting for sidewalks should be provided
as necessary for safety. Low level sidewalk illumination for
nonresidential uses shall be between 0.5 to 1.0 footcandle. Low
level sidewalk illumination for residential uses shall be
between 0.2 and 0.3 footcandle.
A. Minimum required landscaping. Nonresidential and multifamily
residential land development in the residential districts shall have a
minimum of 20% landscaping of the total gross lot area excluding
building floor area, impervious surface.
(1) At least 60% or all trees, shrubs, and groundcover required by this
section shall be native plants, except that a minimum of 30% of the
vegetation chosen for erosion control shall be native plants from
the list of Vegetation Acceptable for Erosion Control Plants (listed
below) chosen shall be appropriate for their intended function and
location based on plant characteristics.
(2) The required landscaped area shall include a minimum of 12
deciduous or evergreen trees for each one acre with a minimum of
2 1/2 inch caliper at time of planting. As an alternative, six trees for
each one acre shall be required if deciduous trees are four inches in
caliper or greater at the time of planting, and evergreen trees are
nine feet in height or greater at the time of planting. A combination
of tree sizes is permitted where at least one of larger sized trees
may be substituted for two smaller sized trees.
(3) Five deciduous shrubs or hedges may be substituted for one
deciduous tree for a maximum of 20% of the tree requirement.
(4) The preservation of existing deciduous or evergreen trees of fourinch
caliper or greater within the net lot area may be substituted
for 50% of the tree requirement. (Net lot area for this section shall
§ 99-38 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 99-39
99:415
be total gross lot area minimum building floor area, impervious
surface, and sensitive environmental features as defined in the
Comprehensive Plan.) The number of existing trees must meet or
exceed 50% of the number of trees required in Subsection A(1),
above.
(5) The remaining area required to be landscaped shall be ground
cover.
(6) Cost estimate for posting of securities in accordance with this
chapter.
(7) All trees, shrubs, hedges, or ground cover that die or are destroyed
shall be replaced within six months.
B. Street trees. Reasonable effort shall be made by the applicant to
preserve existing shade trees and, in addition, deciduous hardwood
trees with a minimum caliper of 1 1/2 inches shall be provided in
accordance with conditions as recommended by the Planning
Commission and agreed upon by the Borough Council, and, if necessary,
the Borough Authority and/or appropriate public utility. Shade trees
shall be required along with all existing and new streets within a
subdivision or land development. Where provided, such trees shall be
planted between the sidewalk and the building setback line at least five
feet from the sidewalk, provided the planting strip is a minimum of six
feet wide.
(1) Location. Street trees shall be installed along the street frontage or
both sides of the street, where applicable. Street trees shall be
planted along the street frontage within five feet of the right-of-way
line. Where trees are planted along streets, spacing shall depend
on the tree size as follows:
Tree Size at Maturity Planting Interval
Large -- more than 40 feet 50 feet to 70 feet
Medium -- 30 feet to 40 feet 40 feet to 50 feet
Small -- less than 30 feet 30 feet to 40 feet
(2) When the spacing interval exceeds 40 feet, small ornamental trees
may be placed between the large trees. If a street canopy effect is
desired, trees may be planted closer together, following the
recommendations of a landscape architect.
(3) Street trees shall be planted as not to interfere with utilities,
roadways, sidewalks, streetlights, clear sight triangles, and safe
sight distance.
C. Minimum planting specifications at the time of planting, except as
specified in § 99-41, Screening.
§ 99-39 § 99-39
99:416
(1) Deciduous trees shall have a minimum caliper measurement of 2 1/
2 inches, measured a minimum of six inches above the soil line.
(2) Coniferous trees shall have a minimum height of six feet.
(3) Evergreen shrubs, except for those used as low ground cover, shall
have an average height of 20 inches.
(4) Deciduous shrubs shall have an average height of 30 inches.
(5) Trees with less than three inches in caliper shall be properly staked
or trees with more than three inches in caliper shall be guyed and
be properly protected for a period of one year from the date of
planting.
(6) Any nylon rope used in balling the tree must be cut and removed
from the root ball.
(7) Trees and shrubs shall be hardy, not prone to disease or pests and
suitable for use as a screening hedge, including dense foliage.
(8) Shrubs to be used on slopes steeper than 3:1 shall be chosen from
the list of Vegetation Acceptable for Erosion Control Plants (listed
below). Ground cover to be used on slopes steeper than 3:1 shall be
chosen from the list titled "Vegetation Acceptable for Erosion
Control," except that no more than 50% of berm area may be
composed of ornamental grass or legume mixture.
(9) Mulch for grass seed mix must be straw mulched as specified in
PennDOT Publication Number 408, except slopes steeper than 3:1
shall receive erosion control blankets/mats as specified in PennDOT
Publication Number 408. Mulch shall be placed around trees,
shrubs, and groundcover. Mulch shall be shredded bark or other
organic mulch, if approved by Borough officials, in continuous beds
surrounding vegetation. Mulch shall not be the sole cover but shall
be used in conjunction with vegetation groundcover which shall
cover 95% of the area within two years of planting. A system of
staking, matting and/or netting shall be installed on slope/mound
areas steeper than 3:1 to be mulched, but that will not inhibit
vegetative growth and that will not be visible two years after
planting.
(10) Stabilization measures shall include erosion control blankets or
mats as specified in PennDOT Publication Number 408 for slopes
steeper than 3:1.
D. Landscape plan. All landscaping shall be drawn to scale on a site
development plan and submitted to the Zoning Officer prior to the
issuance of a zoning permit or with the land development or major
preliminary or final subdivision application. The landscape plan shall be
prepared and certified by a landscape architect licensed by the
§ 99-39 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 99-39
99:417
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. The landscape plan shall contain the
following data as a minimum:
(1) An on-site inventory identifying type, size and height of existing
plant materials.
(2) A plant schedule describing plant materials, including names
(common and botanical), location, qualities, caliper sizes, heights,
spread, and spacing at installation.
(3) Location, height, and type of plant material proposed for buffer
yards, screening and fencing.
(4) The manner in which tress and shrubs are to be planted shall be
indicated on a tree and shrub planting detail.
(5) The manner in which lawn areas and ground cover are to be
planted shall be indicated on a ground cover detail.
(6) A description of how existing healthy trees are proposed to be
retained and protected from damage during construction should be
described in the construction detail.
(7) Size, height, location and material of proposed seating, lighting,
planters, sculptures, and water features.
(8) Location and dimension of clear sight triangles.
E. Native plant requirements. The use of native species benefits land
developers by reducing landscape maintenance costs and will benefit
the community and the environment by reestablishing a native plan
community.
(1) Vegetation acceptable for erosion control:
Vegetation Acceptable For Erosion Control
Type Common Name Scientific Name
S Siberian Dogwood Cornus alba
S and N Red-Osier Dogwood Cornus sericea
S and N Gray Dogwood Cornus racemosa
S Cranberry Cotoneaster Cotoneaster apiculata
Gc Ground Cotoneaster Cotoneaster horizontalis
S Scotch Heather Calluna vulgaris
S Weeping Forsythia Forsythia suspensa
Gc Shore Juniper Juniper conterta
Gc Creeping Juniper Juniper horizontalis
Gc Savin' Juniper Juniper sabina
S and N Northern Bayberry Myrica pensylvanica
§ 99-39 § 99-39
99:418
Vegetation Acceptable For Erosion Control
Type Common Name Scientific Name
Gc Japanese Spurge Pachysandra terminallis
Gc Crispa Cutleaf
Stephandra
Stephandra incise 'crispa'
Gc and N Prostrate Chenault
Coralberry
Symphoricarpos x
chenaultii 'hancock'
S Candles of Heaven Yucca filementosa
Gc PennDOT formula "W" grass legume seed mix (tall
fescue, birdsfoot, trefoil, and redtop)
S Various types of ornamental grasses
NOTES:
S = Shrub
Gc = Groundcover
N = Native
(2) Native plants acceptable for landscaping.
(a) Shrubs.
Common Name Scientific Name
Azalea, sweet Rhododendron arborescens
Azalea, rhodora Rhododendron canadense
Azalea, flame Rhododendron calendulaceum
Azalea, mountain Rhododendron canescens
Azalea, pinxter Rhododendron periclymenoides
Azalea, roseshell Rhododendron prinophyllum
Azalea, swamp Rhododendron viscosum
Bluebeny, highbush Vaccinium corymbosum
Chokeberry, red Aronia arbutifolia
Chokeberry, black Aronia melanocarpa
Bayberry Myrica pensylvanica
Bearberry Arctostaphylos uva-ursi
Buttonbush Cephalantus occidenlalis
Carolina Allspice Calycanthus floridus
Cinquefoil, shrubby Potentilla fruiticosa
Dogwood, pagoda Corpus altemifolia
Dogwood, silky Corpus amomum
Dogwood, gray Corpus racemosa
§ 99-39 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 99-39
99:419
Common Name Scientific Name
Dogwood, red Corpus sericea
Elderberry Sambucus canadensis
Hazelnut Corylus americana
Inkberry Flex glabra
Mountain Laurel Kalmia latifolia
Rhododendron, rosebay Rhododendron maximum
Shadbush Serviceberry Amelanchier canadensis
St. Johnswort Hypericum prolificum
Spicebush Lindera benzoin
Strawberry bush Euonymus americana
Sumac, fragrant Rhus aromatica
Sumac, shining Rhus copallina
Sumac, smooth Rhus glabra
Sumac, staghorn Rhus typhina
Sweet Pepperbush Clethra alnifolia
Viburnum, mapleleaf Viburnum acerifolium
Viburnum, arrowwood Viburnum dentatum
Viburnum, nannyberry Viburnum lentago
Viburnum, blackhaw Viburnum prunifolium
Winterberry Flex verticillata
(b) Small trees.
Common Name Scientific Name
American Hornbeam Carpinus caroliniana
Serviceberry Amelanchier alborea
River Birch Betula nigra
Redbud Cercis canadensis
Fringe Tree Chionathus virginicus
Eastern Dogwood Comus florida
Witch Hazel Hamamelis virginiana
Red Cedar Juniperus virginiana
Pawpaw Asimina triloba
Persimmon Diospyros virginiana
(c) Shrubs or small trees for dry, sunny sites
§ 99-39 § 99-39
99:420
Common Name Scientific Name
Bayberry Myrica pensylvanica
Bearberry Arctostaphylos uva-ursi
E. Red Cedar Juniperus virginiana
(d) Shrubs or small trees for moist sites; i.e., edges of ponds,
streams, swamps, and lower slopes of hills. Most will tolerate
somewhat drier conditions as well.
Common Name Scientific Name
Chokeberry Aronia arbutifolia, A. melanocarpa
Elderberry Sambucus canadensis
Inkberry Ilex glabra
Rosebay Rhododendron maximum
Shrubby Dogwoods Comus sericea, C. amomum, C.
racemosa
Spicebush Lindera benzoin
Sweet Pepperbush Clethra alnifolia
Winterberry Ilex verticillata
Witch Hazel Hamamelis virginiana
(e) Shrubs or small trees for wetlands or seasonally flooded sites
or at the edge of water bodies.
Common Name Scientific Name
American hornbeam Carpinus caroliniana
Buttonbush Cephalanthus occidentalis
Inkberry Ilex glabra
River Birch Betula nigra
Spicebush Lindera benzoin
Swamp Azalea Rhododendron viscosum
Sweet Pepperbush Clethra alnifolia
Winterberry Ilex verticillata
(f) Shrubs or small trees for shaded sites.
Common Name Scientific Name
Azaleas Rhododendron canadense, R.
claendulaceum, R.
periclymenoides
Hazelnut Corylus americana
Maple-leaved Viburnum Vibumum acerifolium
§ 99-39 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 99-39
99:421
Common Name Scientific Name
Mountain Laurel Kalmia latifolia
Rhododendrons Rhododendron maximum
(g) Shrubs or small trees for wildlife food and cover.
Common Name Scientific Name
Bayberry Myrica pensylvanica
Chokeberry Aronia melanocarpa, A. arbutifolia
Elderberry Sambucus canadensis
Inkberry Ilex glabra
Winterberry Ilex verticillata
Serviceberry Amelanchiercanadensis, A.
arborea
Shrubby Dogwoods Cornus amomum, C. racemosa, C.
sericea
Spicebush Lindera benzoin
Sumacs Rhus glabra, R. copallina, R.
typhina
Viburnums Vibubumum prunifolium, V.
lentago, V. dentatum, V.
acerifolium
(h) Large trees.
Common Name Scientific Name
Eastern hemlock Tsuga canadensis
Eastern white pine Pinus strobus
American beech Fagus grandifolia
Black gum Nyssa sylvatica
Black walnut Juglans nigra
Black willow Salix nigra
Red maple Acer rubrum
Sugar maple Acersaccharun
Sycamore Platanus occidentalis
Northern red oak Quercus rubra
Pin oak Quercus palustris
White oak Quercus alba
White ash Fraxinus americana
Mockemut hickory Carya tormentosa
Shagbark hickory Carya ovate
§ 99-39 § 99-39
99:422
Common Name Scientific Name
Shellbark hickory Carya lachiniosa
(i) Native grasses and wildflowers for groundcover, wildlife, or
aesthetics.
Common Name Scientific Name
Big bluestem Andropogan gerardii
Bushy bluestem Andropogan glomeratus
Broom sedge Andropogan virginicus
Pennsylvania sedge Carex pensylvanica
Northern sea oats/river
oats
Chasmathium latifolium
Fraser' sedge Cymophyllus fraseri
Hairgrass, tufted Deschampsia cespitosa
Purple lovegrass Eragrostis spectabilis
Soft rush Juncus effusus
Muhly grass Mublenbergia capillaris
Switch grass Panicum virgatum
Sideoats grama Bouteloua curtipendula
Little bluestem Andropogan scoparius
Indian grass Sorghastrum nutans
Eastern gamma grass Tripsacum dactyloides
Sundrops Oenothera fructicosa
Butterfly-weed Asclepias tuberosa
Wild blue phlox Phlox divaricata
Indian paintbrush Castilleja coccinea
Beard-tongue Penstemon digitalis
Common yarrow Achillea millefolium
Boneset Eupatorium peffoliatum
New England Aster Aster novae-angliae
Blazing star Liatris spicata
Prairie coneflower Ratibida pinnate
Black-eyed Susan Rudbeckia hirta
Ox-eye sunflower Heliopsis helianthoides
Canada goldenrod Solidago canadensis
Stiff goldenrod Solidago rigida
Showy goldenrod Solidago speciosa
§ 99-39 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 99-39
99:423
§ 99-40. Buffering.
Buffer yards required by this section are intended to separate different
land uses from each other and are intended to eliminate and/or minimize
(j) Native trees or hybrids acceptable for street trees.
Common Name Scientific Name
Norway Maple Acer platanoides
Sugar Maple Acer saccharum
White Ash Fraxinus americana
Green Ash Fraxinus pennsylvania laceolata
Maidenhair Tree Ginkgo biloba
Thornless Honey Locust Gleditsia triacanthos inermis
Sweet Gum Liquidambar styraciflua
Oriental Plane Tree Platanus acerifolia
American Plane Tree Platanus occidentalis
White Oak Quercus alba
Red Oak Quercus borealis
Scarlet Oak Quercus coccinea
Pin Oak Quercus palustris
Little Leaf European
Linden
Tillia cordata
Silver Linden Tillia tomentosa
American Elm Ulmus americana
F. Maintenance plan. Landscaping required in this section shall be
maintained in a healthy, growing condition at all times. It shall be the
responsibility of the property owner of record or his delegated
representative to properly maintain and care for any landscape screen
or other treatment as approved by the Borough of Steelton. In order to
insure proper maintenance of landscaping, a maintenance plan,
addressing the following, shall be required:
(1) The maintenance plan shall be prepared and certified by a
landscape architect, registered and licensed in the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania.
(2) Project narrative.
(3) Description of short-term maintenance procedures for the first year
following the date of planting.
(4) Long-term law and planting maintenance.
(5) One-year contractor's warranty of all lawn and plant materials.
§ 99-39 § 99-40
99:424
nuisances such as dirt, litter, noise, glare, signs, unsightly buildings or
parking areas, and to provide spacing to reduce adverse impacts of noise,
light, odor, or danger from fire and explosion. Buffer yards shall meet the
following requirements. The pictures at the end of this section are meant to
illustrate these points.82
A. A buffer yard shall be located at the perimeter of the lot for any given
use and shall not be located in any portion of a public right-of-way or
proposed right-of-way.
B. Permitted uses in a buffer yard: stormwater management facilities,
underground utility facilities, picnic areas, greenways or pedestrian
walkways. Buildings or storage of any kind shall not be permitted in a
buffer yard.
C. A buffer yard and screening shall be provided between districts and
used as follows:
(1) A buffer yard of 50 feet shall be required between residential uses
or districts and nonresidential uses or districts. Level three
screening (see § 99-41) shall be required within the buffer yard.
(2) A buffer yard of 25 feet shall be required between multifamily
residential use or district and single-family/two-family residential
uses or districts. Level one screening (see § 99-41) shall be
required within the buffer yard.
(3) A buffer yard of 50 feet shall be required between residential uses
or districts and industrial uses and districts. Level three screening
(see § 99-41) shall be required within the buffer yard.
(4) A buffer yard of 25 feet shall be required between commercial uses
or district and industrial uses or district. Level two screening (see
§ 99-41) shall be required within the buffer yard.
(5) A buffer yard of 50 feet shall be provided where residential uses or
districts are adjacent to minor arterial streets; in this case Level
one screening (see § 99-41) shall be required. A buffer yard of 100
feet shall be provided where residential uses or districts are
adjacent to interstate highways; in this case Level three screening
(see § 99-41) shall be required.
D. Parking lots shall not encroach into a buffer yard. Buffer yards shall not
be used for parking.
E. A buffer yard shall not be required in front yards except as required in
this Subsection C(5) of this section.
82.Editor's Note: The diagrams that accompany this section are located at the end of this
chapter as Attachment 1, Buffering Diagrams.
§ 99-40 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 99-41
99:425
§ 99-41. Screening.
Screening shall be provided as required by this chapter. The purpose of
screening is provide an effective visual barrier and to protect property
against traffic, trespass, noise, heat, glare, dust, unsightly or distracting
activity, to preserve property values, and assure compatibility of uses.
A. The following list describes various levels of screening:
(1) Level One: This buffer shall contain screening materials which, at
maturity, provide intermittent visual obstruction from the ground
to a height of four feet as well as intermittent visual obstruction
from a height of four feet to a height of 30 feet. Vegetative
screening materials within intermittent visual obstruction areas
shall contain horizontal openings no greater than 20 feet in width
upon the plant's maturity. Grouping of plant materials is
encouraged to achieve a more natural appearance. The pictures at
the end of this section are meant to illustrate this point.83
(a) Evergreen trees: minimum five-foot planting height.
(b) Deciduous trees: minimum two-inch caliper and six-foot
planting height.
(c) Shrubs: eighteen-inch planting height, reaching a minimum of
30 inches within two years. All shrubs (deciduous or
evergreen) must have a minimum spread of 12 to 15 inches
when planted.
(d) Minimum planting width: 10 feet.
(2) Level Two: This buffer shall contain screening materials which, at
maturity, provide semiopacity from the ground to a height of six
feet and intermittent visual obstruction from a height of six feet to a
height of 30 feet. Vegetative screening materials within
intermittent visual obstruction areas shall contain horizontal
openings no greater than 20 feet in width; and vegetative screening
material within semiopaque areas shall contain openings no
greater than 15 feet in width upon the plant's maturity. Grouping of
plant material is encouraged to achieve a more natural appearance.
The pictures at the end of this section are meant to illustrate this
point.84
(a) Evergreen trees: minimum five-foot planting height.
(b) Deciduous trees: minimum two-inch caliper and six-foot
planting height.
83.Editor's Note: The diagrams that accompany this section are located at the end of this
chapter as Attachment 2, Screening Diagrams.
84.Editor's Note: The diagrams that accompany this section are located at the end of this
chapter as Attachment 2, Screening Diagrams.
§ 99-41 § 99-41
99:426
(c) Shrubs: minimum eighteen-inch planting height, reaching a
minimum of 30 inches with two years. All shrubs (deciduous
and evergreen) must have a minimum spread of 12 to 15 inches
when planted.
(d) Minimum planting width: 10 feet.
(3) Level Three: This buffer shall contain screening materials which, at
maturity, provide opacity from the ground to a height of 30 feet.
Vegetative screening materials within opaque areas shall contain
no horizontal openings upon the plant's maturity. Trees within this
buffer shall consist primarily of Eastern white pine and Norway
spruce grouped to achieve a desired opacity. Screening shall
consist of a combination, in longitudinal series, of at least two of
the following options: (The pictures at the end of this section are
meant to illustrate this point.85)
(a) Option A: fence screen.
[1] Minimum six-foot-high freestanding/retaining wall or solid
fence.
[2] Evergreen trees: minimum five-foot tree planting height.
[3] Minimum planting width: 12 feet.
(b) Option B: evergreen tree screen.
[1] Evergreen trees: minimum eight-foot tree planting height.
[2] Composition adequate to achieve a solid screen from zero
to six feet in height two years after planting.
[3] Minimum planting width: 12 feet.
(c) Option C: berm screen.
[1] Berm: minimum six-foot height, and berm slopes 3:1 and
less steep, and eight-foot minimum top width.
[2] Lawn, groundcover, shrubs, and trees: minimum six-foot
tree planting height and adequate to provide a continuous
bed of vegetative groundcover over at least 95% of the
berm area within two years of planting.
(d) Option D: steep berm screen.
[1] Steep berm: minimum six-foot tree planting height,
composed of lightly compacted soil with stability measures
adequate to retain stable soil structure and prevent
85.Editor's Note: The diagrams that accompany this section are located at the end of this
chapter as Attachment 2, Screening Diagrams.
§ 99-41 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 99-41
99:427
§ 99-42. Sidewalks.
The Comprehensive Plan recognizes the importance of providing a safe
and efficient circulation system that includes facilities for pedestrians. It
is the intent of this section to provide a set of minimum standards for
the location of sidewalks for the purpose of providing safe and convenient
transportation routes for pedestrians, protecting the public safety, reducing
traffic congestion by encouraging alternative modes of transportation,
promoting the recreational use of sidewalks, encouraging a social focus for
residents, insuring the quality of pedestrian facilities are equal to or above
automobile-related facilities.
erosion, with slopes greater that 3:1 up to 2:1 maximum
slope, and eight-foot minimum top width.
[2] Groundcover, shrubs and trees: adequate to achieve a
continuous bed of vegetative cover over at least 95% of the
berm within two years of planting, groundcover and
shrubs to be chosen from the listing titled Vegetation
Acceptable for Erosion Control, and composition adequate
to achieve a solid screen from zero-foot to six-foot height
two years after planting considering the expected plant
size two years after planting.
B. Uses. The following specific uses or features shall be screened with a
Level Three screening from adjacent properties and from public view
from a street:
(1) Dumpster and trash-handling areas.
(2) Loading docks or spaces.
(3) Outdoor storage or any material stocks, or equipment, including
but not limited to motor vehicles, farm or construction equipment
or other similar items.
(4) Rooftop equipment shall be visually screened with a wall, fence or
permanent enclosure.
(5) Service entrances and utility facilities.
(6) Natural and/or man-made swales, basins, and stormwater
management facilities.
C. Maintenance. All required plantings shall comply with § 99-39. All
required fences or walls shall be permanently maintained in good
condition and whenever necessary repaired and replaced.
A. Requirements. Sidewalks shall be required in the following locations:
(1) In the Residential Two-Family Suburban, Residential Single-Family
Urban, Residential Two-Family Urban, Residential Multifamily
§ 99-41 § 99-42
99:428
Urban, Commercial Central, Commercial Neighborhood, and
Commercial Highway Zoning Districts.
(2) Within 1,000 feet of the above zoning districts.
(3) Along any roadway served by mass transit.
(4) Within and along the perimeter of any land development that is a
pedestrian trip generator such as schools, parks and recreation
facilities, community activity centers, employment concentrations,
shopping and commercial centers.
B. Other required locations where sidewalks are required.
(1) In residential developments with greater than six lots, which have a
typical lot width of 100 feet or less at the street line or in
commercial and industrial areas at the discretion of the Borough of
Steelton, sidewalks must be installed on both sides of the interior
streets and on one side of streets which bound the development.
(2) Sidewalks may be required in developments where lot widths at the
street line are greater than 100 feet if the character of the
neighborhood is such that they are considered necessary.
Sidewalks may also be required in circumstances where it would be
desirable to continue sidewalks that are existing in adjoining
developments or to provide access to community facilities such as
schools, bus stops, shopping areas, and recreation areas.
(3) Borough of Steelton may waive requirements for sidewalks on one
side of the street where pedestrian interior pathways, in the
judgment of the Borough, better serve the needs of the subdivision
or land development.
C. Placement. All sidewalks must be constructed no closer than one foot to
the street right-of-way line and extend toward the curb or gutter line. A
grass planting strip, not less than two feet in width, shall be provided
between the curb or roadway edge and sidewalk.
D. Construction. Sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with the
following requirements:
(1) Sidewalks shall have a minimum of four inches of Class A cement
concrete and four inches of compacted stone base (2A).
(2) Sidewalks shall have a minimum depth of six inches where
traversed by a residential driveway and a minimum depth of eight
inches where traversed by a commercial driveway.
(3) The minimum sidewalk width shall be four feet.
(4) Sidewalks shall have one-fourth-inch per-foot slope toward the
street.
§ 99-42 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 99-42
99:429
(5) Curb ramps must be installed in accordance with Americans with
Disabilities Act (ADA) requirements.
(6) Brick sidewalks will be permitted only where specifically
authorized by the Borough of Steelton. Bricks must be laid on a
concrete sidewalk constructed as noted above and grouted with
cement.
§ 99-42 § 99-42
99:430
ARTICLE VII
Fees
§ 99-43. Filing.
At the time of filing, all plats shall be accompanied by a check payable to
the Borough of Steelton, in the amount specified herein, to defray the cost
of reviewing the proposed plats and required data.
§ 99-44. Fee schedule.
§ 99-45. Engineering fees.
On or before the date on which the preliminary or final plat is to be
considered by the Borough Council, the applicant shall pay by a check,
payable to the Borough of Steelton, an amount determined or approved by
the Borough Engineer sufficient to cover the costs of:
§ 99-46. Review fees.
A. The Borough Council shall establish by resolution a Schedule of Fees to
be paid by the subdivider at the time of filing a preliminary or final plat.
B. The Schedule of Fees shall be posted in the office of the Borough Zoning
Officer and in such other places as the Borough may designate.
C. No plat shall be considered by the Borough Council unless all fees and
charges are paid in full.
D. All unexpended fees shall be returned to the subdivider.
A. Reviewing the plat's engineering details.
B. Inspecting the site layout for conformance with the plat.
C. Preparing cost estimates of required improvements (as applicable).
D. Inspecting required improvements during installation.
E. Final inspection on completion of installation of required
improvements.
F. Other engineering verifications required by this chapter.
A. Review fees shall include the reasonable and necessary charges by the
Borough's professional consultants or engineer for review and report to
the Borough, and shall be set by resolution. Such review fees shall be
reasonable and in accordance with the ordinary and customary charges
by the Borough Engineer or consultant for similar service in the
community, but in no event shall the fees exceed the rate or cost
charged by the engineer or consultant to the Borough when fees are not
reimbursed or otherwise imposed on applicants.
§ 99-43 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 99-46
99:431
§ 99-47. Other fees.
B. In the event the applicant disputes the amount of any such review fees,
the applicant shall, within 10 days of the billing date, notify the Borough
that such fees are disputed, in which case the Borough shall not delay
or disapprove a subdivision or land development application due to the
applicant's request over disputed fees.
C. In the event that the Borough and the applicant cannot agree on the
amount of review fees which are reasonable and necessary, then the
fees shall be recalculated and recertified by another professional
engineer licensed as such in this commonwealth and chosen mutually
by the Borough and the applicant or developer. The estimate certified
by the third engineer shall be presumed fair and reasonable and shall
be the final estimate. In the event that a third engineer is so chosen,
fees for the services of said engineer shall be paid equally by the
Borough and the applicant or developer.
A. Fees for all other permits required for and by the Borough for opening
roads, connecting to municipal sewers, building construction, etc., shall
also be paid by a check payable to the Borough.
B. The applicant at the time of application shall agree to cover the cost of
advertising the ordinance accepting the deed of dedication of
applicable required improvements and its recording costs.
C. At the time of filing, all plats shall be accompanied by a check payable
to the Dauphin County Planning Commission, in the amount specified
by the county, to cover the costs of County Planning Commission review
and report.
§ 99-46 § 99-47
99:432
ARTICLE VIII
Alteration of Requirements
§ 99-48. Modifications.
§ 99-49. Applications for modifications.
Applications for a modification of requirements shall be submitted in writing
by the applicant at the time the preliminary plat is filed with the Planning
Commission. The application shall state fully the grounds and all facts relied
upon by the applicant.
§ 99-50. Records of grants by Council.
In granting any modification of requirements, the Borough Council shall
record its action and the grounds for granting any alteration to the
applicant.
§ 99-51. Records of denials.
Whenever a request for a modification of requirements is denied, the
Borough Council shall record its action and the grounds for such denial in
its minutes. The Borough Council shall transmit a copy of its action and the
grounds for such denial of any modification to the applicant.
§ 99-52. Appeals of Council's decisions.
Persons aggrieved by the granting or denial of a request from a modification
of requirements may appeal the Borough Council's decision through the use
of the appeals procedure as outlined in the "Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code." Act 247, Article X, as amended.86
A. The Borough Council may grant a modification of the requirements of
one or more provisions of this chapter if the literal enforcement will
exact undue hardship because of peculiar conditions pertaining to the
land in question, provided that such modification will not be contrary to
the public interest and that the purpose and intent of this chapter is
observed.
B. All requests for a modification shall be in writing and shall accompany
and be a part of the application for development. The request shall state
in full the grounds and facts of unreasonableness or hardship on which
the request is based, the provision or provisions of this chapter involved
and the minimum modification necessary.
C. The request for modification shall be referred to the Dauphin County
Planning Commission for advisory comments.
D. The Borough Council shall keep a written record of all action on all
requests for modifications.
§ 99-48 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 99-52
99:433
86.Editor's Note: Said article was repealed 12-21-1988 by P.L. 1329, No. 170. See now Art. XA,
53 P.S. § 11001-A et seq.
§ 99-52 § 99-52
99:434
ARTICLE IX
Enforcement, Amendments, Penalties, Severability and Repealer
§ 99-53. Administration and enforcement.
§ 99-54. Amendments.
Amendments to this chapter shall become effective only after a public
hearing held pursuant to public notice as defined, and in accordance with
the "Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code," Act 247, Article V, as
amended.87
A. The Borough Council shall have the duty and authority for the
administration and general enforcement of the provisions of this
chapter, as specified or implied herein. Officials of the Borough of
Steelton having regulatory duties and authorities connected with or
appurtenant to the subdivision, use or development of land shall have
the duty and authority for the controlling enforcement of the provisions
of this chapter, as specified or implied herein or in other ordinances of
the Borough.
B. Permits required by the Borough of Steelton for the erection or
alteration of buildings, the installation of sewers or for other
appurtenant improvements to or use of the land, shall not be issued by
any Borough of Steelton official responsible for such issuance until it
has been ascertained that the site for such building, alteration,
improvement or use is contained in a subdivision or land development
plat approved and publicly recorded in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter. Such permits shall be issued only after it has been
determined that the site for such building, alteration, improvement or
use conforms to the site description as indicated by the approved and
recorded final plat or other land description acceptable in that it is in
compliance with all applicable provisions of this chapter.
C. The Borough Zoning Officer and/or designated official shall require that
the sewage module contain all the information necessary to ascertain
that the site for the proposed system is acceptable in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter, the "Rules and Regulations of the DEP,"
and the provisions of other applicable ordinances of the Borough.
D. The approval of a subdivision or land development plat or of any
improvement installed, or the granting of a permit for the erection or
use of a building or land therein, shall not constitute a representation,
guarantee, or warranty of any kind or nature by the municipality or any
official, employee, or appointee thereof, of the safety of any land,
improvement, property or use from any cause whatsoever, and shall
create no liability upon, or a cause of action against the municipality or
such official, employee or appointee for any damage that may result
pursuant thereto.
87.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10501 et seq.
§ 99-53 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 99-55
99:435
§ 99-55. Remedies to effect completion of improvements.
In the event that any improvements which may be required have not been
installed as provided in this chapter or in accord with the approved final
plat, the Borough Council is hereby granted the power to enforce any
corporate bond or other security by appropriate legal and equitable
remedies. If the proceeds of such bond or other security are insufficient
to pay the cost of installing or making repairs or corrections to all the
improvements covered by said security, the Borough Council may, at its
option, install part of such improvements in all or part of the subdivision
or land development and may institute appropriate legal or equitable action
to recover the moneys necessary to complete the remainder of the
improvements. All of the proceeds, whether resulting from the security or
from any legal or equitable action brought against the developer, or both,
shall be used solely for the installation of the improvements covered by such
security, and not for any other Borough purpose.
§ 99-56. Preventive remedies.
A. In addition to other remedies, the Borough may institute and maintain
appropriate actions by law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate
violations, to prevent unlawful construction, to recover damages and to
prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises. The
description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other
documents used in the process of selling or transferring shall not
exempt the seller or transferor from such penalties or from the
remedies herein provided.
B. The Borough may refuse to issue any permit or grant any approval
necessary to further improve or develop any real property which has
been developed or which has resulted from a subdivision of real
property in violation of this chapter. This authority to deny such a
permit or approval shall apply to any of the following applicants:
(1) The owner of record at the time of such violation.
(2) The vendee or lessee of the owner of record at the time of such
violation without regard as to whether such vendee or lessee had
actual or constructive knowledge of the violation.
(3) The current owner of record who acquired the property subsequent
to the time of violation without regard as to whether such current
owner had actual or constructive knowledge of the violation.
(4) The vendee or lessee of the current owner of record who acquired
the property subsequent to the time of violation without regard as
to whether such vendee or lessee had actual or constructive
knowledge of the violation.
C. As an additional condition for issuance of a permit or the granting of an
approval to any such owner, current owner, vendee or lessee for the
development of any such real property, the Borough may require
§ 99-55 § 99-56
99:436
§ 99-57. Violations and penalties; enforcement remedies.
compliance with the conditions that would have been applicable to the
property at the time the applicant acquired an interest in such real
property.
A. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon being found liable in a civil
enforcement proceeding commenced by the Borough, pay a judgment
of not more than $500 plus all court costs, including reasonable
attorney fees incurred by the Borough as a result thereof. No judgment
shall commence or be imposed, levied or payable until the date of the
determination of a violation by the District Justice. If the defendant
neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the Borough may enforce
the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure. Each
day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation,
unless the District Justice determining that there has been a violation
further determines that there was a good faith basis for the person,
partnership, or corporation violating this chapter to have believed that
there was no such violation, in which event there shall be deemed to
have been only one such violation until the fifth day following the date
of the determination of a violation by the District Justice, and thereafter
each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
B. The Court of Common Pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of stay,
upon cause shown, tolling the per diem judgment pending a final
adjudication of the violation and judgment.
C. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted to
grant to any person or entity other than the Borough the right to
commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this section.
D. District Justices shall have initial jurisdiction in proceedings brought
under this section.
§ 99-56 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 99-57
99:437

ARTICLE X
Effective Date and Enactment
§ 99-58. Codification statement.
It is the intention of the Borough Council and it is ordained that the
provisions of this chapter shall become and be made a part of the Code of
Ordinances of the Borough of Steelton, and the sections of this chapter may
be renumbered to accomplish this intention.
§ 99-58 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 99-58
99:439
Chapter 102
TAXATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Secretary-Treasurer — See Ch. 26.
§ 99-58 § 99-58
102:440
ARTICLE I
Earned Income Tax
[Adopted 1-25-1966 by Ord. No. 66-1, approved 1-25-1966]
§ 102-1. Title and effective date.
This article shall be known as the "Steelton Earned Income Tax Ordinance."
The provisions hereof shall first become effective March 1, 1966.
§ 102-2. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
ASSOCIATION — A partnership, limited partnership or any other
unincorporated group of two or more persons.
BUSINESS — An enterprise, activity, profession or any other undertaking of
an unincorporated nature conducted for profit or ordinarily conducted for
profit, whether by a person, partnership, association or any other entity.
CORPORATION — A corporation or joint-stock association organized under
the laws of the United States, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any
other state, territory, foreign country or dependency.
CURRENT YEAR — The calendar year for which the tax is levied.
DOMICILE — The place where one lives and has his permanent home
and to which he has the intention of returning whenever he is absent.
An actual residence is not necessarily a domicile, for domicile is the fixed
place of abode which, in the intention of the taxpayer, is permanent rather
than transitory. Domicile is the place in which a man has voluntarily fixed
the habitation of himself and his family, not for a mere special or limited
purpose, but with the present intention of making a permanent home until
some event occurs to induce him to adopt some other permanent home. In
the case of businesses or associations, the domicile is that place considered
as the center of business affairs and the place where its functions are
discharged.
EARNED INCOME — Salaries, wages, commissions, bonuses, incentive
payments, fees, tips and other compensation received by a person or his
personal representative for services rendered, whether directly or through
an agent and whether in cash or in property, not including, however, wages
or compensation paid to persons on active military service; periodic
payments for sickness and disability other than regular wages received
during a period of sickness; disability or retirement or payments arising
under workers' compensation acts, occupational disease acts and similar
legislation; or payments commonly recognized as old age benefits,
retirement pay or pensions paid to persons retired from service after
reaching a specific age or after a stated period of employment; or payments
commonly known as public assistance; or unemployment compensation
payments made by any governmental agency or payments to reimburse
§ 102-1 TAXATION § 102-2
102:441
expenses or payments made by employers or labor unions for wage and
salary supplemental programs, including but not limited to programs
covering hospitalization, sickness, disability or death, supplemental
unemployment benefits, strike benefits, social security and retirement.
EMPLOYER — A person, partnership, association, corporation, institution,
governmental body or unit or agency, or any other entity employing one or
more persons for a salary, wage, commission or other compensation.
INCOME TAX OFFICER or OFFICER — Person, public employee or private
agency designated by the Council of the Borough of Steelton to collect and
administer the tax on earned income and net profits.
NET PROFITS — The net income from the operation of a business,
profession or other activity, except corporations, after provision for all costs
and expenses incurred in the conduct thereof, determined either on a cash
or accrual basis in accordance with the accounting system used in such
business, profession or other activity, but without deduction of taxes based
on income.
NONRESIDENT — A person, partnership, association or other entity
domiciled outside the Borough of Steelton.
PERSON or INDIVIDUAL — A natural person.
PRECEDING YEAR — The calendar year before the current year.
RESIDENT — A person, partnership, association or other entity domiciled
in the Borough of Steelton.
SUCCEEDING YEAR — The calendar year following the current year.
TAXPAYER — A person, partnership, association or any other entity
required hereunder to file a return of earned income or net profits or to pay
a tax thereon.
§ 102-3. Imposition of tax.
A tax, for general revenue purposes, of 1% is hereby imposed and shall be
applied as follows:
A. To earned income earned by residents of the Borough of Steelton
during the calendar year 1966 and during each calendar year
thereafter.
B. To earned income earned by nonresidents of the Borough of Steelton in
the Borough of Steelton during the calendar year 1966 and during each
calendar year thereafter.
C. To net profits earned by residents of the Borough of Steelton during the
calendar year 1966 or taxpayer fiscal year beginning in the calendar
year 1966 and during each calendar year or taxpayer fiscal year
thereafter.
D. To net profits earned in the Borough of Steelton by nonresidents of the
Borough of Steelton during the calendar year 1966 or taxpayer fiscal
§ 102-2 § 102-3
102:442
§ 102-4. Declarations of earnings; payment.
year beginning in the calendar year 1966 and during each calendar
year or taxpayer fiscal year thereafter.
A. Net profits.
(1) Every taxpayer making net profits shall, on or before April 15 of the
current year, make and file with the Officer, on a form prescribed or
approved by the Officer, a declaration of his estimated net profits
during the period beginning January 1 and ending December 31 of
the current year, and pay to the Officer in four equal quarterly
installments the tax due thereon as follows: the first installment at
the time of filing the declaration and the other installments on or
before June 15 of the current year, September 15 of the current
year and January 15 of the succeeding year, respectively.
(2) Any taxpayer who first anticipates any net profit after April 15 of
the current year shall make and file the declaration hereinabove
required on or before June 15 of the current year, September 15 of
the current year or December 31 of the current year, whichever of
these dates next follows the date on which the taxpayer first
anticipates such net profit, and pay to the Officer in equal
installments the tax due thereon on or before the quarterly
payment dates which remain after the filing of the declaration.
(3) Every taxpayer shall, on or before April 15 of the succeeding year,
make and file with the Officer on a form prescribed or approved by
the Officer a final return showing the amount of net profits earned
during the period beginning January 1 of the current year and
ending December 31 of the current year, the total amount of tax
due thereon and the total amount of tax paid thereon. At the time of
filing the final return, the taxpayer shall pay to the Officer the
balance of tax due or shall make demand for refund or credit in the
case of overpayment. Any taxpayer may, in lieu of paying the fourth
quarterly installment of his estimated tax, elect to make and file
with the Officer, on or before January 31 of the succeeding year, the
final return as hereinabove required.
(4) The Officer is hereby authorized to provide by regulation for the
making and filing of adjusted declarations of estimated net profits
and for the payments of the estimated tax in cases where a
taxpayer who has filed the declaration hereinabove required
anticipates additional net profits not previously declared or finds
that he has overestimated his anticipated net profits.
(5) Every taxpayer who discontinues business prior to December 31 of
the current year shall, within 30 days after the discontinuance of
business, file his final return as hereinabove required and pay the
tax due.
§ 102-3 TAXATION § 102-4
102:443
§ 102-5. Registration of and collection by employers.
B. Earned income.
(1) Annual earned income tax return. Every taxpayer shall, on or
before April 15 of the succeeding year, make and file with the
Officer on a form prescribed or approved by the Officer a final
return showing the amount of earned income received during the
period beginning January 1 of the current year and ending
December 31 of the current year, the total amount of tax due
thereon, the amount of tax paid thereon, the amount of tax thereon
that has been withheld pursuant to the provisions relating to the
collection at source and the balance of tax due. At the time of filing
the final return, the taxpayer shall pay the balance of the tax due or
shall make demand for refund or credit in the case of overpayment.
(2) Earned income not subject to withholding. Every taxpayer who is
employed for a salary, wage, commission or other compensation
and who received any earned income not subject to the provisions
relating to collection at source shall make and file with the Officer
on a form prescribed or approved by the Officer a quarterly return
on or before April 30 of the current year, July 31 of the current year,
October 31 of the current year and January 31 of the succeeding
year, setting forth the aggregate amount of earned income not
subject to withholding by him during the three-month periods
ending March 31 of the current year, June 30 of the current year,
September 30 of the current year and December 31 of the current
year, respectively, and subject to the tax, together with such other
information as the Officer may require. Every taxpayer making
such return shall, at the time of filing thereof, pay to the Officer the
amount of tax shown as due thereon.
A. Every employer having an office, factory, workshop, branch, warehouse
or other place of business within the Borough of Steelton who employs
one or more persons, other than domestic servants, for a salary, wage,
commission or other compensation, who has not previously registered,
shall within 15 days after becoming an employer register with the
Officer his name and address and such other information as the Officer
may require.
B. Every employer having an office, factory, workshop, branch, warehouse
or other place of business within the Borough of Steelton who employs
one or more persons, other than domestic servants, for a salary, wage,
commission or other compensation shall deduct, at the time of payment
thereof, the tax imposed by this article on the earned income due to his
employee or employees, and shall, on or before April 30 of the current
year, July 31 of the current year, October 31 of the current year and
January 31 of the succeeding year, file a return and pay to the Officer
the amount of taxes deducted during the preceding three-month
periods ending March 31 of the current year, June 30 of the current
year, September 30 of the current year and December 31 of the current
§ 102-4 § 102-5
102:444
§ 102-6. Powers and duties of Officer.
year, respectively. Such return, unless otherwise agreed upon between
the Officer and employer, shall show the name and social security
number of each such employee, the earned income of such employee
during such preceding three-month period, the tax deducted therefrom,
the political subdivisions imposing the tax upon such employee, the
total earned income of all such employees during such preceding threemonth
period and the total tax deducted therefrom and paid with the
return.
C. Any employer who for two of the preceding four quarterly periods has
failed to deduct the proper tax or any part thereof or has failed to pay
over the proper amount of tax to the Borough of Steelton may be
required by the Officer to file his return and pay the tax monthly. In
such cases, payments of tax shall be made to the Officer on or before
the last day of the month succeeding the month for which the tax was
withheld.
D. On or before February 28 of the succeeding year, every employer shall
file with the Officer:
(1) An annual return showing the total amount of earned income paid,
the total amount of tax deducted and the total amount of tax paid to
the Officer for the period beginning January 1 of the current year
and ending December 31 of the current year.
(2) A return withholding statement for each employee employed
during all or any part of the period beginning January 1 of the
current year and ending December 31 of the current year, setting
forth the employee's name, address and social security number, the
amount of earned income paid to the employee during said period,
the amount of tax deducted, the political subdivisions imposing the
tax upon such employee and the amount of tax paid to the Officer.
Every employer shall furnish two copies of the individual return to
the employee for whom it is filed.
E. Every employer who discontinues business prior to December 31 of the
current year shall, within 30 days after the discontinuance of business,
file the returns and withholding statements hereinabove required and
pay the tax due.
F. Every employer who willfully or negligently fails or omits to make the
deductions required by this section shall be liable for payment of the
taxes which he was required to withhold to the extent that such taxes
have not been recovered from the employee.
G. The failure or omission of any employer to make the deductions
required by this section shall not relieve any employee from the
payment of the tax or from complying with the requirements of this
article relating to the filing of declarations and returns.
§ 102-5 TAXATION § 102-6
102:445
A. It shall be the duty of the Officer to collect and receive the taxes, fines
and penalties imposed by this article. It shall also be his duty to keep a
record showing the amount received by him from each person or
business paying the tax and the date of such receipt.
B. The Income Tax Officer, before entering upon his official duties under
this article, shall give and acknowledge a bond to the Borough of
Steelton such as will comply with the provisions of Section 13(V)(b) of
Act No. 511 of the 1965 Session of the Pennsylvania General Assembly,
approved December 31, 1965.
C. The officer charged with the administration and enforcement of the
provisions of this article is hereby empowered to prescribe, adopt,
promulgate and enforce rules and regulations relating to any matter
pertaining to the administration and enforcement of this article,
including provisions for the reexamination and correction of
declarations and returns and of payments alleged or found to be
incorrect or as to which an overpayment is claimed or found to have
occurred, and to make refunds in case of overpayment, for any period of
time not to exceed six years subsequent to the date of payment of the
sum involved, and to prescribe forms necessary for the administration
of this article. No rule or regulation of any kind shall be enforceable
unless it has been approved by resolution by the Council of the Borough
of Steelton. A copy of such rules and regulations currently in force shall
be available for public inspection.
D. The officer shall refund, on petition of and proof by the taxpayer, earned
income tax paid on the taxpayer's ordinary and necessary business
expenses, to the extent that such expenses are not paid by the
taxpayer's employer.
E. The officer and agents designated by him are hereby authorized to
examine the books, papers and records of any employer or of any
taxpayer or of any person whom the Officer reasonably believes to be an
employer or taxpayer, in order to verify the accuracy of any declaration
or return or, if no declaration or return was filed, to ascertain the tax
due. Every employer and every taxpayer and every person whom the
Officer reasonably believes to be an employer or taxpayer is hereby
directed and required to give to the Officer, or to any agent designated
by him, the means, facilities and opportunity for such examination and
investigations as are hereby authorized.
F. Any information gained by the Officer or his agents or by any other
official or agent of the Borough of Steelton as a result of any
declarations, returns, investigations, hearings or verifications required
or authorized by this article, shall be confidential, except for official
purposes and except in accordance with a proper judicial order or as
otherwise provided by law.
§ 102-6 § 102-6
102:446
§ 102-7. Suit for collection of tax.
§ 102-8. Interest and penalty for late payment.
If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6%
per annum on the amount of said tax and an additional penalty of 1/2 of 1%
of the amount of the unpaid tax for each month or fraction thereof during
which the tax remains unpaid shall be added and collected. Where suit is
brought for the recovery of any such tax, the person liable therefor shall, in
addition, be liable for the costs of collection and the interest and penalties
herein imposed.
G. The Officer is authorized to establish different filing, reporting and
payment dates for taxpayers whose fiscal years do not coincide with the
calendar year.
A. The Officer may sue in the name of the Borough of Steelton for the
recovery of taxes due and unpaid under this article.
B. Any suit brought to recover the tax imposed by this article shall be
begun within three years after such tax is due or within three years
after the declaration or return has been filed, whichever date is later;
provided, however, that this limitation shall not prevent the institution
of a suit for the collection of any tax due or determined to be due in the
following cases:
(1) Where no declaration or return was filed by any person although a
declaration or return was required to be filed by him under
provisions of this article, there shall be no limitation.
(2) Where an examination of the declaration or return filed by any
person or of other evidence relating to such declaration or return in
the possession of the Officer reveals a fraudulent evasion of taxes,
there shall be no limitation.
(3) In the case of substantial understatement of tax liability of 25% or
more and no fraud, suit shall be begun within six years.
(4) Where any person has deducted taxes under the provisions of this
article, and has failed to pay the amounts so deducted to the
Officer, or where any person has willfully failed or omitted to make
the deductions required by this article, there shall be no limitation.
(5) This section shall not be construed to limit the Borough of Steelton
from recovering delinquent taxes by any other means provided by
law.
C. The Officer may sue for recovery of an erroneous refund, provided such
suit is begun two years after making such refund, except that the suit
may be brought within five years if it appears that any part of the refund
was induced by fraud or misrepresentation of material fact.
§ 102-6 TAXATION § 102-9
102:447
§ 102-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-20-1976 by Ord. No.
76-4, approved 5-20-1976]
§ 102-10. Credits or deductions for payment of tax to other political
subdivisions.
Taxpayers under this article shall be allowed such credit or deduction from
their liability for the tax imposed by this article for taxes paid to other taxing
authorities as is provided by the Local Tax Enabling Act, Act No. 511 of the
1965 Session of the Pennsylvania General Assembly, approved December
31, 1965.
A. Any person who fails, neglects or refuses to make any declaration or
return required by this article; any employer who fails, neglects or
refuses to register or to pay the tax deducted from his employees or
fails, neglects or refuses to deduct or withhold the tax from his
employees; any person who refuses to permit the Officer or any agent
designated by him to examine his books, records and papers; and any
person who knowingly makes any incomplete, false or fraudulent return
or attempts to do anything whatsoever to avoid the full disclosure of the
amount of his net profits or earned income in order to avoid the
payment of the whole or any part of the tax imposed by this article,
shall, upon conviction thereof before any court of competent
jurisdiction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $500 for each
offense, and costs, and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to
be imprisoned for a period not exceeding 30 days.
B. Any person who divulges any information which is confidential under
the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof before any
court of competent jurisdiction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $500 for each offense, and costs, and, in default of payment of said
fines and costs, to be imprisoned for a period not exceeding 30 days.
C. The penalties imposed under this section shall be in addition to any
other penalty imposed by any other section of this article.
D. The failure of any person to receive or procure forms required for
making the declaration or returns required by this article shall not
excuse him from making such declaration or return.
§ 102-9 § 102-10
102:448
ARTICLE II
Per Capita Tax
[Adopted 12-11-1967 by Ord. No. 67-5, approved 12-12-1967]
§ 102-11. Tax established. [Amended 9-17-1973 by Ord. No. 73-6,
approved 9-17-1973]
Be it enacted and ordained by the Borough Council of the Borough of
Steelton, and it is hereby enacted and ordained by the authority of the same,
that for the calendar year beginning January 1, 1968, and each calendar
year thereafter, an annual per capita tax for general revenue purposes in
the amount of $5 is hereby levied on each inhabitant of the Borough of
Steelton above the age of 18 years, which said tax shall be assessed and
collected as provided by law.
§ 102-12. Discount for early payment; penalty for late payment.
All taxpayers subject to the payment of the per capita tax herein levied and
assessed shall be entitled to a discount of 2% from the amount of such tax
upon making payment of the whole amount thereof within two months after
the date of the tax notice. All taxpayers who shall fail to make payment of
any such tax charged against them for four months after the date of the tax
notice shall be charged a penalty of 5%, which penalty shall be added to
such tax by the Borough Tax Collector and be collected by him.
§ 102-13. Legislative authority.
This article is enacted under the authority of the Act of December 31, 1965,
P.L. 1257, as amended.
§ 102-11 TAXATION § 102-13
102:449

ARTICLE III
Realty Transfer Tax
[Adopted 12-11-1967 by Ord. No. 67-6, approved 12-12-1967;
amended in its entirety 12-18-1989 by Ord. No. 89-6, approved
12-18-1989]
§ 102-14. Authority.
A realty transfer tax for general revenue purposes is hereby imposed upon
the transfer of real estate or interest in real estate situated within the
Borough of Steelton, regardless of where the documents making transfer
are made, executed or delivered or where the actual settlements on such
transfer took place, as authorized in Article XI-D, Local Real Estate Transfer
Tax, 72 P.S. § 8101 et seq.
§ 102-15. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ASSOCIATION — A partnership, limited partnership or any other form of
unincorporated enterprise owned or conducted by two or more persons
other than a private trust or decedent's estate.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Steelton.
CORPORATION — A corporation, joint-stock association, business trust
or banking institution which is organized under the laws of this
commonwealth, the United States or any other state, territory, foreign
country or dependency.
DOCUMENT — Any deed, instrument or writing which conveys, transfers,
demises, vests, confirms or evidences any transfer or demise of title of
real estate, but does not include wills, mortgages, deeds of trust or other
instruments of like character given as security for a debt and deeds of
release thereof to the debtor; land contracts whereby the legal title does not
pass to the grantee until the total consideration specified in the contract has
been paid or any cancellation thereof, unless the consideration is payable
over a period of time exceeding 30 years; or instruments which solely grant,
vest or confirm a public utility easement. "Document" shall also include
a declaration of acquisition required to be presented for recording under
§ 102-20.
FAMILY FARM CORPORATION — A corporation of which at least 75% of its
assets are devoted to the business of agriculture and at least 75% of each
class of stock of the corporation is continuously owned by members of the
same family. The business of agriculture shall not be deemed to include:
Recreational activities, such as but not limited to hunting, fishing,
camping, skiing, show competition or racing.
A.
§ 102-14 TAXATION § 102-15
102:451
MEMBERS OF THE SAME FAMILY — Any individual, such individual's
brothers and sisters, the brothers and sisters of such individual's parents
and grandparents, the ancestors and lineal descendants of any of the
foregoing, a spouse of any of the foregoing and the estate of any of the
foregoing. Individuals related by half blood or legal adoption shall be
treated as if they were related by whole blood.
PERSON — Every natural person, association or corporation. Whenever
used in any clause prescribing and imposing a fine or imprisonment, or
both, the term "person," as applied to associations, shall include the
responsible members or general partners thereof and, as applied to
corporations, the officers thereof.
REAL ESTATE —
REAL ESTATE COMPANY — A corporation or association which is primarily
engaged in the business of holding, selling or leasing real estate, 90% or
more of the ownership interest in which is held by 35 or fewer persons and
which:
TITLE TO REAL ESTATE —
The raising, breeding or training of game animals or game birds, fish,
cats, dogs or pets or animals intended for use in sporting or
recreational activities.
B.
C. Fur farming.
D. Stockyard and slaughterhouse operations.
E. Manufacturing or processing operations of any kind.
All lands, tenements or hereditaments within the Borough of Steelton,
including without limitation buildings, structures, fixtures, mines,
minerals, oil, gas, quarries, spaces with or without upper or lower
boundaries, trees and other improvements, immovables or interests
which, by custom, usage or law, pass with a conveyance of land, but
excluding permanently attached machinery and equipment in an
industrial plant.
A.
B. A condominium unit.
A tenant-stockholder's interest in a cooperative housing corporation,
trust or association under a proprietary lease or occupancy agreement.
C.
Derives 60% or more of its annual gross receipts from the ownership or
disposition of real estate; or
A.
Holds real estate, the value of which comprises 90% or more of the
value of its entire tangible asset holdings exclusive of tangible assets
which are freely transferable and actively traded on an established
market.
B.
Any interest in real estate which endures for a period of time, the
termination of which is not fixed or ascertained by a specific number of
A.
§ 102-15 § 102-15
102:452
TRANSACTION — The making, executing, delivering, accepting or
presenting for recording of a document.
VALUE —
§ 102-16. Imposition of tax; interest.
years, including without limitation an estate in fee simple, life estate or
perpetual leasehold; or
Any interest in real estate enduring for a fixed period of years but
which, either by reason of the length of the term or the grant of a
right to extend the term by renewal or otherwise, consists of a group
of rights approximating those of an estate in fee simple, life estate or
perpetual leasehold, including without limitation a leasehold interest or
possessory interest under a lease or occupancy agreement for a term of
30 years or more or a leasehold interest or possessory interest in real
estate in which the lessee has equity.
B.
In the case of a bona fide sale of real estate at arm's length for
actual monetary worth, the amount of the actual consideration therefor,
paid or to be paid, including liens or other encumbrances thereon
existing before the transfer and not removed thereby, whether or not
the underlying indebtedness is assumed, and ground rents or a
commensurate part thereof where such liens or other encumbrances
and ground rents also encumber or are charged against real estate,
provided that, where such documents shall set forth a nominal
consideration, the value thereof shall be determined from the price set
forth in or actual consideration for the contract of sale.
A.
In the case of a gift, sale by execution upon a judgment or upon the
foreclosure of a mortgage by a judicial officer, transactions without
consideration or for consideration less than the actual monetary worth
of the real estate, a taxable lease, an occupancy agreement, a leasehold
or possessory interest, any exchange of properties or the real estate
of an acquired company, the actual monetary worth of the real estate
determined by adjusting the assessed value of the real estate for local
real estate tax purposes for the common level ratio factor developed
by the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue for Pennsylvania realty
transfer tax base calculations.
B.
In the case of an easement or other interest in real estate, the value of
which is not determinable under Subsection A or B, the actual monetary
worth of such interest.
C.
The actual consideration for or actual monetary worth of any executory
agreement for the construction of buildings, structures or other
permanent improvements to real estate between the grantor and other
persons existing before the transfer and not removed thereby or
between the grantor, the agent or principal of the grantor of a related
corporation, association or partnership and the grantee existing before
or effective with the transfer.
D.
§ 102-15 TAXATION § 102-16
102:453
§ 102-17. Exempt parties.
The United States, the commonwealth or any of their instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions shall be exempt from payment of the tax
imposed by this article. The exemption of such governmental bodies shall
not, however, relieve any other party to a transaction from liability for the
tax.
§ 102-18. Excluded transactions.
A. Every person who makes, executes, delivers, accepts or presents for
recording any document or in whose behalf any document is made,
executed, delivered, accepted or presented for recording shall be
subject to pay for, and in respect to the transaction or any part thereof,
a tax at the rate of 1% of the value of the real estate represented by
such document, which tax shall be payable at the earlier of the time the
document is presented for recording or within 30 days of acceptance of
such document or within 30 days of becoming an acquired company.
B. The payment of the tax imposed herein shall be evidenced by the
affixing of an official stamp or writing by the Recorder of Deeds
whereon the date of the payment of the tax, amount of the tax and the
signature of the collecting agent shall be set forth.
C. It is the intent of this chapter that the entire burden of the tax imposed
herein on a person or transfer shall not exceed the limitations
prescribed in the Local Tax Enabling Act, Act of December 31, 1965,
P.L. 1257, 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq., so that if any other political subdivision
shall impose or hereafter shall impose such tax on the same person or
transfer, then the tax levied by the Borough Council of the Borough of
Steelton under the authority of that Act shall, during the time such
duplication of the tax exists, except as hereinafter otherwise provided,
be 1/2 of the rate, and such one-half rate shall become effective without
any action on the part of the Borough Council of the Borough of
Steelton; provided, however, that the Borough of Steelton and any other
political subdivision which impose such tax on the same person or
transfer may agree that, instead of limiting their respective rates to 1/2
of the rate herein provided, they will impose respectively different
rates, the total of which shall not exceed the maximum rate permitted
under the Local Tax Enabling Act.
D. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate in
effect at the time the tax is due shall be added and collected.
A. The tax imposed by § 102-16 shall not be imposed upon:
(1) A transfer to the commonwealth or to any of its instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions by gift, dedication or deed in lieu
of condemnation or deed or confirmation in connection with
condemnation proceedings or a reconveyance by the condemning
body of property condemned to the owner of record at the time of
§ 102-16 § 102-18
102:454
condemnation, which reconveyance may include property line
adjustments, provided that said reconveyance is made within one
year from the date of condemnation.
(2) A document which the Borough of Steelton is prohibited from
taxing under the constitution or statutes of the United States.
(3) A conveyance to a municipality, township, school district or county
pursuant to acquisition by the municipality, township, school
district or county of a tax-delinquent property at a sheriff's sale or
Tax Claim Bureau sale.
(4) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration which corrects or
confirms a transfer previously recorded but which does not extend
or limit existing record legal title or interest.
(5) A transfer or division in kind for no or nominal actual consideration
of property passed by testate or intestate succession and held by
cotenants; however, if any of the parties take shares greater in
value than their undivided interest, tax is due on the excess.
(6) A transfer between husband and wife, between persons who were
previously husband and wife who have since been divorced,
provided that the property or interest therein subject to such
transfer was acquired by the husband and wife or husband or wife
prior to the granting of the final decree in divorce, between parent
and child or the spouse of such child, between brother and sister or
spouse of a brother or sister and between a grandparent and
grandchild or the spouse of such grandchild, except that a
subsequent transfer by the grantee within one year shall be subject
to tax as if the grantor were making such transfer.
(7) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration of property
passing by testate or intestate succession from a personal
representative of a decedent to the decedent's devisee or heir.
(8) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration to a trustee of an
ordinary trust where the transfer of the same property would be
exempt if the transfer were made directly from the grantor to all of
the possible beneficiaries, whether or not such beneficiaries are
contingent or specifically named. No such exemption shall be
granted unless the Recorder of Deeds is presented with a copy of
the trust instrument that clearly identifies the grantor and all
possible beneficiaries.
(9) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from a trustee to a
beneficiary of an ordinary trust.
(10) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from trustee to
successor trustee.
§ 102-18 TAXATION § 102-18
102:455
(11) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration between principal
and agent or straw party or from or to an agent or straw party
where, if the agent or straw party were his principal, no tax would
be imposed under this article.
(12) A transfer made pursuant to the statutory merger or consolidation
of a corporation or statutory division of a nonprofit corporation,
except where the Department reasonably determines that the
primary intent for such merger, consolidation or division is
avoidance of the tax imposed by this article.
(13) A transfer from a corporation or association of real estate held of
record in the name of the corporation or association where the
grantee owns stock of the corporation or an interest in the
association in the same proportion as his interest in or ownership of
the real estate being conveyed and where the stock of the
corporation or the interest in the association has been held by the
grantee for more than two years.
(14) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee of property conveyed by the grantee to that
agency or authority as security for a debt of the grantee or a
transfer to a nonprofit industrial development agency or authority.
(15) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee purchasing directly from it, but only if the
grantee shall directly use such real estate for the primary purpose
of manufacturing, fabricating, compounding, processing,
publishing, research and development, transportation, energy
conversion, energy production, pollution control, warehousing or
agriculture and the agency or authority has the full ownership
interest in the real estate transferred.
(16) A transfer by a mortgagor to the holder of a bona fide mortgage in
default in lieu of a foreclosure or a transfer pursuant to a judicial
sale in which the successful bidder is the bona fide holder of a
mortgage, unless the holder assigns the bid to another person.
(17) Any transfer between religious organizations or other bodies or
persons holding title for a religious organization if such real estate
is not being or has not been used by such transferor for commercial
purposes.
(18) A transfer to a conservancy which possesses a tax-exempt status
pursuant to Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of
1986, [68A Stat. 3 U.S.C. 501(c)(3)] and which has as its primary
purpose preservation of land for historic, recreational, scenic,
agricultural or open space opportunities.
(19) A transfer of real estate devoted to the business of agriculture to a
family farm corporation by a member of the same family which
directly owns at least 75% of each class of the stock thereof.
§ 102-18 § 102-18
102:456
§ 102-19. Corporate documents.
Except as otherwise provided in § 102-18, documents which make, confirm
or evidence any transfer or demise of title to real estate between
associations or corporations and the members, partners, shareholders or
stockholders thereof are fully taxable. For the purposes of this section,
corporations and associations are entities separate from their members,
partners, stockholders and shareholders.
§ 102-20. Acquired companies.
(20) A transfer between members of the same family of an ownership
interest in a real estate company or family farm corporation.
(21) A transaction wherein the tax is $1 or less.
(22) Leases for the production or extraction of coal, oil, natural gas or
minerals and assignments thereof.
B. Where the document by which title is acquired by a grantee or
statement of value fails to set forth that the property was acquired by
the grantee from or for the benefit of his principal, there is a rebuttable
presumption that the property is the property of the grantee in his
individual capacity if the grantee claims an exemption from taxation
under this subsection.
C. In order to exercise any exclusion provided in this section, the true, full
and complete value of the transfer shall be shown on the statement of
value. A copy of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax statement of value
may be submitted for this purpose. For leases of coal, oil, natural gas or
minerals, the statement of value may be limited to an explanation of the
reason such document is not subject to tax under this article.
A. A real estate company is an acquired company upon a change in
ownership interest in the company, however effected, if the change
does not affect the continuity of the company and, of itself or together
with prior changes, has the effect of transferring, directly or indirectly,
90% or more of the total ownership interest in the company within a
period of three years.
B. With respect to real estate acquired after February 16, 1986, a family
farm corporation is an acquired company when, because of voluntary or
involuntary dissolution, it ceases to be a family farm corporation or
when, because of issuance or transfer of stock or because of acquisition
or transfer of assets that are devoted to the business of agriculture, it
fails to meet the minimum requirements of a family farm corporation
under this article.
C. Within 30 days after becoming an acquired company, the company shall
present a declaration of acquisition with the recorder of each county in
which it holds real estate for the affixation of documentary stamps and
recording. Such declaration shall set forth the value of real estate
§ 102-18 TAXATION § 102-20
102:457
§ 102-21. Tax credits.
§ 102-21.1. Extension of lease.
In determining the term of a lease, it shall be presumed that a right or
option to renew or extend a lease will be exercised if the rental charge
to the lessee is fixed or if a method for calculating the rental charge is
established.
§ 102-21.2. Judicial sales.
The tax imposed shall be fully paid and have priority out of the proceeds
of any judicial sale of real estate before any other obligation, claim, lien,
judgment, estate or costs of the sale and of the writ upon which the
sale is made except the state realty transfer tax, and the Sheriff or other
officer conducting said sale shall pay the tax herein imposed out of its first
moneys paid to him in connection therewith. If the proceeds of the sale are
insufficient to pay the entire tax herein imposed, the purchaser shall be
liable for the remaining tax.
holdings of the acquired company in such county. A copy of the
Pennsylvania realty transfer tax declaration of acquisition may be
submitted for this purpose.
A. Where there is a transfer of a residential property by a licensed real
estate broker which property was transferred to him within the
preceding year as consideration for the purchase of other residential
property, a credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the
transfer to him shall be given to him toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
B. Where there is a transfer by a builder of residential property which was
transferred to the builder within the preceding year as a consideration
for the purchase of new, previously unoccupied residential property, a
credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the transfer to the
builder shall be given to the builder toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
C. Where there is a transfer of real estate which is leased by the grantor, a
credit for the amount of tax paid at the time of the lease shall be given
the grantor toward the tax due upon the transfer.
D. Where there is a conveyance by deed of real estate which was
previously sold under a land contract by the grantor, a credit for the
amount of the tax paid at the time of the sale shall be given the grantor
toward the tax due upon the deed.
E. If the tax due upon the transfer is greater than the credit given under
this section, the difference shall be paid. If the credit allowed is greater
than the amount of tax due, no refund or carry-over credit shall be
allowed.
§ 102-20 § 102-21.3
102:458
§ 102-21.3. Duties of Recorder of Deeds.
§ 102-21.4. Statement of value.
Every document lodged with or presented to the Recorder of Deeds for
recording shall set forth therein and as a part of such document the true,
full and complete value thereof or shall be accompanied by a statement
of value executed by a responsible person connected with the transaction
showing such connection and setting forth the true, full and complete value
thereof or the reason, if any, why such document is not subject to tax under
this article. A copy of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax statement of
value may be submitted for this purpose. The provisions of this section
shall not apply to any excludable real estate transfers which are exempt
from taxation based on family relationship. Other documents presented
for the affixation of stamps shall be accompanied by a certified copy of
the document and statement of value executed by a responsible person
connected with the transaction, showing such connection and setting forth
the true, full and complete value thereof or the reason, if any, why such
document is not subject to tax under this article.
§ 102-21.5. Violations and penalties.
A. As provided in 16 P.S. § 11011-6, as amended by Act of July 7, 1983 (P.L.
40, No. 21), the Recorder of Deeds shall be the collection agent for the
local realty transfer tax, including any amount payable to the Borough
of Steelton based on a redetermination of the amount of tax due by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax,
without compensation from the Borough of Steelton.
B. In order to ascertain the amount of the taxes due when the property is
located in more than one political subdivision, the Recorder shall not
accept for recording such a deed unless it is accompanied by a
statement of value showing what taxes are due each municipality.
C. On or before the 10th of each month, the Recorder shall pay over to the
Borough of Steelton all local realty transfer taxes collected, less 2% for
use of the county, together with a report containing the information as
is required by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in reporting
collections of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax. The commission of
2% shall be paid to the county.
D. Upon a redetermination of the amount of realty transfer tax due by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the Recorder shall rerecord the deed
or record the additional realty transfer tax form only when both the
state and local amounts and a rerecording or recording fee has been
tendered.
A. If any part of any underpayment of taxes imposed by this article is due
to fraud, there shall be added to the tax an amount equal to 50% of the
underpayment.
§ 102-21.3 TAXATION § 102-21.5
102:459
§ 102-21.6. Liens.
The tax imposed by this article shall become a lien upon the lands,
tenements or hereditaments or any interest therein lying or being situated
wholly or in part within the boundaries of the Borough of Steelton, which
lands, tenements, hereditaments or interest therein are described in or
conveyed by or transferred by the deed which is the subject of the tax
imposed, assessed and levied by this article, said lien to begin at the time
when the tax under this article is due and payable and continue until
discharged by payment or in accordance with the law, and the Solicitor is
authorized to file a municipal or tax claim in the Court of Common Pleas
of Dauphin County, in accordance with the provisions of the Municipal
Claims and Liens Act of 1923, 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq., its supplements and
amendments.
§ 102-21.7. Recoverability.
All taxes imposed by this article, together with interest and penalties
prescribed herein, shall be recoverable as other debts of like character are
recovered.
§ 102-21.8. Enforcement
The Recorder of Deeds of Dauphin County is charged with enforcement
and collection of the tax and is empowered to promulgate and enforce
reasonable regulations for enforcement and collection of the tax. The
regulations which have been promulgated by the Pennsylvania Department
of Revenue under 72 P.S. § 8101-C et seq. are incorporated into and made a
part of this article.
§ 102-21.9. Severability.
If any sentence, clause, section or part of this article is for any reason found
to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality
or invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions,
sentences, clauses, sections or parts of this article. It is hereby declared
as the intent of the Borough Council of the Borough of Steelton that this
article would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid
sentence, clause, section or part thereof not been included herein.
§ 102-21.10. Repealer.
All ordinances inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed.
B. In the case of failure to record a declaration required under this article
on the date prescribed therefor, unless it is shown that such failure is
due to reasonable cause, there shall be added to the tax 5% of the
amount of such tax if the failure is for not more than one month, with an
additional 5% for each additional month or fraction thereof during
which such failure continues, not exceeding 50% in the aggregate.
§ 102-21.5 § 102-21.11
102:460
§ 102-21.11. Effective date.
This article shall become effective on December 18, 1989, and shall
continue in effect on a calendar-year basis thereafter without annual
reenactment.
§ 102-21.11 TAXATION § 102-21.11
102:461

ARTICLE IV
Emergency and Municipal Services Tax
[Adopted 12-11-1967 by Ord. No. 67-7, approved
12-12-1967;5-20-1976 by Ord. No. 76A, approved 5-20-1976;
12-6-1999 by Ord. No. 99-8, approved 12-6-1999; 12-29-2004 by
Ord. No. 2004-13, approved 12-29-2004]
§ 102-22. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section except where the context or
language clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
ADMINISTRATOR — A person, bureau, officer, clerk, collector or entity
designated by resolution of the Borough Council of the Borough of Steelton
under whose direction this tax shall be administered and enforced.
BOROUGH OF STEELTON — The area within the corporate limits of the
Borough of Steelton.
EMPLOYER — An individual, partnership, association, corporation,
governmental body, agency or other entity employing one or more persons
on a salary, wage, commission or other compensation basis, including a selfemployed
person.
HE, HIS or HIM — Indicates the singular and plural number as well as male,
female and neuter gender.
INDIVIDUAL — Any person, male or female, engaged in any occupation,
trade or profession within the corporate limits of the Borough of Steelton.
OCCUPATION — Any trade, profession, business or undertaking of any
type, kind or character, including services, domestic or other, carried on or
performed within the corporate limits of the Borough of Steelton for which
compensation is charged or received, whether by means of salary, wages,
commissions or fees for services rendered.
TAX — The emergency and municipal services tax in the amount of $52
levied by this article.88
§ 102-23. Imposition of tax.
The Borough of Steelton levies and imposes on each occupation engaged in
by individuals within its corporate limits during the calendar year of 1968
and each calendar year thereafter an occupational privilege tax. This tax is
in addition to all other taxes of any kind or nature heretofore levied by the
Borough of Steelton.
§ 102-24. Amount; restricted use.
88.Editor's Note: The definition of "treasurer," which immediately followed this definition,
was repealed 12-6-1999 by Ord. No. 99-8, approved 12-6-1999.
§ 102-22 TAXATION § 102-24
102:463
§ 102-25. Responsibility of employer.
Each employer within the Borough of Steelton, as well as any employer
situated outside the Borough of Steelton but who engages in business
within the Borough of Steelton, is hereby charged with the duty of collecting
from each of his employees engaged by him and performing for him within
the Borough of Steelton, the said tax of $52 per annum and making a return
and payment thereof to the Administrator. Further, each employer is hereby
authorized to deduct this tax from each employee in his employ, whether
said employee is paid by salary, wages or commission and whether or not
part or all such services are performed within the Borough of Steelton.
§ 102-26. Filing of returns; compensation.
Each employer shall prepare and file a return showing a computation of the
tax on forms to be supplied to him by the Administrator, Municipal Building,
123 North Front Street, Steelton, Pennsylvania. Each employer, in filing this
return and making payment of the tax withheld from his employees, shall be
entitled to retain a commission calculated at the rate of 2% of the gross tax
due and payable, provided that such tax is collected and paid over by the
employer on or before the dates hereinafter set forth. It is further provided
that if the employer fails to file said return and pay said tax, whether or not
he makes collection thereof from the salary, wages or commissions paid by
him to said employee, the employer shall be responsible for the payment of
the tax in full without deducting a commission and as though the tax had
originally been levied against him.
§ 102-27. Determination of liability for payment.
Each employer shall, in each calendar year, use his employment records
from the first day of January to the 31st day of March for determining
the number of employees from whom said tax shall be deducted and paid
over to the Administrator on or before April 30. Supplemental reports shall
A. Beginning with the first day of January 2005, each occupation, as
hereinbefore defined, engaged in within the corporate limits of the
Borough of Steelton shall be subject to an emergency and municipal
services tax in the amount of $52 per annum, said tax to be paid by the
individual so engaged.
B. All funds derived from the emergency and municipal services tax may
be used only for:
(1) Police, fire and/or emergency services;
(2) Road construction and/or maintenance; or
(3) Reduction of property taxes,
C. The allocation of the funds derived from said tax among the purposes of
Subsection B(1), (2), or (3) above to be determined solely by the
Borough Council of the Borough of Steelton.
§ 102-24 § 102-27
102:464
be made by each employer on July 31, October 31 and January 31 of the
following calendar year of new employees as reflected on his employment
records from April 1 to June 30; July 1 to September 30 and October 1
to December 31. Payments on these supplemental reports shall be made
on July 31, October 31 and January 31 of the following calendar year,
respectively.
§ 102-28. Individuals with more than one occupation.
§ 102-29. Self-employed individuals.
All self-employed individuals who perform services of any type or kind
and who engage in any occupation or profession within the Borough of
Steelton shall be required to comply with this article and pay the tax to
the Administrator on April 30 of the calendar year or as soon thereafter
as they engage in an occupation. In the event that a self-employed person
is engaged in more than one occupation within or without the Borough
A. Each individual who shall have more than one occupation within the
Borough of Steelton shall be subject to the payment of this tax on his
principal occupation, and his principal employer shall deduct this tax
and deliver to him evidence of deductions on a form to be furnished to
the employer by the Administrator, which form shall be evidence of
deduction having been made and, when presented to any other
employer, shall be authority for such employer to not deduct this tax
from the employee's wages, but to include such employee on his return
by setting forth his name, address and the name and account number of
the employer who deducted this tax.
B. In the event that a person is engaged in more than one occupation or an
occupation which requires his working in more than one political
subdivision during the calendar year, the priority of claim to collect
such occupational privilege tax shall be in the following order: first, the
political subdivision in which a person maintains his principal office or
is principally employed; second, the political subdivision in which the
person resides and works, if such a tax is levied by that political
subdivision; third, the political subdivision in which a person is
employed and which imposes the tax nearest in miles to the person's
home. The place of employment shall be determined as of the day the
taxpayer first becomes subject to the tax during the calendar year. It is
the intent of this provision that no person shall pay more than $52 in
any calendar year as an occupational privilege tax, irrespective of the
number of political subdivisions within which such person may be
employed within any given calendar year. In case of dispute, a tax
receipt of the taxing authority for that calendar year, declaring that the
taxpayer has made prior payment, constitutes prima facie certification
of payment to all other political subdivisions.
C. Deduction or nondeduction and reporting by employers shall be in
accordance with Subsection A.
§ 102-27 TAXATION § 102-29
102:465
or an occupation which requires his working in more than one political
subdivision during the year, reporting priority of claims and prima facie
certification of payment shall be in accordance with § 102-28A and B.
§ 102-30. Persons residing outside corporate limits.
All employers and self-employed individuals residing or having their place
of business outside of the Borough of Steelton, but performing services of
any type or kind or engaging in any occupation or profession within the
Borough of Steelton, do by virtue thereof agree to be bound by and subject
themselves to the provisions, penalties and regulations promulgated under
this article with the same force and effect as though they were residents of
the Borough of Steelton. Further, any individual engaged in an occupation
within the Borough of Steelton and an employee of a nonresident employer
may, for the purpose of this article, be considered a self-employed person,
and in the event that this tax is not paid, the Borough shall have the option
of proceeding against either the employer or employee for the collection of
this tax as hereinafter provided.
§ 102-31. Administration and enforcement.
§ 102-32. Suits for collection.
A. It shall be the duty of the Administrator to accept and receive payment
of this tax and to keep a record thereof showing the amount received by
him from each employer or self-employed person, together with the
date the tax was received.
B. The Administrator is hereby charged with the administration and
enforcement of this article and is hereby charged and empowered to
prescribe, adopt and promulgate rules and regulations relating to any
matter pertaining to the administration and enforcement of this article,
including provisions for the examination of the payroll records of any
employer subject to this article and the examination and correction of
any return made in compliance with this article and any payment
alleged or found to be incorrect or as to which overpayment is claimed
or found to have occurred or any payment made by a taxpayer who is
engaged in a business or occupation or businesses or occupations
within the corporate limits of the Borough of Steelton, from which he
derives in the aggregate less than $1,000 per year gross income. Any
person aggrieved by any decision of the Administrator shall have the
right to appeal to the Court of Common Pleas of Dauphin County as in
other cases provided.
C. The Administrator is hereby authorized to examine the books and
payroll records of any employer in order to verify the accuracy of any
return made by an employer or, if no return was made, to ascertain the
tax due. Each employer is hereby directed and required to give the
Administrator the means, facilities and opportunity for such
examination.
§ 102-29 § 102-32
102:466
§ 102-33. Violations and penalties.
Whoever makes any false or untrue statement on any return required by
this article or refuses inspection of his books, records or accounts in his
custody and control setting forth the number of employees subject to this
tax who are in his employment, or whoever fails or refuses to file any return
required by this article shall, upon a summary conviction before the District
Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600 for each offense
and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, be imprisoned in the local
or Dauphin County jail for a period not exceeding 30 days for each offense.
It is further provided that the action to enforce the fine and penalty herein
provided may be instituted against any person in charge of the business
of any employer who has failed or refused to file a return required by this
article.
§ 102-34. Effect of court decisions.
If the tax hereby imposed under the provisions of this article shall be held
by any court of competent jurisdiction to be in violation of the Constitution
of the United States or of the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
as to any individual, the decision of the court shall not affect or impair the
right to impose or collect said tax or the validity of the tax so imposed on
other persons or individuals as herein provided.
§ 102-35. When effective.
This article shall become effective January 1, 1968, and remain in force
during the calendar year 1968 and each calendar year thereafter.
§ 102-36. Legislative authority.
This article is enacted under the authority of the Act of December 31, 1965,
P.L. 1257, as amended.89
A. In the event that any tax under this article remains due or unpaid 30
days after the due dates above set forth, the Administrator may sue for
the recovery of any such tax due or unpaid under this article, together
with interest and penalty.
B. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6%
on the amount of said tax shall be calculated beginning with the due
date of said tax, and a penalty of 5% shall be added to the flat rate of
said tax for nonpayment thereof. Where suit is brought for the recovery
of this tax, the individual liable therefor shall, in addition, be
responsible and liable for the costs of collection.
89.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.
§ 102-32 TAXATION § 102-36
102:467

ARTICLE V
Tax Rate
[Adopted 12-29-1980 by Ord. No. 80-4, approved 12-29-1980;90
11-15-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-11, approved 11-15-2004]
§ 102-37. Tax rate established.
A. That a tax be and the same is hereby levied on all persons owning
property within the Borough of Steelton, Dauphin County, Pennsylvania,
and subject to taxation for Borough purposes for the fiscal year 2005
beginning the first day of January, A.D., 2005 and ending the 31st day of
December A.D. 2005, as follows, to wit:
(1) Tax at a tax rate for general purposes, 12.0 mills on each dollar of
assessed valuation on real estate classified as nonfarmland and
10.0 mills on each dollar of assessed valuation on real estate
classified as buildings on land pursuant to 53 P.S. § 46302.1.
(2) For purposes of this section:
FARMLAND — Includes any tract of land that is actively devoted
to agricultural use, including but not limited to the commercial
production of "crops, livestock and livestock products," as defined
in Section 3 of the Act of June 30, 1981 (P.L. 128, No. 43) (3 P.S.
§ 903), known as the "Agricultural Area Security Law."
NONFARMLAND — Includes any tract of land that is not farmland.
B. That a tax be and the same is hereby levied on all occupations within
the Borough of Steelton subject to taxation for the fiscal year 2005 as
follows: tax rate for general purposes 20 mills on each dollar of
assessed valuation pursuant to 53 P.S. § 46302(b).
90.Editor's Note: This ordinance also superseded Ord. No. 79-4, adopted 12-27-1979,
approved 12-27-1979, which established the tax rate for the fiscal year 1980.
§ 102-37 TAXATION § 102-37
102:469

ARTICLE VI
Off-Premises Sign Tax
[Adopted 12-22-1997 by Ord. No. 97-10, approved 12-22-1997]
§ 102-38. Title; effective date.
This article shall be known as the "Off-Premises Sign Tax." The provisions
hereof shall first become effective January 1, 1998.
§ 102-39. Purposes.
The Borough of Steelton, through which numerous state highways and an
interstate route traverse and in which numerous business are located, is
impacted by an ever increasing volume of vehicular traffic. The Borough
of Steelton, due to the ever increasing vehicular traffic, incurs costs for
police, street, fire, emergency management services and infrastructure
growth, among others. By lease or rental fees, owners of off-premises
sign structures benefit greatly from the ever increasing volume of traffic
through the Borough. On-premises sign structures are primarily to identify
businesses, professionals, activities, commodities, services or
entertainment conducted, sold or offered upon the premises where the
signs are located, in contrast to off-premises sign structures that are
sources of income to their owners. Off-premises sign structures are not
assessed for real property taxes within the Borough, whether or not
permanently affixed to the land. The maintenance of off-premises sign
structures is a privilege subject to taxation by the Borough under the Local
Tax Enabling Act, i.e., Act of December 31, 1965, P.L. 1257, as amended (53
P.S. § 6901 et seq.).
§ 102-40. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section except where the context or
language clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
BUSINESS IDENTIFICATION SIGN — Any sign that directs attention to
a business, profession, activity, commodity, service, product price, or
entertainment conducted, sold or offered upon the premises where such
sign is located or within the building to which such sign is affixed.
GROSS SURFACE AREA — The entire area within a single continuous
perimeter composed of a single face enclosing the extreme limits of
characters, lettering, illustrations, ornamentations or other figures together
with a material or color forming an integral part of the display or to
differentiate the sign from the background to which it is placed. Structural
supports shall not be included in gross surface area.
INCIDENTAL, TEMPORARY EXTERIOR SIGN — Any sign not regularly
or permanently displayed at a location, which sign advertises or directs
attention to an event, activity, service, commodity or attraction of limited
§ 102-38 TAXATION § 102-40
102:471
duration (not more than 30 days), including but not limited to yard sales,
auctions, chicken barbecue dinners, birth announcements and bake sales.
OFF-PREMISES SIGNS — Any sign visible from a public way that directs
attention to a business, commodity, service, entertainment, attraction or
subject sold, offered or existing elsewhere than upon the same lot where
such sign is displayed. The term "off-premises sign" shall include an outdoor
advertising sign (billboard) on which space is leased or rented by the
owner thereof to others for the purpose of conveying a commercial or
noncommercial message.
POLITICAL SIGN — Any sign which advertises a person or party seeking
political office or a political cause or opinion on a referendum or matter
of political concern and which relates to a scheduled election or matter of
upcoming vote by a governmental body.
§ 102-41. License requirement.
The owner of every lot upon which an off-premises sign is located within the
Borough of Steelton shall be responsible to obtain an annual off-premises
sign license for every off-premises sign located thereon. The term for such
license shall be February 1 to January 31. Every owner shall be responsible
to obtain such license(s) by February 1 of every year.
§ 102-42. License application.
§ 102-43. Payment of tax.
With the annual application for an off-premises sign license, the owner shall
pay the full amount of the off-premises sign tax, which shall be calculated by
multiplying by $2 the gross surface area, measured in square feet, of the offpremises
sign. If a new off-premises sign is erected between February 1 and
June 30, inclusive, the full amount of the tax for the year shall be paid. If a
A. Application for an off-premises sign license shall be made by the lot
owner upon a form provided by the Borough of Steelton which shall
require the following information:
(1) The name and address of the owner of the lot upon which the offpremises
sign is located.
(2) The address of or description of the location of the lot where the offpremises
sign is located.
(3) The gross surface area of the sign.
(4) When there is more than one sign on a lot, a description of the offpremises
sign sufficient to identify the same.
(5) The name and address of the sign operator, if any.
B. A separate application form must be submitted for every off-premises
sign.
§ 102-40 § 102-43
102:472
new off-premises sign is erected between June 30 and February 1, inclusive,
1/2 of the tax shall be paid.
§ 102-44. Exemptions.
The following types of signs are exempt from the provisions of this chapter:
business identification signs, real estate signs, incidental temporary
exterior signs, identification signs and political signs, as defined in this
chapter or in Chapter 120, § 120-162A, B, D, E, F, G, H, and § 120-63, of
the Code of Ordinances of the Borough of Steelton, as well as attraction
signage installed by local or state governmental entities in rights-of-way for
the purpose of directing interested persons to specific sites.
§ 102-45. Enforcement, notification, suit for collection; penalties.
A. The Code Enforcement Officer of the Borough of Steelton shall enforce
the provisions of this chapter. When an owner fails to properly submit
an application and pay the tax provided for in § 102-43 by February 1 or
within 14 days of erecting a new off-premises sign, the Code
Enforcement Officer or his designee shall notify the owner by certified
mail, return receipt requested, that the license application must be
submitted within 30 days.
B. If the application is not submitted within 30 days, the Code
Enforcement Officer or his designee may sue for the recovery of the tax
due, together with interest at the rate of 6% on the amount of the tax
calculated beginning with the due date of said tax, and a penalty of 5%
shall be added to the flat rate of said tax for nonpayment thereof; in
addition, the Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a nontraffic
summary citation. Upon conviction thereof, the owner shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600, together with costs of
prosecution. Every off-premises sign for which a proper application has
not been submitted shall be considered a separate offense.
§ 102-43 TAXATION § 102-45
102:473

ARTICLE VII
Occupation Tax
[Adopted 12-22-1997 by Ord. No. 97-9, approved 12-22-1997]
§ 102-46. Title; effective date.
This article shall be known as the "Occupation Tax." The provisions hereof
shall first become effective January 1, 1998.
§ 102-47. Purposes.
The Borough of Steelton provides numerous municipal services, including
police protection; street construction, maintenance and repairs; collection
and transportation and treatment of sewage; collection and disposal of
trash, garbage, rubbish and other materials; fire protection; emergency
management services; recreation facilities and programs; community
development; among others. For such general revenue purposes, it is
necessary that the Borough provide revenue from many sources, including
occupations of its citizens. The taxation of occupations is subject to taxation
by the Borough under the Local Tax Enabling Act, i.e., Act of December 31,
1965, P.L. 1257, as amended (53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.)
§ 102-48. Tax levied.
An occupation tax of 40% of the value of all occupations, as assessed on
the assessment rolls for Dauphin County tax purposes, is hereby levied and
assessed for general revenue purposes for the calendar year commencing
January 1, 1998, and thereafter until repealed, upon the occupations of all
persons residing in the Borough of Steelton, Dauphin County, Pennsylvania,
who are 18 years of age or older, but under the age of 65 years as of January
1 of the year for which the tax is imposed. The rate of taxation in dollars
and cents on each $250 assessed value of taxable occupation is $100 based
on said percentage of 40%.
§ 102-49. Residents 18 years or older.
Persons residing in the Borough who become 18 years of age on or after
January 1, 1998, or who, being 18 years of age or older, are not on the
current Dauphin County assessment rolls, shall report the attainment of
that age to the Borough of Steelton Secretary-Treasurer.
§ 102-50. Residents 65 years or older.
Persons residing in the Borough of Steelton who become 65 years of age
or older shall report the attainment of that age to the Borough of Steelton
Secretary-Treasurer.
§ 102-51. Other tax levies.
This occupation tax shall be in addition to all other property, per capita,
residence, occupational privilege, or any other taxes levied by the Borough
§ 102-46 TAXATION § 102-51
102:475
of Steelton under the authority of the Borough Code, the Local Tax Enabling
Act or any other legislative taxing authority.
§ 102-52. Value and assessment; collection; enforcement.
Any occupation which is not valued and assessed for county purposes shall
for the purposes of the tax hereby imposed be valued and assessed at $250.
The person against whom said occupation tax is levied, as well as the spouse
of every person against whom said occupation tax is levied, shall be liable
for the payment of said tax. Collection thereof from said person or said
person's spouse may be made and enforced in the manner provided by law
for the collection and enforcement of other taxes owing by such person
or spouse, including the collection thereof through the person or spouse's
employer by authorized legal procedure.
§ 102-53. Computation and collection of tax. [Amended 11-15-2004
by Ord. No. 2004-12, approved 11-15-2004]
The Borough of Steelton Secretary-Treasurer is hereby directed to compute
any of the amount of the tax levied hereunder to the tax duplicate furnished
to the Tax Officer. The tax levied and assessed hereunder shall be collected
by the Borough of Steelton Tax Officer, in accordance with the terms and
conditions of said Tax Officer's duties and responsibilities, together with
the provisions of this article. The position of Tax Officer referred to in this
article shall be filled and performed by the Steelton Tax Administrator or his
or her designee.
§ 102-54. Tax discount; collection; penalty. [Amended 11-15-2004
by Ord. No. 2004-12, approved 11-15-2004]
The Tax Officer shall allow a two-percent discount on the taxes levied and
assessed hereunder if paid within two months of the date of the tax notice.
In the event such taxes are not paid within four months of the date of said
notice, a penalty of 5% of the amount of the tax, together with an additional
penalty equal to the costs of collection, shall be added. In the event such
taxes are not paid within six months of the date of said notice, a penalty
of 10% of the amount of the tax, together with an additional penalty equal
to the costs of collection, shall be added. In addition thereto, the tax as
increased by the above-mentioned penalties shall accumulate interest at
the legal rate on a monthly basis until paid. The provisions with respect to
penalties and collection which are recited herein shall be in addition to all
other provisions and costs of collection which are provided and permitted
by law.
§ 102-55. Exemption.
Any person whose total income from all sources is less than $4,000 per
annum is exempted from the provisions of this tax; provided, however, said
person shall complete and submit to the Tax Officer a written request for
exemption, on the form provided for said purpose.
§ 102-51 § 102-56
102:476
§ 102-56. Effective date.
The tax imposed by this article is imposed for the calendar year beginning
January 1, 1998, and ending December 31, 1998, and shall remain in effect
thereafter on an annual basis until repealed.
§ 102-57. Severability.
If any sentence, clause, section or part of this article is for any reason found
to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality
or invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions,
sentences, clauses, sections or parts of this article. It is hereby declared as
the intent of the Borough Council that this article would have been adopted
had such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid sentence, clause, section or part
thereof not been included herein.
§ 102-56 TAXATION § 102-57
102:477

ARTICLE VIII
Local Taxpayers Bill of Rights
[Adopted 3-15-1999 by Ord. No. 99-2, approved 3-15-1999]
§ 102-58. Policy and intention.
The General Assembly of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania enacted the
Local Taxpayers Bill of Rights (the LTBR) within the provisions of Act 50
of 1998 (53 Pa.C.S.A. § 8421 et seq.). The Local Taxpayers Bill of Rights
requires political subdivisions levying certain local taxes (eligible taxes),
as that term is defined in the LTBR, to adopt rules and regulations for
practice, procedure and administration in the audit, assessment appeal,
determination and collection of eligible taxes. The Borough of Steelton
levies certain taxes which qualify as eligible taxes under the LTBR. In order
to comply with the requirements of the Local Taxpayers Bill of Rights, the
Borough Council of the Borough of Steelton desires to adopt rules and
regulations for practice and procedure implementing the LTBR, a notice
to taxpayers, a disclosure statement and administrative appeal procedures
relating to taxpayer petitions.
§ 102-59. Rules and regulations.
The rules and regulations attached hereto as Schedule I and incorporated
herein are hereby approved and adopted.91
§ 102-60. Disclosure statement.
The disclosure statement, substantially in the form set forth in Schedule 292
attached hereto and incorporated herein, is hereby approved and adopted.
§ 102-61. Petition for appeal and refund.
The form of petition for appeal and refund, substantially in the form set
forth in Schedule 393 attached hereto and incorporated herein, is hereby
approved and adopted.
§ 102-62. Administrative appeal process.
The administrative appeal process set forth in the rules and regulations
and substantially in the form set forth in Schedule 4,94 attached hereto and
incorporated herein, are hereby approved and adopted.
§ 102-63. Administrative appeal procedures.
The governing body hereby determines that administrative appeal
procedures applicable to petitions for appeal and refund in the form set
91.Editor's Note: Said schedule is on file in the Borough offices.
92.Editor's Note: Said schedule is on file in the Borough offices.
93.Editor's Note: Said schedule is on file in the Borough offices.
94.Editor's Note: Said schedule is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 102-58 TAXATION § 102-63
102:479
forth in Schedule 5,95 attached hereto and incorporated herein, submitted
by taxpayers in connection with the assessment, determination or refund of
an eligible tax under the LTBR shall be undertaken by the hearing officer.
§ 102-64. Hearing officer appointed.
The governing body hereby appoints the Secretary-Treasurer as the hearing
officer.
95.Editor's Note: Said schedule is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 102-63 § 102-64
102:480
Chapter 105
TRAILERS, TRAILER CAMPS AND TOURIST CAMPS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 44.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 58.
Sewers — See Ch. 90.
Zoning — See Ch. 120.
§ 105-1. Definitions.
Whenever used in this chapter, unless a different meaning appears from the
context, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
AUTOMOBILE TRAILER, TRAILER COACH, TRAILER — Any vehicle or
structure designed and constructed in such manner as will permit
occupancy thereof as sleeping quarters for one or more persons, or the
conduct of any business or profession, occupation or trade, or use as a
selling or advertising device, and so designed that it is or may be mounted
on wheels and used as a conveyance on highways or city streets, propelled
or drawn by its own or other motive power, except a device used exclusively
upon stationary rails or tracks.
CABIN PLOT — A section of ground not less than 30 by 40 feet in area, upon
which only one camp cottage or cabin is located.
PERSON — Includes a person, partnership, firm, company, corporation,
tenant, owner, lessee or licensee, its agents, heirs or assigns.
TOURIST CAMP — Any park, tourist park, tourist court, camp, court, site,
lot, parcel or tract of land upon which one or more camp cottages or cabins
are located and maintained for the accommodation of transients by the day,
week or month, whether a charge is made or not.
TRAILER CAMP — Any park, trailer park, trailer court, camp, court, site,
lot, parcel or tract of land designed, maintained or intended for the purpose
of supplying a location or accommodations for any trailer coach or trailer
coaches and upon which any trailer coach or trailer coaches are parked and
includes all buildings used or intended for use as part of the equipment
thereof, whether a charge is made for the use of the trailer camp and its
facilities or not. "Trailer camp" shall not include automobile or trailer sales
lots on which unoccupied trailers are parked for purposes of inspection and
sale.
UNIT — A section of ground in a trailer camp of not less than 800 square
feet of unoccupied space in an area designated as the location for only one
automobile and one trailer.
§ 102-64 TRAILERS, TRAILER CAMPS AND TOURIST § 105-2
105:481
§ 105-2. Administration and enforcement. [Amended 5-20-1976 by
Ord. No. 76-4, approved 5-20-1976]
A board, consisting of the Zoning Enforcement Officer, Chief of the Fire
Department, Chief of the Police Department and the Borough Secretary,
is hereby created with the Zoning Enforcement Officer as Chairman. The
Borough Secretary shall be the Secretary for the Board. It is hereby made
the duty of said Board to enforce all provisions of this chapter as prescribed
herein or such provisions as may hereafter be enacted, and for the purpose
of securing such enforcement, any of the above members of the Board or
their duly authorized representatives shall have the right and are hereby
empowered to enter upon any premises on which any automobile trailers or
camp cottages or cabins are located or are about to be located and inspect
the same and all accommodations connected therewith at any reasonable
time. The Board is further empowered to issue orders granting, renewing
and revoking such permits and licenses as are provided for in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 105-3. Location outside trailer camp prohibited except for
emergencies or storage.
§ 105-4. Use for permanent occupancy prohibited.
Automobile trailers shall not be used as a permanent place of abode or as
a permanent dwelling or for indefinite periods of time; provided, however,
that any such trailer properly connected with the Borough water supply
and sanitary sewer systems and constructed and located in compliance with
all requirements of the building, plumbing, sanitary, health and all other
applicable ordinances of the Borough of Steelton and not inhabited by a
greater number of occupants than that for which it was designed may be
A. It shall be unlawful, within the limits of the Borough of Steelton, for any
person to park any trailer on any street, alley or highway or other public
place or on any tract of land owned by any person, occupied or
unoccupied, within the Borough of Steelton, except as provided in this
chapter.
B. Emergency or temporary stopping or parking is permitted on any
street, alley or highway for not longer than six hours, subject to any
other and further prohibitions, regulations or limitations imposed by
the traffic and parking regulations or ordinances for that street, alley or
highway.
C. No person shall park or occupy any trailer on the premises of any
occupied dwelling or on any lot which is not a part of the premises of
any occupied dwelling, either of which is situated outside an approved
trailer camp, except that the parking of only one unoccupied trailer in
an accessory private garage building or in a rear yard in any district is
permitted, provided no living quarters shall be maintained nor any
business practiced in said trailer while such trailer is so parked or
stored.
§ 105-2 § 105-4
105:482
permitted on any premises under permits properly secured as provided
for in said building, plumbing, sanitary, health and all other applicable
ordinances of the Borough of Steelton.
§ 105-5. License required; application and issuance procedure.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, operate or maintain or
permit to be established, operated or maintained, upon any property
owned or controlled by him, a trailer camp or tourist camp or
combination of the two within the limits of the Borough of Steelton
without having first secured a license therefor, and for each of them,
from the Board, granted and existing in compliance with the terms of
this chapter. Such license shall expire one year from the date of
issuance but may be renewed under the provisions of this chapter for
additional periods of one year.
B. The application for such license or the renewal thereof shall be filed
with the Chairman of the Board and shall be accompanied by a fee of
$25 for each unit and cabin plot in the existing or proposed camp and a
license bond in the sum of $5,000 to guarantee compliance with the
terms of this chapter. The application for a license or a renewal thereof
shall be made on printed forms furnished by the Board and shall include
the name and address of the owner in fee of the tract (if the fee is vested
in some person other than the applicant, a duly verified statement by
that person that the applicant is authorized by him to construct or
maintain the trailer or tourist camp and make the application) and such
a legal description of the premises upon which the trailer or tourist
camp is or will be located as will readily identify and definitely locate
the premises. The application shall be accompanied by four copies of
the camp plan showing the following, either existing or as proposed:
[Amended 5-20-1976 by Ord. No. 76-4, approved 5-20-1976]
(1) The extent and area used for camp purposes.
(2) Roadways and driveways.
(3) Location of sites or units for trailer coaches or cabins.
(4) Location and number of sanitary conveniences, including toilets,
washrooms, laundries and utility rooms to be used by occupants of
units or cabins (in cases where cabins do not have all such facilities
in proper conformance with Borough building, plumbing and other
ordinances).
(5) Method and plan of sewage disposal.
(6) Method and plan of garbage removal.
(7) Plan for water supply.
(8) Plan for electrical lighting of units and cabins.
§ 105-4 TRAILERS, TRAILER CAMPS AND TOURIST § 105-5
105:483
§ 105-6. Location requirements.
§ 105-7. Camp plan.
C. Before such license may be issued, there must be a favorable
recommendation by a majority of the Board of the Borough of Steelton,
and the premises must be inspected and approved by each of the
members of the Board or their duly authorized representatives as
complying with all the provisions of this chapter and all other applicable
ordinances of the Borough of Steelton.
D. Licenses issued under the terms of this chapter convey no right to erect
any building, to do any plumbing work or to do any electrical work.
A. No trailer or tourist camp shall be located within the limits of the
Borough of Steelton unless Borough water and sewer connections and
fire protection facilities are available.
B. No occupied trailer or camp cottage or cabin cottage or cabin or other
building shall be located within the Borough limits of the Borough of
Steelton, within the recognized setback line in the area of the Borough
in which such trailer or cabin is located nor less than 10 feet from any
other building or vehicle or the boundary line of the tract on which it is
located.
A. Every trailer or tourist camp shall be located on a well-drained area,
and the premises shall be properly graded so as to prevent the
accumulation of storm or other waters.
B. Units and cabin plots shall be clearly designated and the camp so
arranged that all units and cabin plots shall face or abut on a driveway
of not less than 16 feet in width, giving easy access from all units to a
public street. Such driveway shall be paved and maintained in good
condition, having natural drainage into a Borough street catch basin,
shall be well-lighted at night and shall not be obstructed.
C. No camp cottage or cabin shall be less than 280 square feet nor less
than 14 feet wide at its narrowest point and not less than eight feet high
from floor to ceiling and shall not have less than 27 square feet of
ventilating openings, and all windows must be fully screened. If the
floor be of wood, it shall be raised not less than 12 inches above the
ground level.
D. The camp shall be so laid out that no unit or cabin shall be located
farther than 200 feet from the toilets and service buildings provided for
herein, and walkways to such buildings shall be paved and well-lighted
at night.
E. Every trailer unit shall be furnished with an electric service outlet. Such
outlet shall be equipped with an externally operated switch or fuse of
not less than 30 amperes' capacity and a heavy-duty outlet receptacle.
§ 105-5 § 105-8
105:484
§ 105-8. Requirements for water supply.
§ 105-9. Service building facilities.
§ 105-10. Requirements for waste and garbage disposal.
A. An adequate supply of pure water, furnished through a pipe distribution
system connected directly with the Borough water main, with supply
faucets located not more than 200 feet from any trailer or cabin, shall
be furnished for drinking and domestic purposes.
B. No common drinking vessels shall be permitted, nor shall any drinking
water faucets be placed in any toilet room or water closet compartment.
C. An abundant supply of hot water shall be provided at all times for
bathing, washing and laundry facilities.
A. Every trailer or tourist camp shall have erected thereon, at a distance
not greater than 200 feet from any unit or cabin it is designed to serve,
a suitable building for housing toilets, showers and laundry facilities as
required by this chapter, such building to be known as the "service
building."
B. There shall be provided separate toilet rooms for each sex. Flush toilets
provided with an adequate water supply shall be enclosed in separate
compartments having a minimum width of four feet and a depth of eight
feet and shall be provided for each sex in the ratio of one toilet for each
eight units or cabins or fraction thereof. Every male toilet room shall
have one urinal for each 16 units or cabins, but in no case shall any
male toilet be without one urinal. Toilet rooms shall contain lavatories
with hot and cold water in the ratio of one lavatory to every two or less
water closets.
C. Separate bathing facilities for each sex shall be provided, with one
shower, enclosed in a compartment at least four feet square, for each
eight units or cabins or fraction thereof. Each shower compartment
shall be supplemented by an individual dressing compartment of at
least 12 square feet.
D. Laundry facilities shall be provided in the ratio of one double tray and
one ironing board for each 10 units or cabins.
E. The above accommodations shall be based on the total camp capacity
according to accepted plans.
F. Floors of toilets, showers and the laundry shall be of concrete, tile or
similar material impervious to water and easily cleaned and pitched to a
floor drain.
A. All waste from showers, toilets, laundries, faucets and lavatories shall
be washed into a sewer system extended from and connected with the
Borough sewer system.
§ 105-8 TRAILERS, TRAILER CAMPS AND TOURIST § 105-10
105:485
§ 105-11. Length of stay and number of occupants limited.
§ 105-12. Responsibilities of management.
B. All sanitary facilities in any trailer which are not connected with the
Borough sewer system by means of rigid pipe connections shall be
sealed, and their use is hereby declared unlawful.
C. Each faucet site shall be equipped with facilities for drainage of waste
and excess water into the sewer. In no case shall any wastewater be
thrown or discharged upon the surface of the ground or disposed of by
means other than as herein provided.
D. Every unit shall be provided with a substantial flytight metal garbage
depository from which the contents shall be removed by the Borough
garbage collection service.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to remain or live in any trailer or
tourist camp for more than 90 days in each twelve-month period,
subject to the provisions of § 105-4, except that upon a showing and
proof that one or more occupants of a trailer or cabin are engaged in
vital national defense work and that there exists in the community a
shortage of adequate housing facilities, additional stays of 60 days may
be granted by the Board, such additional stays being renewable at the
end of each sixty-day period upon a further and similar showing;
provided, however, that this time limitation shall not apply to the
licensee of a trailer or tourist camp or his bona fide employees so as to
prevent their remaining on the camp premises at all times.
B. No trailer or cabin may be inhabited by a greater number of occupants
than that for which it was designed.
A. In every trailer or tourist camp there shall be an office building in which
shall be located the office of the person in charge of said camp. A copy
of the camp license and of this chapter shall be posted therein, and the
camp register shall at all times be kept in said office.
B. It is hereby made the duty of the attendant or person in charge,
together with the licensee, to: [Amended 5-20-1976 by Ord. No.
76-4, approved 5-20-1976]
(1) Keep at all times a register of all guests, which shall be open at all
times to inspection by state and federal officers and the Zoning
Enforcement Officer of the Borough of Steelton, showing for all
guests:
(a) Names and addresses.
(b) Dates of entrance and departure.
(c) License numbers of all trailers and towing or other
automobiles.
§ 105-10 § 105-12
105:486
§ 105-13. Service and inspection charge.
There is hereby imposed a service and inspection charge of $0.25 per day
per unit on the occupant or occupants of each unit of trailer camps licensed
hereunder. The licensee of the trailer camp shall collect this service charge
for the Borough of Steelton and pay it over to the Borough Treasurer in
accordance with such reasonable regulations governing such payments as
the Treasurer may promulgate.
§ 105-14. Plumbing, electrical and building standards.
All plumbing, electrical, building and other work on or at any camp licensed
under this chapter shall be in accordance with the ordinances of the
Borough of Steelton regulating such work unless said ordinances are
specifically made inapplicable under the terms of this chapter.
§ 105-15. Revocation and suspension of license.
The Board is hereby authorized to revoke any license issued pursuant to
the terms of this chapter if, after due investigation, it determines that the
(d) States issuing such licenses.
(e) Place of last location and length of stay.
(2) Maintain the camp in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition at all
times.
(3) See that the provisions of this chapter are complied with and
enforced and report promptly to the proper authorities any
violations of this chapter or any other violations of law which may
come to his attention.
(4) Report to the Zoning Enforcement Officer all cases of persons or
animals infected or suspected of being infected with any
communicable disease.
(5) Prevent the running loose of dogs, cats or other animals or pets.
(6) Maintain in convenient places, approved by the Fire Department,
hand fire extinguishers in the ratio of one to each eight units or
cabins.
(7) Collect the service charge, provided for in § 105-13, from the
occupants of each unit in the camp and pay over the money so
collected to the Treasurer of the Borough of Steelton. A book shall
be kept showing the names of the persons paying such service
charges and the amount paid.
(8) Prohibit the lighting of open fires on the premises.
(9) Prohibit the use of any trailer or cabin by a greater number of
occupants than that which it is designed to accommodate.
§ 105-12 TRAILERS, TRAILER CAMPS AND TOURIST § 105-15
105:487
holder thereof has violated any of the provisions of this chapter or that any
trailer, trailer camp or tourist camp is being maintained in an unsanitary or
unsafe manner or is a nuisance.
§ 105-16. Appeals; hearing.
Any person aggrieved by an order of the Board granting, denying, renewing
or revoking a license for a trailer camp or tourist camp under this chapter
may file a written request for a hearing before the Board within 10 days
after issuance of such order. The Board shall give notice of a public hearing
upon this request to be held not less than five days after service of the
notice on the person requesting the hearing. The Board may also give notice
of the hearing to other persons directly interested in the order in question.
At such hearing, the Board shall determine whether the granting, denial,
renewal or revocation of the license was in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter and shall issue a written findings of fact, conclusions of law
and an order to carry out its findings and conclusions. These findings of fact,
conclusions of law and order shall be filed with the Secretary of the Board
and served by the Board upon all parties appearing or represented at said
hearing.
§ 105-17. Court review. [Amended 5-20-1976 by Ord. No. 76-4,
approved 5-20-1976]
Any order either granting, denying, renewing or revoking any license under
the provisions of this chapter may be appealed to the Court of Common
Pleas of Dauphin County in the same manner as appeals from any ordinance
or ordinances of the Borough of Steelton. Appeals from such orders must
be taken within 10 days after the order is issued. Upon any such appeal the
findings of fact of the Board, if supported by substantial evidence, shall be
conclusive.
§ 105-18. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-20-1976 by Ord. No.
76-4, approved 5-20-1976]
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter or aiding, abetting or
assisting in the violation of said provisions shall, upon conviction before
the District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $5 and not
more than $300 or shall undergo imprisonment in the local or county jail
for a period not exceeding 30 days, and every day such violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder.
§ 105-15 § 105-18
105:488
Chapter 107
TREES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Open burning — See Ch. 48.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 82.
Sewers — See Ch. 90.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 94.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
99.
§ 107-1. Designation of authority to regulate.
The Shade Tree Commission shall have the authority to adopt such rules
and regulations as may be necessary for the purpose of carrying out the
intent of this chapter. Such regulations for the planting, care, trimming and
removal of trees shall not only be aimed at the elimination of economic
waste by reason of damage to public property and/or the property of others
and the public health, safety and welfare, but also the beautification of the
streets, highways, avenues, parks, parkways and other public areas of the
Borough of Steelton. In carrying out the provisions of this chapter, it may be
guided by the standards laid down by the National Shade Tree Conference
or any other similar organization which promulgates standards which would
carry out the intent of this chapter.
§ 107-2. Promulgation of additional regulations.
The Shade Tree Commission shall have the authority to promulgate
additional rules not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter, subject
to the approval of the Borough Council.
§ 107-3. Custody and control of shade trees.
From and after the effective date of these regulations, the Shade Tree
Commission shall have custody and control of the shade trees on the public
highways of the Borough and shall have authority to plant, remove,
maintain and protect such trees.
§ 107-4. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMMISSION — The Shade Tree Commission of the Borough of Steelton.
PERMIT — A permit in writing as issued by the Secretary of the Shade Tree
Commission.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, association or corporation.
§ 105-18 TREES § 107-4
107:489
SHADE TREE — Any shade tree, shrub or other woody plant on any public
highway in the Borough of Steelton, or that part of any tree, shrub or other
woody plant which extends within the lines of any public highway in said
Borough.
§ 107-5. Permits; application; fee; bond; revocation.
The application for any permit required hereunder shall be made in writing
to the Borough Secretary upon forms furnished by him and shall specify
the particular kind of work or operation the applicant desires to perform
thereunder and shall state the exact location and species of any shade tree
or trees affected and shall be accompanied by a permit fee of $1. It shall
be the duty of the Borough Secretary to submit every such application to
the Commission for approval or disapproval. The permit shall be effective
for such length of time as the Commission shall in each case determine,
which shall be indicated on the permit, and such permit may be revoked
at any time at the direction of the Commission upon proof satisfactory to
the Commission that the terms and conditions upon which the permit has
been issued are being or have been violated. The Commission may, in its
discretion, as a condition precedent to the issuing of the permit, require the
applicant to file a bond satisfactory to the Commission or to deposit escrow
funds or securities satisfactory to it to guarantee the compliance by the
applicant with the terms and conditions upon which the permit is issued.
§ 107-6. Actions for which permit is required.
It shall be unlawful for any person without first obtaining a permit to cut,
prune, break, injure in any manner or remove any shade tree; to cut down or
interfere in any way with the main roots of any shade tree; to spray with any
chemicals or insecticides any shade tree; to place any rope, guy wire, cable,
signs, posters or other fixtures on a shade tree or shade tree guard; or to
injure, misuse or remove any device placed to protect shade trees, except
in case of immediate necessity for protection of life or property.
§ 107-7. Street tree plan.
The Commission shall have the authority to prepare and adopt a street tree
plan for all trees in or upon the public streets, highways, avenues, parks,
parkways and other public areas which, in its opinion, shall effectuate the
provisions of the chapter, provided that such plan shall not become effective
until approval by the Borough Council.
§ 107-8. Permit for planting.
No shade tree shall be planted on any public highway in the Borough of
Steelton until a permit is granted therefor, such permit to designate the
type and place where such shade tree is to be planted. The Commission may
refuse a permit to plant any species of shade tree which, in its opinion, is
not suited to the location.
§ 107-4 § 107-9
107:490
§ 107-9. Trimming.
All shade trees shall be kept trimmed so that the minimum height where
they overhang any public walk or road shall be nine feet above the walk
or road. However, the Commission reserves the right to designate a higher
clearance on certain highways where heavy traffic or other conditions make
it expedient. All trees standing on private property and having branches
projecting over a public highway shall be kept trimmed by the owner of such
private property so that the lowest branches shall have a minimum height
of nine feet above the highway or such other height as may be specified by
the Commission. In case the owner of such property shall neglect or refuse
to trim such shade trees upon being notified in writing by the Commission
so to do and within the time specified by such notice, the Commission may,
after the expiration of the date specified in said notice, cause such trimming
to be done at the expense of the owner, and the entire cost thereof shall be
a lien upon said premises and shall be filed and collected by the Borough in
the same manner as other municipal claims are filed and collected.
§ 107-10. Care of roots.
No person shall without first obtaining a permit place or hereafter maintain
any stone, cement or other substance which shall impede the passage of
water and air to the roots of any shade tree unless such person shall leave
an open space of ground surrounding the trunk of the shade tree, such
space to be not less than four feet square.
§ 107-11. Construction near trees.
In connection with any building operation or the performance of any work
whatsoever in the Borough in the vicinity of any shade trees, before any
such work shall be commenced, guards shall be placed at all shade trees
which may be affected by such work so as to effectually prevent injury to
them.
§ 107-12. Destruction of wood from diseased trees.
All wood cut from trees afflicted with Dutch elm or other disease shall be
immediately burned.
§ 107-13. Injuring trees with harmful substances.
No person shall pour salt water, oil or other materials at any place in such a
manner that injury may result to any shade tree.
§ 107-14. Attaching electric devices prohibited.
No person shall attach any electric wire or insulator or any device for the
holding of an electric wire to any shade tree.
§ 107-9 TREES § 107-15
107:491
§ 107-15. Electric wires not to touch trees.
Every person having any wire or wires charged with electricity running
through a public highway shall trim any trees so the wire or wires shall not
come in contact with any shade tree so as to injure the same.
§ 107-16. Removal of wires during certain operations.
Whenever, in order to take down or prune any shade tree in the public
highway or having branches extending over the public highway, it shall
be deemed necessary to remove any wire or wires, every person having
any such wire or wires running through a public highway shall temporarily
remove the same or cut off the flow of current therefrom within 24 hours
after service of written notice from the Commission to do so.
§ 107-17. Tree Warden.
Regulations of the Shade Tree Commission shall be enforced by a Tree
Warden to be appointed by the Shade Tree Commission.
§ 107-18. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate or fail to comply with any of the regulations
of the Borough of Steelton Shade Tree Commission shall be liable, on
conviction thereof, to a fine or penalty not exceeding $300 for each and
every offense. In default of the payment of such fine and costs, such person
shall be imprisoned in the county jail for a period not exceeding 30 days.
Whenever such person shall have been notified, by the Shade Tree
Commission or by service of summons in a prosecution or in any other way,
that he is committing such violation, each day in which he shall continue
such violation after any such notification shall constitute a separate offense,
punishable by like fine or penalty. Such fines or penalties shall be collected
as prescribed by law.
§ 107-19. Costs assumed by Borough.
The cost of planting, transplanting or removing any shade trees in the
streets or highways of the Borough; of the necessary and suitable guards,
curbing or grading for the protection thereof; and of the replacing of any
pavement or sidewalk necessarily disturbed in the execution of such work
shall be assumed by the Borough when, and only when, the work is done by
the Borough.
§ 107-20. Removal of diseased trees.
The Shade Tree Commission may, upon five days' written notice, require
owners of property to cut and remove trees afflicted with the Dutch elm
or other disease which threatens to injure or destroy shade trees in the
Borough. Upon failure of any such owner to comply with such notice, the
Borough may cause the work to be done by the Borough and levy and collect
the cost thereof from the owner of the property. The cost of such work shall
§ 107-15 § 107-20
107:492
be a lien upon the premises from the time of the commencement of the
work, which date shall be fixed by the Borough Engineer and shall be filed
with the Borough Secretary. Any such lien may be collected by action in
assumpsit or by lien filed in the manner provided by law for the filing and
collection of municipal claims.
Chapter 108
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 44.
Open burning — See Ch. 48.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 54.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 58.
Plumbing — See Ch. 80.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 82.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
99.
Zoning — See Ch. 120.
§ 108-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as "The Borough of Steelton
Uniform Construction Code."
§ 108-2. Purpose.
§ 108-3. Election to administer and enforce.
The Borough of Steelton hereby elects to administer and enforce the
provisions of the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, Act 45 of 1999,
35 P.S. §§ 7210.101 to 7210.1103, as amended from time to time, and its
regulations.
§ 108-4. Adoption of code.
The Uniform Construction Code, contained in 34 Pa. Code, Chapters 401
to 405, as amended from time to time, is hereby adopted and incorporated
A. The purpose of this chapter is to promote the general health, safety and
welfare of the citizens of the Borough and to conform to the
requirements of the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act and
regulations to the Act promulgated by the Pennsylvania Department of
Labor and Industry (hereinafter sometimes collectively referred to as
the "code").
B. The Pennsylvania Construction Code Act requires the enactment of an
appropriate ordinance by municipalities electing to administer and
enforce the building code provisions of the code.
§ 107-20 UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODES § 108-4
108:493
herein by reference as the municipal building code of the Borough of
Steelton.
§ 108-5. Methods of administration and enforcement.
Administration and enforcement of the code within the Borough of Steelton
shall be undertaken in any of the following ways, as determined by the
governing body of the Borough of Steelton from time to time by resolution:
§ 108-6. Board of appeals.
A board of appeals shall be established by resolution of the governing
body of the Borough of Steelton in conformity with the requirements of the
relevant provisions of the Code, as amended from time to time, and for the
purposes set forth therein. If at any time enforcement and administration
is undertaken jointly with one or more other municipalities, said Board
of Appeals shall be established by joint action of the participating
municipalities.
§ 108-7. Effect of existing ordinances.
A. By the designation of an employee of the Borough of Steelton to serve
as the municipal code official to act on behalf of the Borough of
Steelton;
B. By the retention of one or more construction code officials or thirdparty
agencies to act on behalf of the Borough of Steelton;
C. By agreement with one or more other municipalities for the joint
administration and enforcement of this Act through an intermunicipal
agreement;
D. By entering into a contract with another municipality for the
administration and enforcement of this Act on behalf of the Borough of
Steelton;
E. By entering into an agreement with the Pennsylvania Department of
Labor and Industry for plan review, inspections and enforcement of
structures other than one-family or two-family dwelling units and utility
and miscellaneous use structures.
A. All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which were
adopted by the Borough of Steelton on or before July 1, 1999, and which
equal or exceed the requirements of the code shall continue in full force
and effect until such time as such provisions fail to equal or exceed the
minimum requirements of the code, as amended from time to time.
B. All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which are in
effect as of the effective date of this chapter and whose requirements
are less than the minimum requirements of the code are hereby
amended to conform with the comparable provisions of the code.
§ 108-4 § 108-7
108:494
§ 108-8. Fees.
Fees assessable by the Borough of Steelton for the administration and
enforcement undertaken pursuant to this chapter and the code shall be
established by the governing body by resolution from time to time.
Chapter 109
VEHICLES, ABANDONED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 58.
Littering — See Ch. 71.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 82.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 94.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 110.
§ 109-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABANDONED — Any motor vehicle which is found unattended without the
current year's registration or identification markers as required by law,
has been continuously parked in any public street, public land or private
property for a period of 10 days and is so disabled as to be incapable of
being operated under its own power or is without one or more tires.
JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle which is no longer in
actual use as a motor vehicle or which is wholly unfit to be operated or has
been discarded for use or otherwise abandoned.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any vehicle which is self-propelled, as defined by the
Vehicle Code of Pennsylvania.
§ 109-2. Abandonment prohibited; exceptions.
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause a motor vehicle to be abandoned
upon any public or private lands in the Borough of Steelton or upon any
public street, except that nothing herein contained shall be deemed to
prohibit any person from parking, storing or repairing a motor vehicle
upon private or public property where authorized under the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or the laws of the Borough of Steelton, and
nothing shall be deemed to prohibit the placing, keeping or storing of any
motor vehicle in an enclosed garage or other building.
C. All relevant ordinances, regulations and policies of the Borough of
Steelton not governed by the code shall remain in full force and effect.
§ 108-7 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 109-3
109:495
§ 109-3. Junked automobiles prohibited.
No person shall place, keep or store any junked automobile on any public or
private property within the Borough of Steelton or upon the public highways
in the Borough of Steelton.
§ 109-4. Removal required; notice; failure to comply.
All abandoned motor vehicles shall be removed by the owner or operator
thereof or by the owner or occupant of the private property on which the
said motor vehicle is abandoned. Upon the failure of the owner or operator
of any abandoned or junked motor vehicle to remove the same within 24
hours after receiving notice from the Steelton Borough Police Department
to remove the same, such notice being given either by personal service or
by certified mail to the owner or operator of such abandoned motor vehicle
or to the owner or occupant of the private property on which the said
abandoned or junked motor vehicle is found, the Steelton Borough Police
Department may remove the same or cause the same to be removed.
§ 109-5. Removal by Borough.
In removing any such abandoned motor vehicles, the Steelton Borough
Police Department shall cause the same to be towed and stored by such
garages or towing services as are designated by the Chief of Police of the
Borough of Steelton to be approved storage garages or pounds for the
storage of such vehicles.
§ 109-6. Storage garages.
Any designated storage garage, prior to engaging in any towing away
and/or storing of any vehicle hereunder, shall file a surety bond with the
Borough, said bond to indemnify the Borough and the owner of any
impounded vehicle against loss thereof or injury or damage thereto while
any vehicle is in custody of such garage.
§ 109-7. Towing and storage charges.
Specific towing and storage charges to be made under this chapter shall
be fixed, from time to time, by the Borough Council in accordance with the
prevailing rates in the Borough, and such charges shall be posted in the
Municipal Building.
§ 109-8. Notice of impoundment.
The Chief of Police or someone at his direction, within 12 hours after any
vehicle has been removed and impounded, shall notify the owner of record
or the operator of any such vehicle, either by personal service or by certified
mail, or the owner or occupant of the property from which any such vehicle
has been removed, in like manner, of the fact that such vehicle has been
impounded, the place from which it was removed, the reason for its removal
and impounding and the place where the vehicle has been impounded.
§ 109-3 § 109-9
109:496
§ 109-9. Recovery of impounded vehicle.
The owner or operator of any impounded vehicle shall be entitled to recover
possession of such vehicle upon the payment to the Borough of the towing
and storage charges as above set forth.
§ 109-10. Payment of charges; protest and hearing.
The payment of such towing and storage charges, unless made under
protest, shall be final and conclusive and shall constitute a waiver of any
right to recover the money so paid. In the event that the towing and
impounding charges are paid under protest, the offender shall be entitled to
a hearing before a District Justice or a court of record having jurisdiction, as
in the case of a prosecution as in other cases of summary offenses under the
Motor Vehicle Code of Pennsylvania, and the said District Justice or court
of record shall proceed in accordance with Paragraph 1103 of the Motor
Vehicle Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 109-11. Notice to property owner when ownership of vehicle
cannot be ascertained.
In the event that the Police Department shall be unable to ascertain the
ownership of an abandoned motor vehicle found upon private property,
the Chief of Police or someone at his direction, within 12 hours after the
vehicle has been found by the police, may notify the owner or occupant
of the private property, by certified mail, that such vehicle exists, and
thereafter the said owner or occupant of the private property shall cause
the abandoned motor vehicle to be removed to an authorized junk or scrap
yard within 48 hours.
§ 109-12. Failure of property owner to remove vehicle.
If the owner or occupant of such private property shall fail to remove the
abandoned motor vehicle, as set forth in § 109-11 hereof, the said owner
or occupant shall be subject to the penalties provided in § 109-14 of this
chapter. Each day that the motor vehicle is permitted to remain shall
constitute a separate and distinct violation.
§ 109-13. Unclaimed vehicles.
Where an abandoned motor vehicle is removed under the provisions of
this chapter and it remains unclaimed for a period of 15 consecutive days
without being removed by its owner or any other person duly authorized
to remove same, the Chief of Police shall be authorized to report or cause
to be reported such abandonment to the Department of Revenue of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as provided in the Vehicle Code.
§ 109-14. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate the terms of this chapter may be prosecuted
and shall, upon conviction in a summary proceeding therefor, pay a fine not
§ 109-9 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 109-14
109:497
exceeding $300. In default of the payment of such fine, such person may be
imprisoned in the county jail for a period not exceeding 30 days.
Chapter 110
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
§ 109-14 § 109-14
110:498
ARTICLE I
General Regulations
§ 110-1. Definitions and interpretation.
§ 110-2. Manner of adopting permanent traffic and parking
regulations.
All traffic and parking regulations of a permanent nature shall be enacted
as ordinances or parts of ordinances or as amendments to ordinances of the
Borough of Steelton.
§ 110-3. Temporary and emergency regulations.
§ 110-4. Experimental regulations.
A. Words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in the Vehicle Code of Pennsylvania, as now in force,
or as hereafter amended, enacted or reenacted, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning.
B. The term "legal holidays" as used in this chapter shall mean and
include: New Year's Day, Washington's Birthday, Memorial Day,
Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas, or
days celebrated as such.
C. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall
include the singular, and the masculine shall include the feminine and
the neuter.
A. The Mayor shall have the following powers to regulate traffic and
parking temporarily and in time of emergency:
(1) In the case of fire, flood, storm or other emergency, to establish
temporary traffic and/or parking regulations.
(2) In the case of emergency or to facilitate public works, or in the
conduct of parades, processions or public events, to restrict or
prohibit traffic and/or parking in limited areas for periods of not
more than 72 hours.
B. Such temporary and emergency regulations shall be enforced by the
Mayor and Police Department in the same manner as permanent
regulations. Any person who shall operate or park a vehicle or tractor in
violation of any such regulation, or who shall move, remove, destroy,
injure or deface any sign or marking erected, posted or made to give
notice of any such regulation, shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to
the penalty set forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter for a
violation of such nature.
A. The Borough Council, by resolution, from time to time, shall designate
places upon and along the highways in the Borough where, for a period
§ 110-1 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 110-4
110:499
§ 110-5. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the police officers of the Borough of
Steelton, who are hereby given authority to direct traffic on the highways
and intersections of the Borough in accordance with the provisions of this
ordinance and the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
of not more than 90 days, specific traffic and/or parking regulations,
prohibitions and restrictions shall be in force and effect, and shall
designate such locations by proper signs and markings. Such
regulations, prohibitions and restrictions shall be effective just as if
they had been specified in this chapter. No person shall operate or park
a vehicle or tractor in violation of any such regulation, prohibition or
restriction, and no person shall move, remove, destroy or deface any
sign or marking erected, posted or made by authority of this section.
B. The purpose of this section is to allow for the test and experimental
determination of the feasibility and desirability of permanent changes
in the ordinances of the Borough relative to traffic and parking.
§ 110-4 § 110-5
110:500
ARTICLE II
Traffic Regulations
§ 110-6. Use of sidewalks by motor vehicles.
No person shall operate a motor vehicle or tractor upon any sidewalk in the
Borough; nor shall any person operate a motor vehicle upon or across any
sidewalk except in order to gain access to or egress from a driveway or alley
at such locations where the curb, if such sidewalk is curbed, shall have been
properly cut down for the purpose.
§ 110-7. Speed limits established.
The speed limit for traffic along any street or highway within the Borough
is hereby established as 25 miles per hour except for the following listed
streets, the speed limits for which shall be as indicated.
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Front Street 35 From Chambers Street to the
southerly Borough line
North Third Alley [Added
10-16-1989 by Ord. No.
89-3]
15 From Franklin Street to Watson
Street
South Sixth Street [Added
12-7-1998 by Ord. No.
98-9]
25 Between Swatara Street and
Mohn Street
§ 110-8. Traffic control signals.
Traffic control signals, including signals which control traffic at designated
Fire Department areas and schools, shall be installed and operated at the
intersection of those highways described below.
Intersection
Front Street and Conestoga Street
Front Street and Franklin Street
Front Street and Locust Street
Front Street and Pine Street (Fire)
Front Street and Strawberry Alley (Fire)
Front Street and Swatara Street
§ 110-9. One-way highways established.
The highways or parts of highways described below are hereby designated
as one-way streets in the direction indicated.
§ 110-6 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 110-9
110:501
Name of Highway
Direction
of Travel Limits
Blackberry Alley
[Added 6-16-1997 by
Ord. No. 97-2]
West From South Second Street to Front
Street
Blackberry Alley
[Added 6-16-1997 by
Ord. No. 97-2]
East From South Second Street to South
Third Street
Blueberry Alley Southwest From Second Street to Front Street
Chestnut Street
[Added 7-16-2001 by
Ord. No. 2001-4]
West Between South Second Street and
South Front Street
Cranberry Alley Southwest From South Second Street to South
Front Street
Dupont Street Southwest From South Second Street to South
Front Street
Elm Street [Amended
11-21-1978 by Ord.
No. 78-6]
Northeast From South Front Street to South
Second Street
Fourth Street [Added
5-17-1993 by Ord.
No. 93-4]
Southeast Between Walnut Street and Swatara
Street, during the school year
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. —
8:30 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. — 3:30 p.m.,
Mon. — Fri., except for school
holidays
Frederick Street Northwest From Trewick Street to Conestoga
Street
Harrisburg Street
[Added 5-16-1994 by
Ord. No. 94-5]
North From Walnut Street to Pine Street
Locust Street Southwest From Second Street to Front Street
Locust Street [Added
5-16-1994 by Ord.
No. 94-5]
West From Harrisburg Street to Fourth
Street
Locust Street [Added
7-16-2001 by Ord.
No. 2001-4]
West Between Harrisburg Street and Front
Street
McKinley Street
[Added 6-21-1999 by
Ord. No. 99-3,
approved 6-21-1999]
West Between South Second Street and
South Third Street
Mulberry Street Southwest From North Second Street to North
Front Street
§ 110-9 § 110-9
110:502
Name of Highway
Direction
of Travel Limits
Mulberry Street
[Added 7-16-2001 by
Ord. No. 2001-4]
West Between North Fourth Street and
North Third Street
Myers Street Northwest From Conestoga Street to Franklin
Street
Myers Street Southeast From Conestoga Street to Trewick
Street
North Third Street Northwest From Locust Street to Pine Street
Ridge Street Southwest From North Harrisburg Street to
North Second Street
Second Alley [Added
5-16-1994 by Ord.
No. 94-5]
North Between R Street and S Street
Second Street Southeast From Pine Street to Chambers Street
South Second Street
[Added 10-20-1997
by Ord. No. 97-7]
South From the eastern line of Q Street to
western line of R Street
South Third Street
[Added 5-16-1994 by
Ord. No. 94-5]
South From Elm Street to Swatara Street
South Third Street Southeast From Locust Street to Walnut Street
Strawberry Alley Northeast From South Front Street to South
Second Street
Third Alley [Added
8-30-1977 by Ord.
No. 77-7]
Southeast From Franklin Street to Jefferson
Street
Trawitz Alley Northwest From Ridge Street to Lincoln Street
§ 110-10. U-turns.
It shall be unlawful for the operator of a motor vehicle or tractor to make a
U-turn on any public street, alley, easement or right-of-way.
§ 110-11. Turns at intersections. [Amended 11-20-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-5]
No person shall make a turn of the kind designated (left, right, all) and
all persons shall be required to make a turn of the kind designated, as
indicated, at any of the intersections described below:
§ 110-9 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 110-11
110:503
Name
of Highway
Direction
of Travel
Prohibited
Turn
Required
Turn
At
Intersection of
Cranberry
Alley [Added
7-16-2001
by Ord. No.
2001-4]
East Left Right only South Front Street
Cranberry
Alley [Added
7-16-2001
by Ord. No.
2001-4]
West Left Right only South Front Street
Pine Street Southwest Left Right only North Front Street
Pine Street North east Left Right only North Front Street
§ 110-12. Center structures at intersections.
All vehicular traffic shall keep to the right of the following structures or
barriers located in the center of the specified intersections:
Structure On (Name of
Highway) At Intersection of
(Reserved)
§ 110-13. Through highways.
The highways described below are hereby established as through highways,
and the operator of every vehicle or tractor upon approaching any such
highway at any intersection thereof (except for such intersections where
there are now or shall hereafter be located official traffic signals) shall
come to a full stop, within a reasonable distance, before entering any such
through highway.
Name of Highway Limits
(Reserved)
§ 110-14. Stop intersections.
The intersections described below are hereby established as stop
intersections,96 and official stop signs shall be erected in such a position
upon the first-named highway as to face traffic approaching the secondnamed
highway in the direction or directions indicated. All vehicles and
tractors approaching any such intersection upon the first-named highway, in
the direction or directions indicated in each case, shall come to a full stop,
within a reasonable distance, before entering any such intersection.
96.Editor's Note: These stop intersections are in addition to highways intersecting with the
through highways established by § 110-13.
§ 110-11 § 110-14
110:504
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Angle Alley [Added
10-21-1991 by Ord.
No. 91-9]
Northeast Second Street
Bailey Street Both Conestoga Street
Blackberry Street
[Added 10-19-1987
by Ord. No. 87-2]
East River Alley
Brewster Street
[Added 11-20-1978
by Ord. No. 78-6]
Both Second Street
Christian Street Both Francis Street
Columbia Street
[Added 10-17-1988
by Ord. No. 88-5]
Both Lincoln Street
Conestoga Street
[Added 11-21-1983
by Ord. No. 83-4]
Northeast North Front Street
Conestoga Street
[Added 11-21-1983
by Ord. No. 83-4]
Northeast North Front Street
Cranberry Alley
[Added 10-19-1987
by Ord. No. 87-2]
West River Alley
Elm Street [Added
10-19-1987 by Ord.
No. 87-2]
East River Alley
Elm Street [Added
6-2049 by Ord. No.
88-2]
West Third Street
Harrisburg Street
[Added 5-17-1993 by
Ord. No. 93-4]
Northwest Locust Street
Jefferson Street Both North Second Street
Juneberry Alley [Added
11-15-1982 by Ord.
No. 82-12]
Northeast River Alley
Juneberry Alley [Added
11-15-1982 by Ord.
No. 82-12]
Southwest River Alley
§ 110-14 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 110-14
110:505
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Lancaster Street
[Added 10-17-1988
by Ord. No. 88-5]
Both Lincoln Street
Lebanon Street [Added
10-17-1988 by Ord.
No. 88-5]
South Bessemer Street
Mulberry Alley [Added
5-17-1993 by Ord.
No. 93-4]
Northeast Harrisburg Street
Mulberry Alley [Added
5-17-1993 by Ord.
No. 93-4]
Southwest Harrisburg Street
Mulberry Street
[Added 10-19-1987
by Ord. No. 87-2]
West River Alley
North Second Street Both Jefferson Street
P Street [Added
10-21-1991 by Ord.
No. 91-9]
Southwest Second Street
Park Avenue West Swatara Street
Paxton Street [Added
10-20-1980 by Ord.
No. 80-3]
West Reading Street
Pine Alley [Added
6-20-1988 by Ord.
No. 88-2]
East Front Street
River Alley [Added
10-19-1987 by Ord.
No. 87-2]
Both Blackberry Street
River Alley [Added
10-19-1987 by Ord.
No. 87-2]
Both Blueberry Alley
River Alley [Added
10-19-1987 by Ord.
No. 87-2]
Both Chestnut Street
River Alley [Added
10-19-1987 by Ord.
No. 87-2]
Both Cranberry Alley
River Alley [Added
10-19-1987 by Ord.
No. 87-2]
Both Dupont Street
§ 110-14 § 110-14
110:506
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
River Alley [Added
11-18-1985 by Ord.
No. 85-6]
Both Elm Street
River Alley [Added
10-19-1987 by Ord.
No. 87-2]
Both Juneberry Alley
River Alley [Added
10-19-1987 by Ord.
No. 87-2]
Both Locust Street
River Alley [Added
10-19-1987 by Ord.
No. 87-2]
Both Mayberry Alley
River Alley [Added
10-19-1987 by Ord.
No. 87-2]
Both Mohn Street
River Alley [Added
10-19-1987 by Ord.
No. 87-2]
Both Mulberry Street
River Alley [Added
10-19-1987 by Ord.
No. 87-2]
Both Pine Street
River Alley [Added
10-19-1987 by Ord.
No. 87-2]
Both Strawberry Alley
River Alley [Added
10-19-1987 by Ord.
No. 87-2]
Both Swatara Street
River Alley [Added
10-19-1987 by Ord.
No. 87-2]
Both Walnut Street
River Alley [Added
10-19-1987 by Ord.
No. 87-2]
South Highland Street
River Alley [Added
10-19-1987 by Ord.
No. 87-2]
South Hoffer Street
Roller Drive [Added
11-18-1985 by Ord.
No. 85-6]
West Reading Street
R Street Northeast Fourth Street
§ 110-14 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 110-14
110:507
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
St. Mary's Drive
[Added 10-20-1975
by Ord. No. 75-9]
Both Washington Street
St. Mary's Drive
[Added 10-20-1975
by Ord. No. 75-9]
North Highland Street
St. Mary's Drive
[Added 11-21-1983
by Ord. No. 83-4]
West Second Street
School Alley [Added
7-16-2001 by Ord.
No. 2001-4]
Both Locust Street
Second Alley [Added
10-15-1990 by Ord.
No. 90-2]
Both Baldwin Avenue
Second Alley [Added
10-15-1990 by Ord.
No. 90-2]
Both Bridge Avenue
Second Alley [Added
10-15-1990 by Ord.
No. 90-2]
Both E Avenue
Second Alley [Added
10-15-1990 by Ord.
No. 90-2]
Both S Street
Second Alley [Added
10-15-1990 by Ord.
No. 90-2; amended
11-15-1993 by Ord.
No. 93-10; 5-16-1994
by Ord. No. 94-5]
North R Street
Second Alley [Added
10-15-1990 by Ord.
No. 90-2]
North T Street
Second Alley [Added
10-15-1990 by Ord.
No. 90-2]
South F Avenue
Second Street [Added
11-15-1993 by Ord.
No. 93-10]
South R Street
Second Street [Added
11-15-1982 by Ord.
No. 82-12]
Southeast Dupont Street
§ 110-14 § 110-14
110:508
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
South Fourth Street Both Blanche Avenue
South Fourth Street
[Added 10-20-1975
by Ord. No. 75-9]
North St. Mary's Drive
South Second Street
[Added 10-20-1975
by Ord. No. 75-9]
Both T Street
South Seventh Street
[Added 6-17-1996 by
Ord. No. 96-4]
East Swatara Street
South Third Street
[Added 5-15-2000 by
Ord. No. 2000-2,
approved 5-15-2000]
South Strawberry Alley
Spruce Street [Added
6-20-1988 by Ord.
No. 88-2]
West Fourth Street
S Street Both South Third Street
S Street [Added
12-20-1976 by Ord.
No. 76-10]
Northeast Fourth Street
Steel Alley Both Iron Alley
Strawberry Alley
[Added 5-15-2000 by
Ord. No. 2000-2,
approved 5-15-2000]
East South Third Street
Third Alley [Added
11-21-1983 by Ord.
No. 83-4]
Southeast Eleanor Street
Third Street Both Conestoga Street
Third Street [Added
6-20-1988 by Ord.
No. 88-2]
Both Walnut Street
T Street [Added
10-15-1990 by Ord.
No. 90-2]
West Second Alley
Walnut Street [Added
11-21-1983 by Ord.
No. 83-4]
Southwest Fourth Street
Watson Street Southwest Third Street
§ 110-14 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 110-15
110:509
§ 110-15. Yield right-of-way intersections.
The intersections described below are hereby established as yield right-ofway
intersections, and official yield signs shall be erected in such a position
upon the first-named highway as to face traffic approaching the secondnamed
highway in the direction or directions indicated. All vehicles and
tractors approaching any such intersection upon the first-named highway,
in the direction or directions indicated, shall yield the right-of-way to any
vehicle in the intersection or approaching on the second-named highway
so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time that the
operator of such vehicle or tractor is moving across or within such
intersection.
Yield Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
(Reserved)
§ 110-16. No-passing zones.
The zones described below are hereby established as no-passing zones and
it shall be unlawful for any person driving a vehicle to pass any other vehicle
which is proceeding in the same direction.
Name of Highway Limits
Swatara Street From South Second Street to the Borough
line
§ 110-17. Closing of certain highways to certain vehicles. [Amended
4-19-1976 by Ord. No. 76-3; 8-20-1984 by Ord. No. 84-3]
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle or tractor, except
a passenger vehicle (but not including any passenger vehicle drawing any
trailer or towing any other vehicle), or commercial vehicle having a gross
weight in excess of 5,500 pounds upon all the Borough streets or portions
thereof (excepting therefrom any state highway or legislative route), except
for the purpose of making local deliveries.
§ 110-18. Vehicle weight limits established. [Amended 8-20-1984 by
Ord. No. 84-3]
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any commercial vehicle or
other tractor, trailer or tractor-trailer combination having a gross weight
in excess of 5,500 pounds upon all the Borough streets or portions thereof
(excepting therefrom any state highways or legislative routes), except for
the purpose of making local deliveries.
§ 110-19. Operation of vehicles on closed highways.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle or tractor upon
any highway in the Borough that is under construction, resurfacing or
§ 110-15 § 110-19
110:510
repair, in disregard of any official sign, barricade or notice that the same is
closed to vehicular traffic.
§ 110-20. Play highways.
A. The Mayor is hereby authorized to designate as play highways,
whenever he shall deem such action advisable, and for whatever period
of time directed by him, any portion of any highway in the Borough,
whereon sledding and coasting shall be permitted. Such highways shall
be set apart for the purpose under the direction of the Mayor.
B. No person shall operate any motor vehicle or tractor upon any play
highway at any time when such highway shall be so designated, except
in case of emergency, with special permission of the Mayor or of the
police officer in charge, who shall first clear such play highway of all
persons using such highways for the purpose for which it was set aside.
C. The portions of highways described below are hereby established as
play highways during the times designated.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person to utilize the cartway of any highway,
street, alley or other public way for any recreational or sports activities,
including but not limited to basketball, baseball, stickball, racing,
hockey and related activities or otherwise playing in said cartways,
since such activities obstruct the traveling public and create a danger
to the health, safety and welfare of both those taking part in such
activities as well as those utilizing such cartways for the purposes for
which they are intended, i.e., vehicular travel, parking or stopping.
[Added 5-16-1994 by Ord. No. 94-5]
Name of Highway Days Hours Location
(Reserved)
§ 110-19 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 110-20
110:511

ARTICLE III
Parking Regulations
§ 110-21. Parking without lights authorized.
The boundary limits of the Borough of Steelton are hereby established as
a zone in which motor vehicles may remain standing without lights, and all
highways within such boundary limits are hereby designated as highways
where motor vehicles may remain standing without lights.
§ 110-22. Vehicles to be parked within marked spaces.
Wherever a space shall be marked off on any highway for the parking of
an individual vehicle, every vehicle there parked shall be parked within the
lines bounding such space.
§ 110-23. Angle parking.
No person shall park a vehicle upon any of the highways or parts thereof
described below except at the angle designated and only within the painted
stall lines. On all highways or portions thereof where angle parking is now
or shall hereafter be authorized, all vehicles parked there on shall be parked
with the front thereof nearest the curb.
Name of
Highway Side Angle Location
Brewster Street Southeast Southeast From North Front Street to
North Second Street
North Second
Street
Northeast Northeast Opposite St. James Church
property for the width of the
boundaries of said property
North Second
Street [Added
6-21-1999 by
Ord. No. 99-3,
approved
6-21-1999]
West Southeast Beginning at a point, said point
located on the west side of
North Second Street a distance
of 15 feet south of the southwest
corner of the intersection of
Angle Alley and North Second
Street; thence continuing in a
southerly direction 90 feet to a
point; being a portion of the rear
of 123 North Front Street
Second Street
[Added
6-15-1992 by
Ord. No 92-1]
Southeast Southeast From Hoffer Street to Chambers
Street
South Second
Street [Added
11-20-1978 by
Ord. No. 78-6]
Southwest Southwest From Highland Street to Hoffer
Street
§ 110-21 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 110-24
110:513
§ 110-24. Parking prohibited at all times.
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the highways or parts
thereof described below.
Name of Highway Side Location
Adams Street Both From Front Street to the bed of the Old
Pennsylvania Canal
Adams Street
[Added 5-18-1998
by Ord. No. 98-3]
NorthwestBeginning at a point, said point located at
the northeastern intersection of Adams
Street and North Front Street, thence
continuing along the northwestern side of
Adams Street in a northwesterly direction
49 1/2 feet to the southwestern side of
the access driveway to the Moose Lodge
parking area
Adams Street South From Harrisburg Street to North Front
Street
Bailey Street Both From Pine Street to Angle Avenue
Bailey Street
[Added 10-20-1997
by Ord. No. 97-7]
Both From Ridge Street to Adams Street
(except Sunday from 8:00 a.m. to 3:00
p.m.)
Bailey Street
[Added 12-7-1998
by Ord. No. 98-9]
West From Paxton Alley to Angle Avenue
Blackberry Alley Both From South Front Street to Third Street
Blackberry Alley
[Added 6-16-1997
by Ord. No. 97-2]
North From South Second Street to Front Street
Cherry Street
[Added 3-15-1976
by Ord. No. 76-2]
Both From Fourth Street to Angeline Avenue
Christian Street
[Added 5-15-2000
by Ord. No.
2000-2, approved
5-15-2000]
East From the gate at the Bethlehem Steel
Company steel scrap recovery yard, north
to and including the common intersection
of Christian Street and Franklin Street
Conestoga Street North From Front Street to Myers Street
Conestoga Street North From the easterly curbline of North Front
Street to a point 40 feet east thereof
Conestoga Street South From Myers Street to Christian Street
Cranberry Alley
[Added 7-16-2001
by Ord. No.
2001-4]
Both From River Alley West to Cranberry Alley
§ 110-24 § 110-24
110:514
Name of Highway Side Location
Cranberry Alley North From River Alley to South Front Street
Cranberry Alley South From Second Street to River Alley
Daron Alley Both From Adams Street to Water Street
Dupont Street
[Amended
10-21-1996 by
Ord. No. 96-5]
South From the western line of South Second
Street to the eastern line of South Front
Street
Eleanor Street North From Front Street to Third Street
Elm Street North From Second Street to Front Street
Elm Street North From Third Street to Fourth Street
Felton Street Both From South Front Street to South Second
Street
Felton Street North From South Second Street to Second
Alley
Fourth Street
[Added 3-17-1975
by Ord. No. 75-3]
East From Pine Street to Mulberry
Fourth Street West From Walnut Street to Swatara Street
Harrisburg Street
[Added 12-16-1974
by Ord. No. 74-10]
Both From Adams Street to Cameron
Harrisburg Street
[Added 5-17-1993
by Ord. No. 93-4]
East From the northeast curbline of Locust
Street to a point 20 feet northwest
thereof
Harrisburg Street
[Added 5-17-1993
by Ord. No. 93-4]
East From the southeast curbline of Locust
Street to a point 20 feet southeast thereof
Harrisburg Street
[Added 5-17-1993
by Ord. No. 93-4]
From the northeast curbline of Mulberry
Street to a point 20 feet northwest
thereof
Harrisburg Street
[Added 5-17-1993
by Ord. No. 93-4]
From the southeast curbline of Mulberry
Street to a point 20 feet southeast thereof
Harrisburg Street East From Pine Street to the northerly
Borough line
Harrisburg Street West From the southwest curbline of Lincoln
Street to a point 100 feet southwest
thereof
Harrisburg Street
[Added 5-17-1993
by Ord. No. 93-4]
West From the northwest curbline of Locust
Street to a point 20 feet northwest
thereof
§ 110-24 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 110-24
110:515
Name of Highway Side Location
Harrisburg Street
[Added 5-17-1993
by Ord. No. 93-4]
West From the southwest curbline of Locust
Street to a point 20 feet southeast thereof
Harrisburg Street
[Added 5-17-1993
by Ord. No. 93-4]
West From the northwest curbline of Mulberry
Street to a point 20 feet northwest
thereof
Harrisburg Street
[Added 5-17-1993
by Ord. No. 93-4]
West From the southwest curbline of Mulberry
Street to a point 20 feet southeast thereof
Harrisburg Street
[Added 6-17-1996
by Ord. No. 96-4]
West From Pine Street to Adams Street
Heagy Street
[Added 2-17-1975
by Ord. No. 75-1]
Both From River Alley to South Third Street
Heagy Street
[Added 12-7-1998
by Ord. No. 98-9]
South From South Second Street to River Alley
Jefferson Street South From the easterly curbline of Front Street
to a point 25 feet east thereof
Kennedy Lane
[Added 5-18-1998
by Ord. No. 98-3]
East From Hickory Street to the southern side
of house no. 11
Kennedy Lane
[Added 5-18-1998
by Ord. No. 98-3]
East From the north side of house no. 25 to the
concrete curbing perpendicular to house
no. 29
Kennedy Lane
[Added 5-18-1998
by Ord. No. 98-3]
North From a point beginning at the southern
line of house no. 23 to a point at the
beginning of the curbline opposite the
western side of house no. 24
Kennedy Lane
[Added 5-18-1998
by Ord. No. 98-3]
North Beginning at the end of the curbline
located at the western side of house no.
26 to Hickory Street
Kennedy Lane
[Added 5-18-1998
by Ord. No. 98-3]
West From a point beginning opposite the
northern line of Lot No. 11 where
Kennedy Lane begins a curve to the right
on the northern side of house no. 13
continuing along the western line of
Kennedy Lane to the southern line of
house no. 23
§ 110-24 § 110-24
110:516
Name of Highway Side Location
Mulberry Street
[Added 7-16-2001
by Ord. No.
2001-4]
North Between North Fourth Street and North
Third Street
Mulberry Street
[Added 5-15-1989
by Ord. No. 89-1]
North Between a point located on the northeast
corner of the intersection of River Alley
and Mulberry Street and a point located
50 feet west of the northwest corner of
the intersection of Second Street and
Mulberry Street
Mulberry Street South From Second Street to Front Street
Nectarine Street Both From Sixth Street to Woodbine Street
North Front Street
[Added 5-21-1986
by Ord. No. 86-1]
Northeast From the southeast corner of the
intersection of Adams Street and North
Front Street to a point 161 feet southeast
thereof along the northeast line of North
Front Street
North Front Street Northeast From the northeast curbline of Pine
Street to a point 24 feet north thereof
North Front Street Northeast From the southeast curbline of Pine
Street to a point 53 feet south thereof
North Front Street
[Added 5-18-1998
by Ord. No. 98-3]
Southeast Beginning at a point, said point located at
the southeastern side of the driveway to
185 North Front Street (the Steelton Fire
Department), thence continuing along the
southeastern line of North Front Street in
a southeasterly direction a distance of
28 1/2 feet
North Front Street
[Added 5-18-1998
by Ord. No. 98-3]
Southeast Beginning at a point, said point located at
the southeastern corner of the
intersections of Adams Street and North
Front Street, thence continuing along the
southeastern line of North Front Street in
a southeastern direction 68 feet to the
northwestern side of the driveway to 185
North Front Street (the Steelton Fire
Department)
North Front Street
[Added 5-18-1998
by Ord. No. 98-3]
SouthwestBeginning at a point, said point located
on the eastern side of the Northwestern
access driveway to 154 North Front
Street and continuing a distance of 42
feet in a southeasterly direction to the
northwestern side of the second access
driveway to 154 North Front Street
§ 110-24 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 110-24
110:517
Name of Highway Side Location
North Front Street
[Added 5-18-1998
by Ord. No. 98-3]
SouthwestBeginning at a point, said point located
on the northwestern side of the
northernmost driveway into 154 North
Front Street, thence continuing
northwesterly along the northwestern
line of North Front Street a distance of
11 1/2 feet
North Front Street West From Conestoga Street to Gibson Street
North front Street
[Added 5-17-2004
by Ord. No.
2004-5, approved
5-17-2004]
West From Conestoga Street to Jefferson Street
North Front Street West From a point 60 feet south of the
southerly curbline of Pine Street to a
point 22 feet south thereof
North River Alley
[Added 9-16-2002
by Ord. No.
2002-2]
East and
west
From Eleanor Street to Brewster Street
North River Alley
[Added 4-21-2003
by Ord. No.
2003-1, approved
4-21-2003]
East and
west
Beginning at the intersection of Pine
Street and North River Alley and
continuing in a northerly direction 127.4
feet
North Second Street
[Added 2-21-1995
by Ord. No. 95-3]
East From a point 58 feet north of the
northeastern intersection of Jefferson
Street and North Second Street in a
northerly direction a distance of 54 feet
North Third Street
[Added 6-17-1996
by Ord. No. 96-4]
East Beginning at a point, said point being
located along the east side of North Third
Street, said point also being located 149
feet north of the northeast intersection of
Locust and North Third Streets; thence
continuing along the east side of North
Third Street in a northerly direction to
Pine Street
P Street [Added
5-19-1975 by Ord.
No. 75-4]
West From South Second Street to South Third
Street
Pine Street [Added
6-20-1988 by Ord.
No. 88-2]
North From Harrisburg Street to a point 55 feet
west thereof
§ 110-24 § 110-24
110:518
Name of Highway Side Location
Pine Street South From the northerly Borough line to Front
Street
Pine Street
Extended [Added
5-18-1987 by Ord.
No. 87-1]
Both From Front Street to Bethlehem Steel
Primrose Avenue Both From South Fourth Street to South Sixth
Street
Reading Street
[Added 6-21-1999
by Ord. No. 99-3,
approved
6-21-1999]
East From Pine Street to Mulberry Alley
Reading Street West From Mulberry Street to a point 25 feet
north thereof
Reading Street
[Added 11-18-1985
by Ord. No. 85-6]
West From the northwest corner of the
intersection of Reading Street and Pine
Street to a point 25 feet north thereof
along the western line of Reading Street
Ridge Street North From Harrisburg Street to Trawitz Alley
River Alley [Added
3-20-1978 by Ord.
No. 78-2]
Both From Pine Jefferson Street south 125 feet
to dead end at St. James Church
River Alley Both From Pine Street to Mulberry Street
River Alley [Added
2-6-1995 by Ord.
No. 95-1]
East From a point 70 feet north of Chestnut
Street in a northerly direction to a point
163 feet north of Chestnut Street
River Alley East From Heagy Street to McKinley Street
River Alley West From Heagy Street to Felton Street
River Alley West From Pine Street to Chambers Street
St. Mary's Drive South From Second Street to Fourth Street
School Alley [Added
12-7-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-9]
East Between Locust Street and Walnut Street
Second Street
[Added 5-18-1987
by Ord. No. 87-1]
East From Pine Street to Adam Street
South Front Street
[Added 10-20-1986
by Ord. No. 86-5]
West From Strawberry Alley to Chambers
Street
§ 110-24 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 110-24
110:519
Name of Highway Side Location
South Second Street
[Added 5-15-1989
by Ord. No. 89-1]
East From a point, said point being the
southeast corner of the intersection of
Strawberry Street and South Second
Street, continuing in a southerly direction
along South Second Street for a distance
of 88 feet to a point on South Second
Street
South Second Street
[Added 11-20-1978
by Ord. No. 78-6]
Southeast From Highland Street to Hoffer Street
South Third Street
[Added 5-16-1994
by Ord. No. 94-5]
East From Walnut Street to Swatara Street
South Third Street West From Elm Street to Strawberry Street
South Third Street West From Pine Street to Walnut Street
Spruce Street Both From South Fourth Street to Swatara
Street
Swatara Street South From Fifth Street to South Front Street
Swatara Street
[Added 6-16-1997
by Ord. No. 97-2]
South From Fifth Street east approximately 192
feet to the ramp accessing the even
number of Swatara Street at the 400-500
Block
Swatara Street
[Amended
6-20-1988 by Ord.
No. 88-2]
South From the premises of 420 Swatara Street
east to Sixth Street
Swatara Street
[Added 12-7-1998
by Ord. No. 98-9]
South Between a point located 135 feet
northeast of the southeast intersection of
Swatara Street and South Harrisburg
Street, also being the northeast corner of
property known as 418 Swatara Street,
and a point located 210 feet northeast of
the southeast intersection of Swatara
Street and South Harrisburg Street, also
being the northwest corner of property
known as 432 Swatara Street
Third Alley [Added
8-30-1977 by Ord.
No. 77-7]
Both From Franklin Street to Jefferson Street
Walnut Street [Repealed 11-18-1985 by Ord. No. 85-6]
Washington Street
[Added 3-17-1975
by Ord. No. 75-3]
South From Front Street to St. Mary's Drive
§ 110-24 § 110-24
110:520
Name of Highway Side Location
Wood Street [Added
5-18-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-3]
North From Chambers Street to Front Street
Wood Street [Added
12-17-1001 by
Ord. No. 2001-7,
approved
12-17-2001]
North Beginning at a point, said point located
335 feet south of the northwest corner of
the intersection of Chambers and Wood
Streets; thence continuing along the
northern line of Wood Street and the
western line of Wood Street a distance of
164 feet to a point
Woodbine Street
[Added 5-17-2004
by Ord. No.
2004-5, approved
5-17-2004]
East and
west
From Catherine Street to Primrose Alley
§ 110-25. Parking prohibited during certain hours.
No person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified below of any
day, except Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, upon any of the highways or
parts of highways described below.
Name of Highway Side Hours Location
P Street [Added
5-19-1975 by
Ord. No. 75-4]
East 9:00 p.m. to 6:00
a.m.97
From South Second
Street to South Third
Street
§ 110-25.1. Parking prohibited in certain locations, certain days
and hours. [Added 5-19-1989 by Ord. No. 89-1; amended
10-21-1991 by Ord. No. 91-9]
Parking shall be prohibited in the following locations at all times on the days
and between the hours indicated in this section, as follows:
97.Editor's Note: Includes Saturdays, Sundays and holidays.
§ 110-24 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 110-25.1
110:521
Name of
Highway Side Days Hours Location
Angle Avenue
[Added
5-17-2004 by
Ord. No. 2004-5,
approved
5-17-2004]
North Tuesday 9:30 a.m. to
11:30 a.m.
From Bailey Street
to North Third
Street
Angle Avenue
[Added
5-17-2004 by
Ord. No. 2004-5,
approved
5-17-2004]
South Thursday 9:30 a.m. to
11:30 a.m.
From Bailey Street
to North Third
Street
Bailey Street
[Added
5-17-2004 by
Ord. No. 2004-5,
approved
5-17-2004]
East Tuesday 9:30 a.m. to
11:30 a.m.
From Pine Street
to dead end
Bailey Street
[Added
5-17-2004 by
Ord. No. 2004-5,
approved
5-17-2004]
West Thursday 9:30 a.m. to
11:30 a.m.
From Pine Street
to dead end
Bowers Alley
[Added
5-18-1998 by
Ord. No. 98-3]
Both Wed. 6:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.
From Travitz Alley
to the dead end of
Travitz Alley
Chestnut Street
[Added
5-17-2004 by
Ord. No. 2004-5,
approved
5-17-2004]
North Monday 7:30 a.m. to
9:30 a.m.
From Front Street
to Second Street
Chestnut Street
[Added
5-17-2004 by
Ord. No. 2004-5,
approved
5-17-2004]
South Tuesday 7:30 a.m. to
9:30 a.m.
From Front Street
to Second Street
Elm Street
[Amended
12-20-1993 by
Ord. No. 93-11]
Both Wed. 7:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.
From Fourth Street
to Penn Street
§ 110-25.1 § 110-25.1
110:522
Name of
Highway Side Days Hours Location
Mulberry Street
[Amended
12-20-1993 by
Ord. No. 93-11]
Both Wed. 7:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.
From Reading
Street to Third
Street
Nectarine Street
[Amended
12-20-1993 by
Ord. No. 93-11]
Both Wed. 7:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.
From Sixth Street
to dead end
North Third Street
[Added
5-17-2004 by
Ord. No. 2004-5,
approved
5-17-2004]
East Thursday 9:30 a.m. to
11:30 a.m.
From Angle
Avenue to dead
end
North Third Street
[Added
5-17-2004 by
Ord. No. 2004-5,
approved
5-17-2004]
West Tuesday 9:30 a.m. to
11:30 a.m.
From Angle
Avenue to dead
end
Paxton Alley
[Amended
12-20-1993 by
Ord. No. 93-11]
Both Wed. 7:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.
From Harrisburg
Street to Bailey
Street
Penn Street
[Added
11-15-1999 by
Ord. No. 99-6]
Both Mon. 9:30 a.m. to
11:30 a.m.
From Mulberry
Street to Elm
Street
Poplar Street
[Amended
12-20-1993 by
Ord. No. 93-11]
Both Wed. 7:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.
From Harrisburg
Street to Fourth
Street
Reading Street
[Added
5-17-2004 by
Ord. No. 2004-5,
approved
5-17-2004]
East Tuesday 9:30 a.m. to
11:30 a.m.
From Pine Street
up to Circle,
including Circle
Reading Street
[Added
5-17-2004 by
Ord. No. 2004-5,
approved
5-17-2004]
West Thursday 9:30 a.m. to
11:30 a.m.
From Pine Street
to Circle
§ 110-25.1 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 110-25.1
110:523
Name of
Highway Side Days Hours Location
River Alley
[Amended
12-20-1993 by
Ord. No. 93-11]
Both Wed. 7:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.
From Heagy Street
1 1/2 blocks north
and 1 1/2 dead end
River Alley
[Amended
12-20-1993 by
Ord. No. 93-11]
Both Wed. 7:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.
From Hoffer Street
to Angle Avenue
Roller Drive
[Added
5-17-2004 by
Ord. No. 2004-5,
approved
5-17-2004]
North Thursday 9:30 a.m. to
11:30 a.m.
From Reading
Street to dead end
Roller Drive
[Added
5-17-2004 by
Ord. No. 2004-5,
approved
5-17-2004]
South Tuesday 9:30 a.m. to
11:30 a.m.
From Reading
Street to dead end
School Alley
[Added
12-7-1998 by
Ord. No. 98-9]
West Wed. 7:00 a.m. to
5:00 a.m.
From Locust Street
to Walnut Street
South Second Street [Repealed 6-17-1996 by Ord. No. 96-4]
§ 110-26. Parking time limited.
No person shall park a vehicle or allow the same to remain parked upon any
of the highways or parts of highways described below between the hours
specified, for longer than the time indicated below.
Name of
Street Sides Time Limit Days/Hours Location
Chambers
Street
Both Any time 2 From South Front
Street to Wood
Street
Chestnut Street Both Any time 2 From South Front
to South Second
Street
Elm Street South Any time 2 From Third
Street to Fourth
Street
§ 110-25.1 § 110-26
110:524
Name of
Street Sides Time Limit Days/Hours Location
Fourth Street East Any time 2 From Pine Street
to Swatara Street
Fourth Street West Any time 2 From Pine Street
to Walnut Street
Front Street East 10:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
2 From Mohn
Street to
Conestoga Street
Heagy Street South Any time 2 From R Alley to
Third Street
Highland Street Both Any time 2 From South Front
Street to the
northeasterly
Borough line
Hoffer Street Both Any time 2 From Front
Street to Second
Street
Juneberry
Street
North Any time 2 From Front
Street to Second
Street
Mulberry Street Both Any time 2 From Harrisburg
Street to Third
Street
Mulberry Street North Any time 2 From Second
Street to Front
Street
§ 110-26 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 110-26
110:525
Name of
Street Sides Time Limit Days/Hours Location
North Second
Street [Added
4-21-2003 by
Ord. No.
2003-1,
approved
4-21-2003]
West Any time
(except
Sunday when
parking is
not
permitted)
1/4 hour (15
minutes)
Beginning at a
point on the west
side of North
Second Street,
said point also
being located 33
feet nine inches
from the
northwest corner
of the
intersection of
Locust and North
Second Streets;
thence continuing
along the western
line of North
Second Street in
a northerly
direction 63 feet
nine inches to a
point
R Street Southeast Any time 2 From Front
Street to Fourth
Street
Reading Street West Any time 2 From Pine Street
to a point 25 feet
north of Mulberry
Street
River Alley East Any time 2 From Angle Alley
to Pine Street
River Alley East Any time 2 From Heagy
Street to Felton
Street
River Alley East Any time 2 From Mulberry
Street to
Chambers Street
River Alley West Any time 2 From Heagy
Street to
McKinley Street
St. Mary's Drive North Any time 2 From Second
Street to
Highland Street
§ 110-26 § 110-26
110:526
Name of
Street Sides Time Limit Days/Hours Location
Second Street Both Any time 2 From Hoffer
Street to
Chambers Street
South Front
Street [Added
5-16-1994 by
Ord. No. 94-5]
West Any time 1/4 (15 min.) Beginning at a
point, said point
being located on
the west line of
South Front
Street, a distance
of 33 feet 6
inches south of
the southwest
intersection of
Locust and South
Front Streets;
thence continuing
along the west
line of South
Front Street a
distance of 20
feet to a point
South Front
Street [Added
5-16-1994 by
Ord. No. 94-5]
West Any time 1/4 (15 min.) Beginning at a
point, said point
being located on
the west line of
South Front
Street, a distance
of 53 feet 6
inches south of
the southwest
intersection of
Locust and South
Front Streets;
thence continuing
along the west
line of South
Front Street a
distance of 20
feet to a point
South Second
Street
Both Any time 2 From McKinley
Street to P Street
South Third
Street [Added
5-16-1994 by
Ord. No. 94-5]
Both Any time 2 From Walnut
Street to Swatara
Street
§ 110-26 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 110-26
110:527
Name of
Street Sides Time Limit Days/Hours Location
Third Street Both Any time 2 From Pine to a
point 150 feet
south of Swatara
Street
Third Street East Any time 2 From a point 150
feet south of
Swatara Street to
Strawberry Alley
Third Street East Any time 2 From Elm Street
to Swatara Street
Walnut Street Both Any time 2 From Second
Street to
Harrisburg Street
§ 110-27. Special purpose parking zones.98
The following are hereby established as special purpose parking zones, and
it shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle or tractor or to allow
the same to remain parked in any such zone except as specifically provided
for such zone:
98.Editor's Note: This section contains only current regulations concerning special purpose
parking zones, and all histories for repealed entries have been removed.
§ 110-26 § 110-27
110:528
Name of
Highway Side
Authorized
Purpose of
Vehicle Location
Adams Street
[Added
10-21-1991 by
Ord. No. 91-9]
North Parking space
reserved for
Elaine S. Ogden
(handicapped
parking)
Beginning at a point on
the northern line by of
Adams Street, said point
being a distance of 101
feet more or less from the
northeastern intersection
of Bailey Street and
Adams Street; thence
continuing along the
northern line of Adams
Street in a northeasterly
direction a distance of
17.5 feet, being the entire
frontage of 215 Adams
Street
Adams Street
[Added
5-16-1994 by
Ord. No. 94-5]
NorthwestParking space
reserved for
Kenneth E.
Goodman
(handicapped
parking)
Beginning at a point, said
point located on the
northwest line of Adams
Street, said point also
being located 40 feet
south west of the
intersection of Daron
Alley and Adams Street;
thence continuing along
the line of Adams Street
in a southwest direction a
distance of 20 feet, being
part of the frontage of
139 1/2 Adams Street
Adams Street
[Added
6-20-2005 by
Ord. No.
2005-6;
approved
6-20-2005]
NorthwestMonumental
AME Church
(handicapped
parking)
Beginning at a point, said
point being located at the
northwest corner of the
intersection of Adams
Street and North Second
Street; thence continuing
in a northeasterly
direction along the
northwestern side of
Adams Street for a
distance of 45 feet; being
the entire frontage of 101
- 105 Adams Street
§ 110-27 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 110-27
110:529
Name of
Highway Side
Authorized
Purpose of
Vehicle Location
Adams Street
[Added
12-19-1994 by
Ord. No. 94-11]
South A zone for
loading and
unloading
commercial
vehicles between
the hours of 7:00
a.m. and 7:00
p.m.
Beginning at a point,
which point is located at
the southeast corner of
the intersection of Adams
Street and Harrisburg
Street, thence continuing
along the southern line of
Adams Street in an
easterly direction a
distance of 228 feet to the
entrance of lands now or
formerly of BWB, Inc.
Chestnut Street
[Added
11-20-2000 by
Ord. No.
2000-5]
NorthwestParking space
reserved for
Goldie Ann
Hoover
(handicapped
parking)
Beginning at a point
located on the northwest
side of Chestnut Street,
said point being located
20 feet from the northeast
corner of the intersection
of Chestnut Street and
River Alley; thence
continuing along the
northwest line of
Chestnut Street in a
northeasterly direction a
distance of 20 feet; being
the entire frontage of 21
Chestnut Street
Chestnut Street
[Added
11-20-2000 by
Ord. No.
2000-5]
NorthwestParking space
reserved for
Minnie R.
Pugliese
(handicapped
parking)
Beginning at a point
located on the northwest
side of Chestnut Street,
said point being located
30 feet southwest of the
northwest intersection of
Chestnut Street and
South Second Street;
thence continuing along
the northwest line of
Chestnut Street in a
southwesterly direction a
distance of 20 feet; being
part of the frontage of 27
Chestnut Street and the
entire frontage of 31
Chestnut Street
§ 110-27 § 110-27
110:530
Name of
Highway Side
Authorized
Purpose of
Vehicle Location
Chestnut Street
[Added
11-20-2000 by
Ord. No.
2000-5]
NorthwestParking space
reserved for
Patricia Y. Wilson
(handicapped
parking)
Beginning at a point
located on the northwest
line of Chestnut Street,
said point also being
located 40 feet southwest
of the southwest
intersection of South
Second Street and
Chestnut Street; thence
continuing in a
southwesterly direction a
distance of 20 feet; being
the entire frontage of 25
Chestnut Street
Chestnut Street
[Added
11-20-2000 by
Ord. No.
2000-5]
Southeast Parking space
reserved for
Louis A. Spizzieri
(handicapped
parking)
Beginning at a point
located on the southeast
side of Chestnut Street,
said point also being
located 32 feet, more or
less, from the southwest
intersection of Chestnut
Street and Second Street;
thence continuing along
the southeast line of
Chestnut Street in a
southwesterly direction a
distance of 19 feet; being
the entire frontage of 30
Chestnut Street
Chestnut Street
[Added
11-16-1992 by
Ord. No. 92-6]
South Parking space
reserved for
Amilda K.
Spizzieri
(handicapped
parking)
Beginning at a point, said
point located on the
southern line of Chestnut
Street a distance of 31
feet from the southwest
corner of the intersection
of South Second Street
and Chestnut Street;
thence continuing along
the southern line of
Chestnut Street in a
southwesterly direction a
distance of 13 feet, being
the entire frontage of 30
Chestnut Street
§ 110-27 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 110-27
110:531
Name of
Highway Side
Authorized
Purpose of
Vehicle Location
Conestoga Street
[Added
11-16-1992 by
Ord. No. 92-6]
Southeast Parking space
reserved for Mary
Harris
(handicapped
parking)
Beginning at a point, said
point located a distance of
30 feet southwest of the
southeast corner of the
intersection of Conestoga
Street and Daron Alley;
thence continuing along
the southeast line of
Conestoga Street in a
southwesterly direction,
37.5 feet, more or less,
being the entire frontage
of 150 Conestoga Street
§ 110-27 § 110-27
110:532
Name of
Highway Side
Authorized
Purpose of
Vehicle Location
Daron Alley
[Added
12-19-1994 by
Ord. No. 94-11]
Center Parking space
reserved for
William E.
Holmes, Jr.
(handicapped
parking)
Beginning at a point, said
point located the
following 2 courses and
distances from the
northwest corner of the
intersection of Daron
Alley and Adams Street:
(1) northerly along the
western line of Daron
Alley a distance of 5 feet,
thence (2) in an easterly
direction perpendicular to
the Western line of Daron
Alley a distance of 3 feet,
thence in a northerly
direction along a line
parallel with the western
line of Daron Alley in a
northerly direction a
distance of 20 feet to a
point; thence in an
easterly direction along a
line perpendicular to the
western line of Daron
Alley, a distance of 10 feet
to a point; thence in a
southerly direction along
a line parallel with the
western line of Daron
Alley, a distance of 20 feet
to a point; thence in a
westerly direction along a
line perpendicular to the
western line of Daron
Alley a distance of 10
§ 110-27 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 110-27
110:533
Name of
Highway Side
Authorized
Purpose of
Vehicle Location
Elm Street
[Added
9-16-2002 by
Ord. No.
2002-2]
Southeast Parking space
reserved for Jill
M. Perez
(handicapped
parking)
Beginning at a point
located on the southeast
side of Elm Street, said
point also being located
36.2 feet, more or less,
from the southeast corner
of the intersection of
South Fourth and Elm
Streets; thence
continuing along the
southeast side of Elm
Street in a southwesterly
direction, a distance of 25
feet more or less; being
the entire frontage of 232
Elm Street
Elm Street
[Added
7-16-2001 by
Ord. No.
2001-4]
Southeast Parking space
reserved for
Dolores A.
Robinson
(handicapped
parking)
Beginning at a point on
the southeast side of Elm
Street, said point also
being located 83 feet,
more or less, northeast of
the northeastern
intersection of South
Third and Elm Streets;
thence continuing in a
northeasterly direction
along the southeasterly
line of Elm Street a
distance of 25 feet, being
the entire frontage of 220
Elm Street
Elm Street
[Added
6-15-1992 by
Ord. No. 92-1]
Southeast Parking space
reserved for
Richard E.
Stickle, Sr.
(handicapped
parking)
Beginning at a point
located on the southeast
line of Elm Street, said
point also being 107.50
feet northeast of the
southeast corner of South
Third Street and Elm
Street; thence continuing
along the southeast line
of Elm Street in a
northeast direction 25
feet, being the entire
frontage of 224 Elm
Street
§ 110-27 § 110-27
110:534
Name of
Highway Side
Authorized
Purpose of
Vehicle Location
Jefferson Street
[Added
5-15-2000 by
Ord. No.
2000-2,
approved
5-15-2000]
North Mary C. Sviben
(handicapped
parking)
Beginning at a point on
the northern line of
Jefferson Street, said
point also being located
44 feet west of the
northwest corner of North
Third and Jefferson
Streets; thence
continuing in a westerly
direction 18 feet; being
the entire frontage of 227
Jefferson Street
Jefferson Street
[Added
6-21-1999 by
Ord. No. 99-3]
NorthwestParking space
reserved for Allen
Cleckner, Jr.
Beginning at a point, said
point being located on the
western line of Jefferson
Street, a distance of 5
feet from the southwest
corner of the intersection
of River Alley and
Jefferson Street; thence
continuing along the
western line of Jefferson
Street in a southwesterly
direction a distance of 20
feet; being a portion of
the frontage of 15
Jefferson Street and the
frontage of 13 Jefferson
Street
Jefferson Street
[Added
5-17-2004 by
Ord. No.
2004-5,
approved
5-17-2004]
Southeast Frank A. Zuvich,
Sr. (handicapped
parking)
Beginning at a point, said
point being located 30
feet southwest of the
southeastern corner of
North Second and
Jefferson Streets; thence
continuing along Jefferson
Street in a southwesterly
direction a distance of 20
feet; being a portion of
the premises at 470 North
Second Street
§ 110-27 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 110-27
110:535
Name of
Highway Side
Authorized
Purpose of
Vehicle Location
Kennedy Lane
[Added
7-16-2001 by
Ord. No.
2001-4;
amended
4-21-2003 by
Ord. No.
2003-1,
approved
4-21-2003]
West Annie Maye
Hunter
(handicapped
parking)
Beginning at a point, said
point located on the west
side of Kennedy Lane,
said point also being
located 305 feet, more or
less, south of the
northwest corner of the
intersection of Hickory
Street and Kennedy Lane;
thence continuing
southward a distance of
22 feet, being the entire
frontage of 26 Kennedy
Lane
Lincoln Street
[Added
5-15-2000 by
Ord. No.
2000-2,
approved
5-15-2000]
North Eleanor A.
Wallace
(handicapped
parking)
Beginning at a point
located on the northern
line of Lincoln Street, said
point located 49 feet east
of the northeast corner of
Lincoln and Short Streets;
thence continuing along
in an easterly direction
for a distance of 20 feet;
being the entire frontage
of 113 Lincoln Street
Lincoln Street
[Added
6-20-2005 by
Ord. No.
2005-6;
approved
6-20-2005]
NorthwestEdward Terry
(handicapped
parking)
Beginning at a point
along the northwestern
line of Lincoln Street, said
point also located 137.28
feet northeast of the
northeastern corner of
the intersection of Bailey
Street and Lincoln Street;
thence continuing in a
northeasterly direction
along the northwestern
line of Lincoln Street a
distance of 18.75 feet;
being the entire frontage
of 217 Lincoln Street
§ 110-27 § 110-27
110:536
Name of
Highway Side
Authorized
Purpose of
Vehicle Location
Lincoln Street
[Added
11-20-2000 by
Ord. No.
2000-5]
NorthwestParking space
reserved for
Vincent L. House
(handicapped
parking)
Beginning at a point, said
point being located 20
feet northeast of the
northwest intersection of
Lincoln Street and Short
Street; thence continuing
along the northwest line
of Lincoln Street in a
northeasterly direction a
distance of 22 feet; being
a portion of the frontage
of 107 Lincoln Street
Lincoln Street
[Added
11-15-1999 by
Ord. No. 99-6]
NorthwestParking space
reserved for Jerry
L. Penn, Sr.
(handicapped
parking)
Beginning at a point, said
point being located on the
northwest line of Lincoln
Street, said point also
being 75 feet southwest
of the northwest corner of
Bailey and Lincoln
Streets, thence
continuing along the
northwest line of Lincoln
Street in a southwesterly
direction a distance of 25
feet; being the entire
frontage of 171 Lincoln
Street
Lincoln Street
[Added
5-17-2004 by
Ord. No.
2004-5,
approved
5-17-2004]
NorthwestEsther R. Grubb
(handicapped
parking)
Beginning at a point, said
point located on the
northwestern line of
Lincoln Street, said point
also being located a
distance of 195 feet
southwest of the
southwestern corner of
the intersection of Lincoln
and North Harrisburg
Streets; thence
continuing along the
northwestern line of
Lincoln Street in a
southwesterly direction
18.75 feet to a point;
being the frontage of 219
Lincoln Street
§ 110-27 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 110-27
110:537
Name of
Highway Side
Authorized
Purpose of
Vehicle Location
Lincoln Street
[Added
5-17-2004 by
Ord. No.
2004-5,
approved
5-17-2004]
NorthwestJuanita Lewis-
Chisolm
(handicapped
parking)
Beginning at a point
along the northwestern
line of Lincoln Street, said
point also located 80 feet
southwest of the
northwestern corner of
the intersection of
Lebanon and Lincoln
Streets; thence
continuing in a
southwesterly direction
along the northwestern
line of Lincoln Street a
distance of 20 feet; being
the entire frontage of 437
Lincoln Street
Lincoln Street
[Added
5-17-2004 by
Ord. No.
2004-5,
approved
5-17-2004]
NorthwestJohnie Mae
Washington-
Jackson
(handicapped
parking)
Beginning at a point, said
point located on the
northwestern line of
Lincoln Street, also being
located a distance of 60
feet southwest of the
northwestern corner of
Lincoln and Lebanon
Streets; thence
continuing in a
southwesterly direction
along the northwestern
line of Lincoln Street a
distance of 20 feet to a
point; being the frontage
of 443 Lincoln Street
Lincoln Street
[Added
6-20-1983 by
Ord. No. 83-3]
South Parking space
reserved for Anna
B. Wells
(handicapped)
20 feet along the
southern line of Lincoln
Street from a point
beginning 140 feet
southwest of the
southwestern corner of
the intersection of Lincoln
Street and Reading
Street, being the total
frontage of property
known as 328 Lincoln
Street
§ 110-27 § 110-27
110:538
Name of
Highway Side
Authorized
Purpose of
Vehicle Location
Lincoln Street
[Added
10-15-1990 by
Ord. No. 90-2]
South Loading zone:
8:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m., Monday
through Friday;
commercial
vehicles only: 15
minute limit
Beginning at the
southeast corner of the
intersection of Harrisburg
Street and Lincoln Street,
thence continuing along
the south side of Lincoln
Street in an easterly
direction for a distance of
50 feet on the south side
of Lincoln Street
Lincoln Street
[Added
4-21-2003 by
Ord. No.
2003-1,
approved
4-21-2003]
Southeast Izola B. Robinson
(handicapped
parking)
Beginning at a point, said
point being located on the
southeast line of Lincoln
Street, said point also
being located a distance
of 32 feet southwest of
the southwestern corner
of the intersection of
Daron Alley and Lincoln
Street; thence continuing
in a southwesterly
direction along the
southeastern line of
Lincoln Street 22 feet to a
point; being the entire
frontage of 144 and a
portion of 146 Lincoln
Street
Lincoln Street
[Added
9-16-2002 by
Ord. No.
2002-2]
Southeast Parking space
reserved for
Anthony T.
McRae, Jr.
(handicapped
parking)
Beginning at a point, said
point located on the
southeast line of Lincoln
Street, said point also
located 125 feet northeast
of the intersection of
Bailey and Lincoln
Streets; thence
continuing along the
southeastern line of
Lincoln Street in a north
easterly direction a
distance of 25 feet to a
point; being the entire
frontage of 222 Lincoln
Street
§ 110-27 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 110-27
110:539
Name of
Highway Side
Authorized
Purpose of
Vehicle Location
Lincoln Street
[Added
10-20-1986 by
Ord. No. 86-5]
Southeast Parking space
reserved for
Constance
Meyers
25 feet along the
southeast side of Lincoln
Street from a point
100.10 feet northeast of
the intersection of Daron
Alley and Lincoln Street,
being the total frontage of
162 Lincoln Street
Locust Street
[Added
5-16-1994 by
Ord. No. 94-5]
North Assistant Fire
Chief
Beginning at a point, said
point being located 139
feet northeast of the
northeast corner of the
intersection of Penn and
Locust Streets; thence
continuing along the
northern side of Locust
Street in a northeast
direction a distance of 20
feet, being part of the
frontage of 339 Locust
Street
Locust Street
[Added
5-17-2004 by
Ord. No.
2004-5,
approved
5-17-2004]
NorthwestShirley W. Keck
(handicapped
parking)
Beginning at a point, said
point located on the
northwest line of Locust
Street; said point also
being located 50 feet
northeast of the northeast
corner of Locust and Penn
Streets; thence
continuing in a northeast
direction along the
northwestern line of
Locust Street a distance
of 20 feet; being the
entire frontage of 331
Locust Street
§ 110-27 § 110-27
110:540
Name of
Highway Side
Authorized
Purpose of
Vehicle Location
Locust Street
[Added
5-17-2004 by
Ord. No.
2004-5,
approved
5-17-2004]
NorthwestSusanna
Svidunovich
(handicapped
parking)
Beginning at a point, said
point located on the
northwest line of Locust
Street, said point also
being located 115 feet
from the northwest
corner of the intersection
of Locust and North
Harrisburg Streets;
thence continuing along
the northwestern line of
Locust Street in a
southwesterly direction a
distance of 20 feet; being
the entire frontage of 337
Locust Street
Locust Street
[Added
5-18-1987 by
Ord. No. 87-1]
NorthwestParking space
reserved for Mary
L. Elliott
(handicapped)
20.25 feet along the
northwest side of Locust
Street from a point being
located 115 feet
southwest of the
northwest corner of the
intersection of North
Harrisburg Street and
Locust Street, being the
total frontage of 341
Locust Street
Locust Street
[Added
6-20-2005 by
Ord. No.
2005-6;
approved
6-20-2005]
NorthwestAssistant Fire
Chief
Beginning at a point, said
point located on the
northwest line of Locust
Street, said point also
being located 88 feet
southwest of the
northwestern corner of
the intersection of North
Harrisburg Street and
Locust Street; thence
continuing along the
northwestern line of
Locust Street in a
southwesterly direction a
distance of 20 feet; being
the entire frontage of 355
Locust Street
§ 110-27 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 110-27
110:541
Name of
Highway Side
Authorized
Purpose of
Vehicle Location
Locust Street
[Added
5-18-1998 by
Ord. No. No.
98-3]
Southeast Handicapped
parking
Beginning at a point, said
point located on the
southeast side of Locust
Street, said point also
being located 20 feet east
of the southeast corner of
the intersection of Locust
Street and River Alley;
thence continuing along
the southeast line of
Locust Street in a
northeast direction, a
distance of 20 feet, being
a portion of the frontage
of Mt. Zion Missionary
Baptist Church
Locust Street
[Added
4-21-2003 by
Ord. No.
2003-1,
approved
4-21-2003]
Southeast Dorotheia R.
Wagner
(handicapped
parking)
Beginning at a point, said
point located on the
southeastern line of
Locust Street, said point
also being located 52 feet
northeast of the northeast
corner of the intersection
of Locust and Penn
Streets; thence
continuing along the
southeastern line of
Locust Street in a
northeasterly direction a
distance of 23 feet; being
the entire frontage of 330
Locust Street
§ 110-27 § 110-27
110:542
Name of
Highway Side
Authorized
Purpose of
Vehicle Location
Locust Street
[Added
5-17-2004 by
Ord. No.
2004-5,
approved
5-17-2004]
Southeast Helen T. Case
(handicapped
parking)
Beginning at a point, said
point being located on the
southeast line of Locust
Street 133 feet southwest
of the southwest
intersection of South
Harrisburg and Locust
Streets; thence
continuing in a
southwesterly direction
along Locust Street a
distance of 20 feet; being
along the frontage of 344
Locust Street
Mulberry Alley
[Added
6-19-1995 by
Ord. No. 95-8]
Southeast Parking space
reserved for
Sarah Mull
(handicapped
parking)
Beginning at a point, said
point being located on the
southeast line of
Mulberry Alley, said point
also being located 86 feet
northeast of the northeast
corner of the intersection
of North Third Street and
Mulberry Alley, thence
continuing along the
southeast line of
Mulberry Alley in an
easterly direction a
distance of 20 feet, being
a portion of the side yard
of 35 North Third Street
§ 110-27 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 110-27
110:543
Name of
Highway Side
Authorized
Purpose of
Vehicle Location
North Fourth
Street [Added
10-20-1997 by
Ord. No. 97-7]
East Parking space
reserved for
Ronald L.
Schmiedel
(handicapped
parking)
Beginning at a point, said
point located on the
eastern line of North
Fourth Street a distance
of 30 feet from the
southeast corner of the
intersection of Locust
Street and North Fourth
Street, thence continuing
along the eastern line of
Harrisburg Street in a
northerly direction a
distance of 20 feet, being
a portion of the side yard
frontage of 239 Locust
Street
North Front
Street [Added
11-20-2000 by
Ord. No.
2000-5]
Northeast A zone for
loading and
unloading
commercial
vehicles between
the hours of 7:00
a.m. and 4:00
p.m.
Beginning at a point,
which point is located 98
feet northwest of the
northeast corner of the
intersection of Angle Alley
and North Front Street;
thence continuing along
the northeast line of
Front Street in a
northwesterly direction a
distance of 19.6 feet;
being the entire frontage
of 155 North Front Street
§ 110-27 § 110-27
110:544
Name of
Highway Side
Authorized
Purpose of
Vehicle Location
North Front
Street [Added
9-16-2002 by
Ord. No.
2002-2]
Northeast A zone for
loading and
unloading
vehicles between
the hours of 7:00
a.m. and 11:30
a.m., Sundays
Beginning at a point,
which point is located on
the northeast line of
North Front Street, said
point also being located a
distance of 89 feet
northwest of the
northeast corner of the
intersection of North
Front and Franklin
Streets; thence
continuing along the
northeastern line of North
Front Street in a
northwesterly direction a
distance of 22 feet; being
a portion of the frontage
of 723 North Front Street
North Second
Street [Added
6-21-1999 by
Ord. No. 99-3]
Northeast Parking space
reserved for
Franklin L. Albert
(handicapped
parking)
Beginning at a point, said
point located on the
northeast line of 536
North Second Street, said
point also being located
117 feet south of the
intersection of Eleanor
and South Second
Streets; thence
continuing along the line
of 538 to 536 to 534
South Second Street in a
southerly direction a
distance of 20 feet; being
a portion of the frontage
of 538 to 536 to 534
South Second Street
§ 110-27 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 110-27
110:545
Name of
Highway Side
Authorized
Purpose of
Vehicle Location
North Second
Street [Added
5-15-2000 by
Ord. No.
2000-2,
approved
5-15-2000]
South Stanley J.
Edwards
(handicapped
parking)
Beginning at a point, said
point being located on the
southern line of North
Second Street a distance
of 110 feet more or less in
a southerly direction from
the southwest corner of
North Second and Lincoln
Streets; thence
continuing in a southerly
direction 22 feet; being
all of the frontage of 242
North Second Street and
a portion of the frontage
of 244 North Second
Street
North Second
Street [Added
11-20-2000 by
Ord. No.
2000-5]
South Parking space
reserved for
William H.
Bakarick and/or
Grace M.
Bakarick
Beginning at a point
located on the southern
line of North Second
Street, said point being
located 200 feet
northwest of the
southwest intersection of
Franklin Street and North
Second Street; thence
continuing in a northwest
direction along North
Second Street, a distance
of 25 feet; being the
entire frontage of 736
North Second Street
§ 110-27 § 110-27
110:546
Name of
Highway Side
Authorized
Purpose of
Vehicle Location
North Second
Street [Added
7-16-2001 by
Ord. No.
2001-4]
South Parking space
reserved for
Margaret A.
Fortino
(handicapped
parking)
Beginning at a point
located on the southern
line of North Second
Street, said point also
being located a distance
of 175 feet, more or less,
from the southeastern
corner of the intersection
of Franklin and North
Second Street; thence
continuing along the
southern line of North
Second Street in a
southeasterly direction a
distance of 25 feet, being
the entire frontage of 638
North Second Street
North Second
Street [Added
11-21-1983 by
Ord. No. 83-4]
South Parking space
reserved for
Elmer Hess
(handicapped)
12.5 feet along the
southern line of North
Second Street from a
point beginning 150 feet
west of the southwestern
corner of the intersection
of North Second Street
and Franklin Street,
being the total frontage of
property known as 724
North Second Street
North Second
Street [Added
6-21-1999 Ord.
No. 99-3]
South Parking space
reserved for
Loretta M.
Wieger
Beginning at a point, said
point located 142 feet,
more or less, south of the
southwest corner of the
intersection of North
Second Street and
Brewster Street; thence
continuing along the
western line of North
Second Street in a
southerly direction a
distance of 22 feet; being
a portion of the frontage
of 746 North Second
Street
§ 110-27 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 110-27
110:547
Name of
Highway Side
Authorized
Purpose of
Vehicle Location
North Second
Street [Added
10-20-1986 by
Ord. No. 86-5]
South Parking space
reserved for
Marie E. DeFrank
33 feet along the
southern side of North
Second Street from a
point 37 feet southeast of
the intersection of
Brewster Street and
North Second Street,
being the total frontage of
772 North Second Street
North Second
Street [Added
5-18-1998 by
Ord. No. 98-3]
South Parking space
reserved for
William E. Gluntz
(handicapped
parking)
Beginning at a point on
the southern line of North
Second Street, said point
being located 90.26 feet
northwest of the
southwest intersection of
North Second Street and
Lincoln Street, thence
continuing along the
southern line of North
Second Street in a
northwest direction a
distance of 20 feet, being
a portion of the frontage
of 316 North Second
Street
North Second
Street [Added
4-21-2003 by
Ord. No.
2003-1,
approved
4-21-2003]
SouthwestStanley J.
Edwards
(handicapped
parking)
Beginning at a point, said
point being located on the
southwestern line of
North Second Street, said
point also being located
13.17 feet, more or less,
northwest of the
southwestern intersection
of North Second Street
and Mulberry Alley;
thence continuing along
the southwestern line of
North Second Street in a
northwesterly direction a
distance of 20.83 feet to a
point; being the entire
frontage of 32 North
Second Street
§ 110-27 § 110-27
110:548
Name of
Highway Side
Authorized
Purpose of
Vehicle Location
North Second
Street [Added
6-21-1999 by
Ord. No. 99-3]
SouthwestParking space
reserved for
Theresa C. Noll
Beginning at a point, said
point located on the
southwestern line of
North Second Street, said
point also being 57.2 feet
northeast of the
southeastern corner of
the intersection of
Eleanor Street and North
Second Street; thence
continuing along the
southwestern line of
North Second Street in a
northeasterly direction a
distance of 20 feet; being
a portion of the frontage
of 546 North Second
Street
North Second
Street [Added
6-20-2005 by
Ord. No.
2005-6,
approved
6-20-2005]
West Donna L. Shearn
(handicapped
parking)
Beginning at a point, said
point located on the
western line of North
Second Street; said point
also being located 105
feet south of the
southwest corner of the
intersection of North
Second and Gibson
Streets; thence
continuing along the
western line of North
Second Street in a
southerly direction 22
feet, more or less; being
the entire frontage of 810
North Second Street
§ 110-27 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 110-27
110:549
Name of
Highway Side
Authorized
Purpose of
Vehicle Location
North Third
Street [Added
5-18-1998 by
Ord. No. 98-3]
Northeast Parking space
reserved for
Becky A. Yinger
(handicapped
parking)
Beginning at a point, said
point located on the
northeastern line of North
Third Street, said point
also being 52.5 feet
southeast of the northeast
intersection of Eleanor
Street and North Third
Street; thence continuing
along the northeastern
line of North Third Street
in a southeasterly
direction a distance of 20
feet, being a portion of
the frontage of 551 North
Third Street
North Third
Street [Added
6-16-1997 by
Ord. No. 97-2]
Southeast Parking space
reserved for
Walter A. Celsky,
Sr. (handicapped
parking)
Beginning at a point, said
point also being located
35 feet southeast of the
southeast corner of the
intersection of Third
Street and Eleanor Street,
thence continuing along
the line of Third Street in
a southeast direction a
distance of 20 feet, being
a portion of the frontage
of 551 North Third Street
Reading Street
[Added
11-20-2000 by
Ord. No.
2000-5]
SouthwestParking space
reserved for
Leonard Penn
(handicapped
parking)
Beginning at a point, said
point located on the
southwest line of Reading
Street, said point also
being located 16.75 feet
more or less northwest of
the northwest corner of
the intersection of Ridge
Street and Reading
Street; thence continuing
along Reading Street in a
northwest direction a
distance of 20 feet to a
point; being a portion of
the northeast side of 351
Ridge Street
§ 110-27 § 110-27
110:550
Name of
Highway Side
Authorized
Purpose of
Vehicle Location
Ridge Street
[Added
10-20-1997 by
Ord. No. 97-7]
North Parking space
reserved for John
T. Carter
(handicapped
parking)
Beginning at a point, said
point located 40 feet east
of the northeast corner of
the intersection of
Harrisburg Street and
Ridge Street, thence
continuing along the
northern line of Ridge
Street in an easterly
direction a distance of 20
feet, being a portion of
the side property line of
229 North Harrisburg
Street
Ridge Street
[Added
6-18-1990 by
Ord. No. 90-1]
NorthwestParking space
reserved for
James H. Batte
(handicapped
parking)
Beginning at a point, said
point located on the
northwestern side of
Ridge Street at a point
160 feet southwest of the
southwestern intersection
of Reading Street and
Ridge Street, thence
continuing along the
northwestern side of
Ridge Street in a
southwestern direction 20
feet to a point, being the
entire frontage of 327
Ridge Street (Barrett
property)
§ 110-27 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 110-27
110:551
Name of
Highway Side
Authorized
Purpose of
Vehicle Location
Ridge Street
[Added
6-19-1995 by
Ord. No. 95-8]
Southeast Parking space
reserved for
George W. Lee
(handicapped
parking)
Beginning at a point, said
point being located on the
southwest line of Ridge
Street, said point also
being located 54 feet
northeast of the northeast
corner of the intersection
of Daron Alley and Ridge
Streets, thence
continuing along the
southeast line of Ridge
Street in a northeasterly
direction a distance of 20
feet, being a portion of
the frontage of 157 and
153 Ridge Street
River Alley
[Added
12-19-1994 by
Ord. No. 94-11]
Both A zone for
loading and
unloading
commercial
vehicles between
the hours of 7:00
a.m. and 7:00
p.m.
Beginning at the southern
side of the intersection of
River Alley and Brewster
Street thence continuing
in a southerly direction on
both sides of River Alley a
distance of 175 feet
(being a point
immediately south of the
concrete steps of the VFW
Building descending to
the parking lot at the
south side of the VFW
building)
§ 110-27 § 110-27
110:552
Name of
Highway Side
Authorized
Purpose of
Vehicle Location
River Alley
[Added
4-21-2003 by
Ord. No.
2003-1,
approved
4-21-2003]
Northeast A zone for
loading and
unloading
vehicles
Beginning at a point,
which point is located on
the northeast line of River
Alley, said point also
being located a distance
of 78 feet southeast of the
southeast corner of the
intersection of Locust
Street and River Alley;
thence continuing along
the southeastern line of
River Alley in a
southeasterly direction a
distance of 35 feet; being
a portion of the side
premises of 20 Locust
Street
River Alley
[Added
10-15-1990 by
Ord. No. 90-2]
SouthwestParking space
reserved for
David W. Murray
(handicapped
parking)
Beginning at a point
located on the southwest
side of River Alley, said
point being located 125
feet southeast of the
southwest intersection of
Blueberry Alley and River
Alley, thence continuing
in a southeasterly
direction along River
Alley a distance of 25
feet, being the entire rear
property line of 339 South
Front Street
§ 110-27 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 110-27
110:553
Name of
Highway Side
Authorized
Purpose of
Vehicle Location
South Fourth
Street [Added
10-21-1991 by
Ord. No. 91-9]
Northeast Parking space
reserved for John
McKee and Ida
McKee
(handicapped
parking)
Beginning at a point
which point is located on
the northeastern side of
South Fourth Street, 26
feet southeast of the
northeastern intersection
of Walnut Street and
South Fourth Street;
thence continuing along
the northeastern side of
South Fourth Street in a
southeasterly direction a
distance of 17 feet to a
point, being the entire
frontage of 105 South
Fourth Street
South Fourth
Street [Added
6-20-2005 by
Ord. No.
2005-6;
approved
6-20-2005]
NorthwestLisa H.
Leinninger
(handicapped
parking)
Beginning at a point, said
point being located on the
northeast line of South
Fourth Street, said point
also being located a
distance of 218 feet, more
or less, southeast of the
northeastern intersection
of Walnut Street and
South Fourth Street;
thence continuing along
the northeastern line of
South Fourth Street in a
southeasterly direction a
distance of 22 feet; being
part of the frontage of
133 South Fourth Street
South Fourth
Street [Added
6-20-1983 by
Ord. No. 83-3]
Southeast Parking space
reserved for
Claudio Birriel
(handicapped)
25 feet along the
southeastern line of South
Fourth Street from a point
beginning 50 feet from
the southeastern corner
of the intersection of
Cherry Alley and South
Fourth Street, being the
total frontage of property
known as 337 South
Fourth Street.
§ 110-27 § 110-27
110:554
Name of
Highway Side
Authorized
Purpose of
Vehicle Location
South Front
Street [Added
10-20-1997 by
Ord. No. 97-7]
East Handicapped
parking
Beginning at a point, said
point being located on the
southeast line of South
Front Street, said point
being located 20 feet
south of the intersection
of South Front Street and
Blackberry Alley, thence
continuing along the line
of South Front Street
(east) in a southerly
direction a distance of 20
feet, being a portion of
the frontage of 239 South
Front Street
South Front
Street [Added
6-20-2005 by
Ord. No.
2005-6;
approved
6-20-2005]
East A zone for
loading and
unloading
commercial
vehicles between
the hours of 9:00
a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
Beginning at a point,
which point is located 17
feet 8 inches northwardly
of the northeast corner of
the intersection of South
Front Street and Chestnut
Street; thence continuing
in a northerly direction to
a point located 42 feet 2
inches northerly of the
northeast corner of the
intersection of South
Front Street and Chestnut
street
South Front
Street [Added
7-16-2001 by
Ord. No.
2001-4]
Northeast Parking space
reserved for
Virginia D.
Keister
(handicapped
parking)
Beginning at a point, said
point located on the
northeastern line of South
Front Street at a point 25
feet southeast of the
northeast corner of the
intersection of Blueberry
Alley and South Front
Street, thence continuing
along the northeastern
line of South Front Street
in a southeasterly
direction a distance of 25
feet, being the entire
frontage of 327 South
Front Street.
§ 110-27 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 110-27
110:555
Name of
Highway Side
Authorized
Purpose of
Vehicle Location
South Front
Street [Added
9-16-2002 by
Ord. No.
2002-2]
Northeast Parking space
reserved for
Charlie Thaug
(handicapped
parking)
Beginning at a point, said
point being located on the
northeast line of South
Front Street, said point
also being located a
distance of 103 feet in a
northwesterly direction
from the northeast corner
of the intersection of
South Front Street and
Juneberry Alley; thence
continuing along the
northeastern line of South
Front Street in a
northwesterly direction a
distance of 20 feet; being
the entire frontage of 615
South Front Street and a
portion of 613 South
Front Street
South Harrisburg
Street [Added
10-20-1997 by
Ord. No. 97-7]
East Parking space
reserved for Ada
G. Schmiedel
(handicapped
parking)
Beginning at a point, said
point located on the
eastern line of Harrisburg
Street, a distance of 30
feet from the southeast
corner of the intersection
of Walnut Street and
Harrisburg Street, thence
continuing along the
eastern line of Harrisburg
Street a distance of 20
feet, being all of the
frontage of 49 South
Harrisburg Street
§ 110-27 § 110-27
110:556
Name of
Highway Side
Authorized
Purpose of
Vehicle Location
South Harrisburg
Street [Added
7-16-2001 by
Ord. No.
2001-4]
Northeast Parking space
reserved for
Geraldine G.
Evans
(handicapped
parking)
Beginning at a point, said
point being located on the
northeast line of South
Harrisburg Street, said
point also being located
209 feet northeast of the
corner of the intersection
of Sweetbriar Avenue and
South Harrisburg Street;
thence continuing in a
northwest direction along
the northeast line of
South Harrisburg Street a
distance of 20 feet, being
a portion of the frontage
of 31 South Harrisburg
Street
South Harrisburg
Street [Added
6-17-1996 by
Ord. No. 96-4]
SouthwestParking space
reserved for
Betty L. Wall
(handicapped
parking)
Beginning at a point
located on the southeast
line of South Harrisburg
Street, said point also
being located a distance
of 78.9 feet southeast of
the southeasterly
intersection of Poplar
Street and South
Harrisburg Street, thence
continuing along the
southeast line of South
Harrisburg Street in a
southeasterly direction a
distance of 20 feet, being
all of the frontage of 42
South Harrisburg Street
and a portion of the
frontage of 40 South
Harrisburg Street
§ 110-27 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 110-27
110:557
Name of
Highway Side
Authorized
Purpose of
Vehicle Location
South Second
Street [Added
10-17-1988 by
Ord. No. 88-5]
Northeast Parking space
reserved for
Michael B.
Radonovich
Beginning at a point, said
point located 260.5 feet
more or less from the
northwestern corner of
the intersection of Mohn
Street and South Second
Street; thence in a
northwesterly direction
16.5 feet, being the entire
frontage of 369 South
Second Street
South Second
Street [Added
6-19-1995 by
Ord. No. 95-8]
Northeast John Shiprak
(handicapped
parking)
Beginning at a point on
the northeast line of
South Second Street, said
point also being located a
distance of 125 feet
southeast of the northeast
corner of South Second
and Locust Streets;
thence continuing in a
southeast direction a
distance of 30 feet to a
point, being the entire
frontage of 23 South
Second Street
South Second
Street [Added
11-15-1993 by
Ord. No. 93-10]
Northeast Parking space
reserved for
Josephine P.
LaVia
(handicapped
parking)
Beginning at a point, said
point being located on the
northeastern line of South
Second Street, said point
also being located 25 feet
northwest of the
northeast intersection of
Blueberry Alley and South
Second Street; thence
continuing along the
northeast line of South
Second Street in a
northwesterly direction a
distance of 25 feet, being
the entire frontage of 325
South Second Street
§ 110-27 § 110-27
110:558
Name of
Highway Side
Authorized
Purpose of
Vehicle Location
South Second
Street [Added
6-20-2005 by
Ord. No.
2005-6;
approved
6-20-2005]
Northeast New Hope
Baptist Church
(handicapped
parking)
Beginning at a point
located on the
northeastern line of South
Second Street, said point
being 31 feet northwest
of the northwestern
corner of the intersection
of Mohn Street and South
Second Street; thence
continuing along the
northeastern line of South
Second Street in a
northwesterly direction a
distance of 22 feet; being
part of the premises of
395 South Second Street
South Second
Street [Added
6-20-2005 by
Ord. No.
2005-6;
approved
6-20-2005]
Northeast Prince of Peace
Parish
(handicapped
parking)
Beginning at a point, said
point being located 20
feet southeast of the
southeast corner of the
intersection of South
Second Street and Hoffer
Street; thence continuing
along the northeastern
line of South Second
Street in a southeasterly
direction a distance of
160 feet; being a portion
of 815 South Second
Street
South Second
Street [Added
6-18-1990 by
Ord. No. 90-1]
South Parking space
reserved for
Geremia R.
Mahoney
(handicapped
parking)
Beginning at a point on
the south side of South
Second Street, said point
located a distance of 154
feet 4 inches from the
southeastern intersection
of Chestnut Street and
South Second Street,
thence continuing along
the southern line of South
Second Street in a
southeasterly direction 25
feet to a point, being the
entire frontage of 318
South Second Street
§ 110-27 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 110-27
110:559
Name of
Highway Side
Authorized
Purpose of
Vehicle Location
South Second
Street [Added
5-20-1991 by
Ord. No. 91-5]
South Parking space
reserved for
Emily A. Yinger
(handicapped
parking)
Beginning at a point
located on the southern
side of South Second
Street, said point also
being located a distance
of 60.5 feet southwest of
the southwestern
intersection of Elm Street
and South Second Street,
thence continuing long
the southern line of South
Second Street in a
southwesterly direction a
distance of 14.5 feet,
being the entire frontage
of 140 South Second
Street
South Second
Street [Added
10-19-1987 by
Ord. No. 87-2]
SouthwestParking space
reserved for
Joseph H. Attivo
(handicapped)
13.4 feet along the
southwest side of South
Second Street from a
point located 26.4 feet
southeast of the corner of
the intersection of South
Second Street and
Mayberry Alley, being the
total frontage of 554
South Second Street
South Second
Street [Added
5-16-1994 by
Ord. No. 94-5]
SouthwestParking space
reserved for
Joseph Dormuth,
Jr. (handicapped
parking)
Beginning at a point
located on the southwest
line of South Second
Street, said point being
located 46 feet, more or
less, from the southwest
intersection of the R/W
lines of South Second
Street and Strawberry
Alley; thence continuing
along the southwest line
of South Second Street in
a northwest direction a
distance of 18.35 feet,
being the entire frontage
of 350 South Second
Street
§ 110-27 § 110-27
110:560
Name of
Highway Side
Authorized
Purpose of
Vehicle Location
South Second
Street [Added
5-16-1994 by
Ord. No. 94-5]
SouthwestParking space
reserved for
Suzanne Furian
(handicapped
parking)
Beginning at a point
located on the southwest
line of South Second
Street, said point also
being located 18.6 feet
southeast of the southeast
corner of Cranberry Alley
and South Second Street;
thence continuing along
South Second Street in a
southeast direction a
distance of 18.6 feet,
being the entire frontage
of 34 South Second Street
South Second
Street [Added
5-20-1991 by
Ord. No. 91-5]
SouthwestParking space
reserved for
Margaret J.
Heagy
(handicapped
parking)
Beginning at a point on
the southwest side of
South Second Street, said
point located 19.5 feet
southeast of the
southwest corner of the
intersection of Elm Street
and South Second Street,
thence continuing in a
southeasterly direction a
distance of 18.2 feet,
being the entire frontage
of 152 South Second
Street
South Second
Street [Added
6-20-1988 by
Ord. No. 88-2]
SouthwestParking space
reserved for
Albert J.
Hutchinson
(handicapped)
Beginning at a point
located 50 feet northeast
of the northeastern
intersection of Blueberry
Alley and South Second
Street, continuing in a
north easterly direction
along South Second
Street a distance of 22
feet 9 inches, being the
entire frontage of 334
South Second Street
§ 110-27 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 110-27
110:561
Name of
Highway Side
Authorized
Purpose of
Vehicle Location
South Second
Street [Added
6-15-1992 by
Ord. No. 92-1]
SouthwestParking space
reserved for
Robert E. Lee
(handicapped
parking)
Beginning at a point
located on the
southwestern line of
South Second Street, said
point being located a
distance of 195 feet from
the southeastern
intersection of Swatara
Street and South Second
Street, thence continuing
along South Second
Street in a southeasterly
direction a distance of 20
feet more or less, being
the entire frontage of 232
South Second Street
South Second
Street [Added
6-15-1992 by
Ord. No. 92-1]
SouthwestParking space
reserved for
Dorothy A. Nies
(handicapped
parking)
Beginning at a point
located on the southwest
line of South Second
Street, said point also
being 167.32 feet
southeast of the southeast
corner of South Second
Street and Walnut Street;
thence continuing along
the southeast line of
South Second Street in a
southeast direction 14
feet 5 inches, being the
entire frontage of 128
South Second Street
South Second
Street [Added
5-20-1991 by
Ord. No. 91-5]
SouthwestParking space
reserved for
Harold E. Shepler
(handicapped
parking)
Beginning at a point, said
point being located 125
feet northwest of the
southwest corner of the
intersection of Blueberry
Alley and South Second
Street, thence continuing
in a northwesterly
direction a distance of 25
feet to a point, being the
entire front of 316 South
Second Street
§ 110-27 § 110-27
110:562
Name of
Highway Side
Authorized
Purpose of
Vehicle Location
South Second
Street [Added
5-17-2004 by
Ord. No.
2004-5,
approved
5-17-2004]
SouthwestRobert McKay
(handicapped
parking)
Beginning at a point, said
point located on the
southwestern line of
South Second Street, said
point also being located
46 feet southeast of the
southwest corner of the
intersection of South
Second and Washington
Streets; thence
continuing in a
southeasterly direction
along the southwestern
line of South Second
Street a distance of 11
feet; being a portion of
the frontage of 604 South
Second Street
South Second
Street [Added
5-17-2004 by
Ord. No.
2004-5,
approved
5-17-2004]
SouthwestJoyce D. Rickard Beginning at a point, said
point located on the
southwestern line of
South Second Street, said
point also located 62.7
feet southeast of the
southwestern corner of
the intersection of Dupont
and South Second
Streets; thence
continuing in a
southeasterly direction
along the southwestern
line of South Second
Street a distance of 11
feet; being a portion of
the frontage of 712 South
Second Street
§ 110-27 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 110-27
110:563
Name of
Highway Side
Authorized
Purpose of
Vehicle Location
South Second
Street [Added
6-18-1990 by
Ord. No. 90-1]
SouthwestParking space
reserved for
Helen Vukmanic
(handicapped
parking)
Beginning at a point
located on the southwest
side of South Second
Street, said point being
located 149 feet from the
southwest corner of the
intersection of Dupont
Street and South Second
Street, thence continuing
in a southeasterly
direction along the
southwest side of South
Second Street 17.5 feet,
being the entire frontage
of 726 South Second
Street
South Second
Street [Added
12-17-2001 by
Ord. No. 2001-7
West Joyce A.
McLaughlin
(handicapped
parking)
Beginning at a point, said
point being located on the
western line of South
Second Street; said point
also being located a
distance of 27 feet from
the southwest corner of
the intersection of South
Second Street and
Washington Streets,
thence continuing along
the western line of South
Second Street in a
southerly direction a
distance of 10 feet; being
the entire frontage of 602
South Second Street
§ 110-27 § 110-27
110:564
Name of
Highway Side
Authorized
Purpose of
Vehicle Location
South Third
Street [Added
10-21-1991 by
Ord. No. 91-9]
Northeast Parking space
reserved for
Raymond M.
Muza
(handicapped
parking)
Beginning at a point on
the northeast side of
South Third Street, said
point being located 75
feet southeast of the
southeastern corner of
Cherry Alley and South
Third Street, thence
continuing along the
north eastern side of
South Third Street, in a
southeasterly direction a
distance of 20 feet, being
the entire frontage of 337
South Third Street
South Third
Street [Added
9-16-2002 by
Ord. No.
2002-2]
SouthwestParking space
reserved for
Benjamin F.
Klugh
(handicapped
parking)
Beginning at a point, said
point being located along
the southwest line of
South Third Street, said
point also being located a
distance of 100 feet in a
northwesterly direction
from the northwest
corner of the intersection
of Walnut and South Third
Streets; thence
continuing along the
southwestern line of
Locust Street in a
northwesterly direction
20 feet; being the entire
frontage of 36 South
Third Street and a portion
of 34 South Third Street
§ 110-27 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 110-27
110:565
Name of
Highway Side
Authorized
Purpose of
Vehicle Location
South Third
Street [Added
12-19-1994 by
Ord. No. 94-11]
SouthwestParking space
reserved for Paul
W. Stevick
(handicapped
parking)
Beginning at a point, said
point being located on the
southwest line of South
Third Street, said point
also being located a
distance of 100 feet
northwest of the
southwest corner of the
intersection of Walnut
Street and South Third
Street, thence continuing
along the southwest line
of South Third Street in a
northwest direction a
distance of 20 feet; being
a portion of the frontage
of 40 South Third Street
South Third
Street [Added
4-21-2003 by
Ord. No.
2003-1,
approved
4-21-2003]
SouthwestDale F. Biesecker
(handicapped
parking)
Beginning at a point
located on the
southwestern line of
South Third Street, said
point also being located
172 feet from the
southwest corner of the
intersection of South
Third Street and Bridge
Avenue; thence
continuing along the
southwestern line of
South Third Street in a
southeasterly direction a
distance of 22 feet; being
part of the frontage of
2620 South Third Street
St. Mary's Drive
East [Added
10-16-1989 by
Ord. No. 89-3]
East Parking space
reserved for
Harry L. Leach,
Sr. (handicapped)
26.625 feet, being the
entire frontage of 527 St.
Mary's Drive
§ 110-27 § 110-27
110:566
Name of
Highway Side
Authorized
Purpose of
Vehicle Location
St. Mary's Drive
[Added
5-16-1994 by
Ord. No. 94-5]
South A zone for
loading and
unloading of
vehicles
Beginning at a point,
which point is located 80
feet east of the
intersection of St. Mary's
Drive and South Second
Street, thence continuing
along the south side of St.
Mary's Drive a distance of
30 feet to a point
Swatara Street
[Added
6-21-1999 by
Ord. No. 99-3,
approved
6-21-1999]
North Marian Kugle
(handicapped
parking)
Beginning at a point, said
point being located on the
northern line of 418
Swatara Street, said point
also being located 211
feet west of the
intersection of Sixth and
Swatara Streets; thence
continuing along the line
of 418 and 416 Swatara
Street in a westerly
direction a distance of 20
feet; being a portion of
the frontage of 418 and
416 Swatara Street
Swatara Street
[Added
6-20-2005 by
Ord. No.
2005-6;
approved
6-20-2005]
NorthwestCarol Gonzalez
(handicapped
parking)
Beginning at a point
located on the northwest
line of Swatara Street,
said point also being
located 70 feet northeast
of the northeast corner of
the intersection of
Swatara Street and South
Fourth Street; thence
continuing along the
northwestern line of
Swatara Street in a
northeasterly direction a
distance of 20 feet; being
the entire frontage of 311
Swatara Street
§ 110-27 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 110-27
110:567
Name of
Highway Side
Authorized
Purpose of
Vehicle Location
Swatara Street
[Added
5-17-2004 by
Ord. No.
2004-5,
approved
5-17-2004]
South Marilyn Taylor
(handicapped
parking)
Beginning at a point, said
point located on the
southern line of Swatara
Street, also being located
a distance of 105 feet
from the southeast corner
of the intersection of
Swatara and Sixth
Streets, to a point; thence
continuing in a
southwesterly direction
along the southern line of
Swatara Street 22 feet to
a point; being a frontage
of 430 Swatara Street
Swatara Street
[Added
5-17-2004 by
Ord. No.
2004-5,
approved
5-17-2004]
South Kelli L. Walk
(handicapped
parking)
Beginning at a point, said
point located on the
southern line of Swatara
Street, also being located
a distance of 82 feet from
the southwest corner of
the intersection of
Swatara and Sixth
Streets; thence
continuing in a
southwesterly direction
along the southern line of
Swatara Street 22 feet to
a point; being the
frontage of 438 Swatara
Street
§ 110-27 § 110-27
110:568
Name of
Highway Side
Authorized
Purpose of
Vehicle Location
Third Street
[Added
4-21-2003 by
Ord. No.
2003-1,
approved
4-21-2003]
SouthwestJohn G. Kyler and
Donna J. Kyler
(handicapped
parking)
Beginning at a point
located on the southwest
line of Third Street, said
point also being located
152.86 feet, more or less,
in a northwesterly
direction from the
northwest corner of the
intersection continuing
along the southwest line
of Third Street in a
northwest direction a
distance of 17.39 feet;
being the entire frontage
of 26 North Third Street
Walnut Street
[Added
5-17-2004 by
Ord. No.
2004-5,
approved
5-17-2004]
NorthwestLyn Clark
(handicapped
parking)
Beginning at a point, said
point located 38 feet
southeast of the northeast
corner of the intersection
of River Alley and Walnut
Street; thence continuing
in a southeasterly
direction 20 feet; being
the entire frontage of 23
Walnut Street and a
portion of 29 Walnut
Street
§ 110-27 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 110-27
110:569
Name of
Highway Side
Authorized
Purpose of
Vehicle Location
Walnut Street
[Added
12-7-1998 by
Ord. No. 98-9]
NorthwestFreda L. Hinkle
(handicapped
parking)
Beginning at a point, said
point located on the
northwest line of Walnut
Street, said point also
being located 20 feet
southwesterly of the
northwest corner of the
intersection of South
Third and Walnut Streets,
thence continuing along
the northwestern line of
Walnut Street in a
southwesterly direction a
distance of 20 feet, being
a portion of the frontage
of 117 Walnut Street and
a portion of the Walnut
Street frontage of 51
South Second Street
Walnut Street
[Added
11-15-1999 by
Ord. No. 99-6]
NorthwestSamuel A.
Rittner, Sr.
(handicapped
parking)
Beginning at a point on
the Northwest line of
Walnut Street, said point
also being located 24 feet
in a northeasterly
direction from the
northeast corner of the
intersection of Walnut
Street and School Alley,
thence continuing along
the northwest line of
Walnut Street in a
northeasterly direction a
distance of 25 feet; being
the entire frontage of 227
Walnut Street
§ 110-27 § 110-27
110:570
Name of
Highway Side
Authorized
Purpose of
Vehicle Location
Wood Street
[Added
5-15-2000 by
Ord. No.
2000-2,
approved
5-15-2000]
South Iris Melendez
(handicapped
parking)
Beginning at a point, said
point located on the south
side of Wood Street; said
point also being located
543 feet from the
southeast corner of the
intersection of Chambers
and Wood Streets; thence
continuing along the
south side of Wood Street
in a westerly direction a
distance of 10 feet; being
the entire frontage of 937
Wood Street
§ 110-27 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 110-27
110:571

ARTICLE IV
Metered Parking
§ 110-28. Designation of parking spaces.
The Police Department is hereby authorized to provide for the marking off
of individual parking spaces in the parking zones and areas designated and
described in § 110-36, said parking spaces to be designated by lines painted
or marked on the curbing or surface of the highway or area. At each space
so marked off, it shall be unlawful to park any vehicle in such a way that said
vehicle shall not be entirely within the limits of the space so designated.
§ 110-29. Installation of meters; operation.
§ 110-30. Manner of parking.
A. In said parking meter zones, parking meters shall be installed upon the
curb, sidewalk or pavement immediately adjacent to the parking spaces
provided in § 110-36 of this article. The Police Department shall be
responsible for the regulation, control, operation, maintenance and use
of such parking meters.
B. Each device shall be so set as to display a signal showing legal parking
upon the deposit of the appropriate coin, for the period of time
hereinafter prescribed. Each device shall be so arranged that upon the
expiration of the lawful time limit it will indicate by a proper, visible
signal that the lawful parking period has expired, and in such case, the
right of such vehicle to occupy such space shall cease, and the operator,
owner, possessor or manager hereof shall be subject to the penalties
hereinafter provided.
A. When a parking space in any parking meter zone is parallel with the
adjacent curb or sidewalk, any vehicle parking in such parking space
shall be parked so that the foremost part of such vehicle shall be
nearest to the parking meter; provided, however, that where double
parking meters are installed upon one standard so as to serve two
parking spaces, any vehicle parked in the space just beyond the parking
meters shall be parked so that the rear bumper of such vehicle shall be
nearest to the parking meters. When a parking space in any parking
meter zone is diagonal to the curb or sidewalk, any vehicle parked in
such parking space shall be parked with the foremost part of such
vehicle nearest to such meter.
B. Where lines or markings are painted or placed upon the curb, sidewalk,
highway and/or paved surface adjacent to each parking meter providing
for parking at an angle and not parallel or perpendicular to the curb, it
shall be unlawful for the operator of any motor vehicle to cross the
center line of the highway to enter or leave said parking area.
§ 110-28 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 110-31
110:573
§ 110-31. Deposit of coins.
When any vehicle shall be parked in any space adjacent to which a parking
meter is located in accordance with the provisions of this article, the
operator shall, upon entering the said parking space, immediately deposit
or cause to be deposited such coin or coins of the United States as is
required for such parking meter and as is designated by proper instructions
on the parking meter, and failure to deposit such coin or coins shall
constitute a breach of this article and shall subject each person to the
penalty prescribed hereafter. Upon the deposit of such coin or coins and
placing said meter in operation, the parking space may be lawfully occupied
by such vehicle during the period of parking time which has been
prescribed for the zone in which said parking space is located, and for
which a coin or coins is or are deposited, as indicated on the parking meter.
If said vehicle shall remain parked in any such parking space beyond the
parking time limit so fixed for such parking space, the parking meter shall,
by its violation signal, dial or pointer, indicate such illegal parking, and
in that event, such vehicle shall be considered as parked overtime and
beyond the period of legal parking time. The parking of a vehicle overtime
or beyond the period of legal parking time in any such space where any such
parking meter is located shall be a violation of this article and punishable
as hereinafter set forth.
§ 110-32. Violations.
It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this article for any
person:
A. To cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in the name of or
operated by such person to be parked overtime or beyond the period of
legal parking time established for any parking meter zone as herein
described, or to deposit in any parking meter any coin for the purpose
of parking beyond the maximum legal parking time for the particular
parking meter zone; where the maximum legal parking time is
consecutively exceeded by the same vehicle, each such violation shall
constitute a separate violation, i.e., if the maximum legal parking time
is two hours and that time is exceeded by a vehicle, a violation occurs; if
the same vehicle remains after four hours, a second violation occurs;
after six hours, a third violation; and so on, ad infinitum. [Amended
5-17-1982 by Ord. No. 82-2]
B. To permit any vehicle to remain or be placed in any parking space
adjacent to any parking meter while said meter is displaying a signal
indicating that the vehicle occupying such parking space has already
been parked beyond the period prescribed for such parking space;
where the maximum legal parking time is consecutively exceeded by
the same vehicle, each such violation shall constitute a separate
violation, i.e., if the maximum legal parking time is two hours and that
time is exceeded by a vehicle, a violation occurs; if the same vehicle
remains after four hours, a second violation occurs; after six hours, a
§ 110-31 § 110-32
110:574
§ 110-33. Report of violations; citations.
It shall be the duty of the police officers of the Borough of Steelton and
such other persons as may be designated and authorized by the Chief of
Police, acting in accordance with instructions issued by the Chief of Police,
to report:
§ 110-34. Collection of coins from meters.
It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to designate some proper person or
persons to make regular collections of the moneys deposited in said meters.
§ 110-35. General provisions.
third violation; and so on, ad infinitum. [Amended 5-17-1982 by Ord.
No. 82-2]
C. To park any vehicle across any line or marking of a parking meter space
or in such position that the vehicle shall not be entirely within the area
designated by such lines or markings.
D. To deface, injure, tamper with, open or willfully break, destroy or impair
the usefulness of any parking meter installed under the provisions of
this article.
E. To deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter any slug,
device or metal substance or other substitute for lawful coins.
F. To park or permit the parking of any vehicle in any parking meter space
where the meter does not register lawful parking.
A. The number of each parking meter which indicates that the vehicle
occupying the parking space and adjacent to such parking meter is or
has been parked in violation of any of the provisions of this article.
B. The state license number of such vehicle.
C. The date and hour of such violation.
D. Any other facts, a knowledge of which is necessary to a thorough
understanding of the circumstances attending such violation.
A. Temporary suspension of provisions. The provisions of this article may
be temporarily suspended by the Mayor and he may prescribe
temporarily such other rules and regulations as traffic conditions may
require.
B. Suspension of provisions on designated holidays. The use of parking
meters throughout the Borough of Steelton be and the same is hereby
dispensed with on the following holidays: New Year's Day, Memorial
Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving and Christmas.
§ 110-32 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 110-35
110:575
§ 110-36. Parking meter zones established.
C. Erection of signs. The Mayor is authorized to erect or cause to be
erected appropriate signs notifying the operators of motor vehicles of
the provisions of this article.
D. Tokens. Where the deposit of any coin or coins is required under the
provisions of this article, it shall be permissible to use such token or
tokens for that deposit as shall be designated and approved by the
Mayor.
A. On-highway parking zones. Parking meter zones are hereby established
upon the highways or parts of highways described below with maximum
parking time periods as indicated on all days, except Sundays and
holidays, during the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.
Name of
Highway Side
Time
Limit
(Hours) Limits
Front Street
[Amended
9-16-2002 by
Ord. No.
2002-2]
East 2 From Mohn Street to a point
55 feet north of the northeast
corner of Locust and Front
Streets; from a point 135 feet
north of the northeast corner
of Locust and Front Streets to
Conestoga Street
Front Street West 2 From Conestoga Street to
Mohn Street
Locust Street North 2 From River Alley to Front
Street
Locust Street North 2 From Second Street to River
Alley
Locust Street South 2 From Second Street to Front
Street
Pine Street North 2 From North Second Street to
River Alley
Second Street West 2 From Pine Street to Mulberry
Alley
Swatara Street North 2 From South Second Street to
River Alley
Walnut Street North 2 From Second Street to Front
Street
Walnut Street South 2 From South Second Street to
South Front Street
§ 110-35 § 110-36
110:576
§ 110-37. Parking meter rates. [Amended 5-17-1982 by Ord. No.
82-2; 5-18-1998 by Ord. No. 98-2]
All parking spaces located within the Borough may be occupied by a vehicle
during the following periods of parking times for the amounts indicated:
B. Off-highway parking zones. Off-highway parking meter areas are
hereby established as described below, with maximum parking time
periods as indicated on all days, except Sundays and holidays, during
the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. The use of meters in such parking
meter areas shall be subject to the provisions of this article governing
the use of meters generally.
Area Time Limit Location
(Reserved)
C. Exceptions. The provisions of Subsections A and B above
notwithstanding the following exception to the parking meter
requirements shall be permitted:
(Reserved)
A. Sixty minutes for a total amount of $0.25 provided by any combination
of allowable coins totaling said amount as designated on the parking
meter.
B. One hundred twenty minutes for a total amount of $0.50 provided by
any combination of allowable coins as totaling said amount designated
on the parking meter.
§ 110-36 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 110-37
110:577

ARTICLE V
Snow and Ice Emergencies
§ 110-38. Declaration of emergency.
In order to facilitate the movement of traffic and to combat the hazards of
excessive snow and ice on the highways or portions of highways named in
§ 110-39 below, the Mayor in his discretion may declare an emergency due
to such hazards.
§ 110-39. Parking prohibited on certain streets.
§ 110-40. Placement of signs.
A. After any such emergency shall have been declared, it shall be
unlawful, during the period of such emergency, for any person to park a
motor vehicle or tractor or to allow the same to remain parked on any
highway or portion thereof named in Subsection B below, or to operate
any motor vehicle or tractor on any such highway or portion thereof,
unless such vehicle or tractor shall be equipped with adequate
equipment to provide sufficient traction to keep such vehicle or tractor
in motion so that other traffic on such highways will not be blocked or
seriously impeded.
B. The highways or portions thereof to which the provisions of this article
shall be applicable during all periods of emergency declared as
provided in § 110-38 above shall be as described below.
Name of Highway Limits
Front Street From Gibson Street to Chambers
Street
Second Street From Gibson Street to Chambers
Street
Swatara Street [Added
2-21-1995 by Ord. No.
95-3; amended 4-17-1995
by Ord. No. 95-4]
South side of Swatara Street from
Front Street to Seventh Street
A. In order to assist the operators of motor vehicles and tractors in
determining the highways affected by this article, the Mayor or the
Chief of Police shall place around the utility poles on the highways or
portions thereof designated in § 110-39B above, signs reading as
follows:
SNOW
EMERGENCY
ROUTE
SNOW TIRES OR
§ 110-38 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 110-40
110:579
§ 110-41. Violations.
CHAINS REQUIRED
NO PARKING
DURING EMERGENCY
VEHICLES
TOWED AWAY
B. The Mayor or the Chief of Police shall also, through radio, newspaper or
other available media, disseminate information as to the existence of
such emergency.
A. Any person who shall park a motor vehicle or tractor upon or along any
of the highways or portions thereof listed in § 110-39B, at any time
during a period of emergency declared as provided in § 110-38, shall be
guilty of a violation of this article.
B. Any person who shall operate a vehicle or tractor upon any highway or
portion thereof listed in § 110-39B and such vehicle or tractor shall
become stalled upon any of such highways during a period of
emergency declared as provided in § 110-38 of this article, if such
stalling shall have been by reason of the failure to have such vehicle or
tractor equipped with the equipment hereinabove prescribed, shall be
guilty of a violation of this article.
§ 110-40 § 110-41
110:580
ARTICLE VI
Removal and Impounding of Illegally Parked Vehicles
§ 110-42. Authorization for removal and impoundment.
The Chief of Police of the Borough is hereby authorized to remove and
impound or to order the removal and impounding, of any vehicle parked on
any of the streets, highways or public property in the Borough in violation
of any provision of the law or of any ordinance of the Borough; provided,
however, that no such vehicle shall be removed or impounded except in
strict adherence to the provisions of this article.
§ 110-43. Approved storage garages designated. [Amended
12-17-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-7, approved 12-17-2001]
The following garages located in the Borough are hereby designated as
approved storage garages, as pounds for the storage of such impounded
vehicles:
Name of Garage Address
F.R. Hutchinson, t/a Ritchey's
Towing
Also t/a Hutch's Towing and
Salvage
114 Vine Street, Harrisburg,
Pennsylvania 17104
6891 Blue Ridge Avenue, Harrisburg,
Pennsylvania 17112
§ 110-44. Bonding of garages.
Every such approved storage garage or pound shall be bonded in the
amount of $10,000 for the indemnifying of the owner of every such
impounded vehicle against the loss thereof, or injury or damage thereto,
while in the custody of such poundkeeper.
§ 110-45. Towing and storage charges. [Amended 12-17-2001 by
Ord. No. 2001-7, approved 12-17-2001]
The towing charge to be collected by every such poundkeeper shall be $80
($70 poundkeeper fee, $10 Borough service fee) and the storage charge
shall be $20 for each day. No Borough service fee will be remitted by
the poundkeeper for towing of an abandoned vehicle unless and until the
poundkeeper recovers $80 or more from any source in relation to said
vehicle. Where the poundkeeper is required to utilize additional manpower
or trucks to effectuate a removal or towing, poundkeeper shall charge not
more than $70 per additional truck at the same towing incident. Special
equipment required to be leased for a particular activity in regard to the
towing or storage will be priced at the leased value plus 20% overhead. Any
cleanup provided by the poundkeeper at the scene of an incident for which
the poundkeeper removes or tows vehicles will enable the poundkeeper to
charge the owner of the vehicle or vehicles an amount not to exceed $25.
Cleanup of hazardous materials done by the poundkeeper shall be billed
directly to the party responsible for the spill of said materials.
§ 110-42 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 110-46
110:581
§ 110-46. Notification of removal and impounding.
Within 12 hours from the time of removal of any vehicle under authority
granted by this article, notice of the fact that such vehicle has been
impounded shall be sent by the Chief of Police of the Borough to the owner
of record of such vehicle. Such notice shall designate the place from which
such vehicle was removed, the reason for its removal and impounding, and
the pound in which it shall have been impounded.
§ 110-47. Payment of charges; protests.
§ 110-48. Record of vehicles removed and impounded.
The Chief of Police shall keep a record of all vehicles impounded and shall
be able at all reasonable times to furnish the owners or the agents of the
owners thereof with information as to the place of storage of such vehicles.
§ 110-49. Liability of owner or operator for fine or penalty.
The payment of towing and storage charges authorized by this article shall
not operate to relieve the owner or operator of any vehicle from liability for
any fine or penalty for violation of any law or ordinance on account of which
such vehicle was removed and impounded.
§ 110-50. Restrictions upon removal of vehicles.
No vehicle shall be removed under the authority of this article if, at the time
of the intended removal thereof, the owner or person for the time being in
charge of such vehicle is present and expresses a willingness and intention
to remove such vehicle immediately.
A. The payment of any towing and impounding charges authorized by this
article shall, unless such payment shall have been made "under
protest," be final and conclusive, and shall constitute a waiver of any
right to recover the money so paid.
B. In the event that any towing and impounding charges so imposed shall
be paid "under protest," the offender shall be entitled to a hearing
before a magistrate or court of record having jurisdiction, in which case
such defendant shall be proceeded against and shall receive such notice
as is provided in the Vehicle Code in other cases of summary offenses,
and shall have the same rights as to appeal and waiver of hearing.
§ 110-46 § 110-50
110:582
ARTICLE VII
Interpretation and Repeal; Penalties
§ 110-51. Severability.
The provisions of this chapter shall be severable, and if any of its provisions
shall be held to be unconstitutional, illegal or otherwise invalid, such
decision shall not affect the validity of any of the remaining provisions of
this chapter. It is hereby declared as a legislative intent that this chapter
would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or otherwise
invalid provision not been included herein.
§ 110-52. Repeal of previous ordinances; effect.
§ 110-53. Violations and penalties.
A. All previous ordinances of the Borough of Steelton pertaining to the
regulation of traffic and parking are hereby repealed.
B. The repeal of ordinances provided for in Subsection A above shall not
affect or prevent the prosecution or punishment of any person for any
act done or liability incurred in violation of any ordinance or regulation
in force immediately prior to the taking effect of this chapter.
C. The provisions of this chapter, insofar as they are the same as those of
ordinances and regulations in force immediately prior to the enactment
of this chapter, are intended as a continuation of such ordinances and
regulations and not as new enactments.
A. Unless another penalty is specifically provided for in Subsection B
below, any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall,
upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $50 and
costs of prosecution and, in the event of nonpayment of such fine and
costs of prosecution, such person shall be subject to imprisonment for a
period not exceeding 10 days.
B. Any person who shall violate any provision of a section listed below
shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than that
specified for violation of said section and, in the event of nonpayment of
such fine and costs of prosecution, such person shall be subject to
imprisonment for a period not exceeding that indicated for said section:
[Amended 5-17-1982 by Ord. No. 82-2; 6-20-1994 by Ord. No.
94-6]
Article/Section Maximum Fine
Maximum
Imprisonment
(days)
Article I
(§§ 110-3 and 110-4) $20 5
§ 110-51 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 110-53
110:583
Article/Section Maximum Fine
Maximum
Imprisonment
(days)
Article II
(§§ 110-7, 110-9, 110-10,
110-11, 110-12 and 110-20)
$20 5
Article II
(§§ 110-8, 110-13, 110-14
and 110-15)
$20 3
(§ 110-19) $25 10
Article III
(§§ 110-22 through 110-27) $20 5
Article IV
(§ 110-32A, B, C and F) $20 (each
violation)
5
(§ 110-32D and E) $300 30
Article V
(§ 110-41A) $20 5
(§ 110-41B) $25 10
C. A notice of violation of any provision of Article III (§§ 110-22 through
110-27) or Article IV (§ 110-32A, B, C or F) of this chapter shall be
placed on the vehicle parked in violation, such notice to contain
instructions to the owner or operator of such vehicle that, if he shall
report to the Police Department of the Borough of Steelton and pay the
penalty imposed for such violation within 48 hours after the time of
such notice, the same shall save the violator from prosecution and from
payment of the fine and costs above prescribed.
D. The above provisions notwithstanding, persons charged with violating
the provisions cited below may dispose of said charges as follows:
[Amended 5-17-1982 by Ord. No. 82-2;99 9-20-1982 by Ord. No.
82-4; 6-20-1994 by Ord. No. 94-6]
(1) Where a police officer or such other persons as may be designated
and authorized by the Chief of Police shall observe a violation of
§§ 110-22 through 110-27 hereof, each such police officer or such
other persons as may be designated and authorized by the Chief of
Police shall place on such vehicle a notice to the owner or operator
thereof that such vehicle has been parked in violation of the
provisions of §§ 110-22 through 110-27 of this chapter and
instructing such owner or operator to report to police headquarters
99.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Subsection D(3), concerning violations
of Art. IV, which immediately followed this section.
§ 110-53 § 110-53
110:584
of the Borough of Steelton in regard to such violation. Each such
owner or operator may, within 10 days of the time when such
notice was attached to such vehicle, pay at police headquarters, as
a penalty for and in full satisfaction of such violation, the sum of
$10. Failure of such owner or operator to make such payment at
police headquarters within 10 days of such violation shall render
such owner or operator subject to an additional penalty of $5.
Failure of such owner or operator to make such payment at police
headquarters within 20 days of such violation shall render such
owner or operator subject to the penalties provided in Subsection
B above.
(2) Where a police officer or such other persons as may be designated
and authorized by the Chief of Police shall observe a violation of
Article IV hereof, § 110-32A, B, C or F, each such police officer or
such other persons as may be designated and authorized by the
Chief of Police shall place on such vehicle a notice to the owner or
operator thereof, that such vehicle has been parked in violation of
the provisions of Article IV, § 110-32A, B, C or F of this chapter
instructing such owner or operator to report to the police
headquarters of the Borough of Steelton in regard to such violation.
Each such owner or operator may, within 10 days of the time when
such notice was attached to such vehicle, pay at police
headquarters, as a penalty for and in full satisfaction of such
violation, the sum of $10. Failure of such owner or operator to
make such payment at police headquarters within 10 days of such
violation shall render such owner or operator subject to an
additional penalty of $5. Failure of such owner or operator to make
such payment at police headquarters within 20 days of such
violation shall render such owner or operator subject to the
penalties provided for in Subsection B above.
§ 110-53 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 110-53
110:585
Chapter 111
VEHICLES, STORAGE ON PRIVATE PROPERTY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 82. Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 109.
§ 111-1. Purposes.
The purposes of this chapter are as follows:
§ 111-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LESSEE — An owner for the purpose of this chapter when the lessor holds
the lessee responsible for maintenance and repairs of the leased premises.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any type of mechanical device, propelled by a motor,
in which a person or persons or property may be transported upon public
streets or highways when in operating condition, and includes trailers or
semitrailers pulled thereby.
A. To prevent the storage of unlicensed and uninspected motor vehicles on
private property, except such motor vehicles as are housed in a fully
enclosed and secure structure, which vehicles are in such a condition as
to create a hazard and danger to the health and welfare of the Borough
citizens because:
(1) Such vehicles create an attractive nuisance for children, who are
not aware of the dangers involved.
(2) Such vehicles may provide a breeding ground, home or haven for
rodents, rats, vermin, mosquitoes, flies and other undesirable
animals, reptiles or insects.
(3) Flammable materials stored in any such motor vehicles or motor
vehicle parts pose a danger of injury to both the citizens of the
Borough and the environment of the Borough.
(4) Such motor vehicles are often utilized to store lumber, garbage,
rubbish or other materials that attract vermin, rodents, reptiles
and insects.
B. To establish a program of regulation by permit over the storage on
private property of unlicensed and uninspected motor vehicles so that
the Borough may be apprised of their location and make appropriate
inspections to determine that they do not constitute nuisances as
prohibited by this chapter.
§ 110-53 § 111-2
111:586
NUISANCE — Any condition which shall constitute a threat, or potential
threat, or is prejudicial, to the public health, safety or welfare.
OWNER — The actual owner, agent or custodian of the property on which
a motor vehicle or vehicles is/are stored, whether individual or partnership,
association or corporation.
PERSON — A natural person, firm, partnership, association, corporation or
other legal entity.
§ 111-3. Storage of certain motor vehicles prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person, owner or lessee to maintain a motor
vehicle upon private property within the Borough of Steelton which does not
have a current and/or valid state safety inspection (if required) or does not
have a valid state registration plate and has any of the following physical
defects which, individually or jointly, shall constitute a nuisance in fact:
A. Broken windshields, mirrors or other glass with sharp edges.
B. One or more flat or open tires or tubes which could permit vermin
harborage.
C. Missing doors, windows, hood, trunk or other body parts which could
permit animal harborage or sharp edges.
D. Any broken or bent body parts with sharp edges, including holes
resulting from rust.
E. Missing tires resulting in unsafe suspension of the motor vehicle.
F. Upholstery which is torn and open to the outside which could permit
animal and or vermin harborage.
G. Broken headlights or tail lamps with sharp edges.
H. Disassembled chassis apart from the motor vehicle stored in a
disorderly fashion or loose in or on the vehicle.
I. Protruding sharp objects from the chassis.
J. Broken vehicle frame suspended from the ground in an unstable
manner.
K. Leaking or damaged oil pan or gas tank which could cause fire,
explosion or environmental hazard.
L. Exposed battery containing acid.
M. Inoperable locking mechanism for doors or trunks.
N. Open or damaged floor boards, including trunk and firewall.
O. Damaged bumpers pulled away from the perimeter of the vehicle
constituting a protruding sharp edge or cutting surface.
§ 111-2 VEHICLES, STORAGE ON PRIVATE PROPERTY § 111-3
111:587
§ 111-4. Permit for storage of motor vehicles.
Any person, owner or lessee who has one or more motor vehicle(s) as
defined in § 111-3 above may be granted a temporary vehicle storage permit
to temporarily store such vehicle(s) in the Borough of Steelton for the
purpose of repairing such vehicles. Such permits are not automatically
granted and may be denied if the Code Enforcement Officer or Steelton
police determine that there is too great a risk to public health or safety.
Such permits are only granted in strict compliance with the regulations
provided herein. Such person, owner or lessee must first apply in writing
to the Code Enforcement Officer or Steelton police for a temporary motor
vehicle storage permit. Such application must set forth the location and
description of the land on which said motor vehicle(s) are to be placed,
the manner of storage, the length and purpose of storage and a complete
description of the vehicle, including make, model, license plate number and/
or vehicle identification number (VIN). A separate application is required
for each vehicle for which a temporary permit is requested, along with a fee
paid to the Borough of Steelton such as may be provided from time to time
by resolution of the Borough Council. If said application is approved by the
Code Enforcement Officer or Steelton police, a temporary vehicle storage
permit will be issued for each approved vehicle.
§ 111-5. Validity and renewal of temporary motor vehicle storage
permits.
Each temporary motor vehicle storage permit will be valid for three
consecutive months from the date of issue. The expiration date of the permit
will be written on the permit by the Code Enforcement Officer or Steelton
police. A permit, upon approval of the Code Enforcement Officer or Steelton
police, may be renewed.
§ 111-6. Placement of vehicle storage permit on vehicle.
The vehicle storage permit shall be placed on the inside surface of the front
windshield of the motor vehicle for which the permit is issued. The permit
will be placed on the driver's side area of the windshield above or near the
area where the state safety inspection sticker is normally placed and shall
P. Broken grill with protruding edges.
Q. Loose or damaged metal trim and clips constituting a potential cutting
surface.
R. Suspended or unstable supports.
S. Broken or bent antennas constituting a protruding sharp edge or
cutting surface.
T. Such other defects that could threaten the health, safety and welfare of
the public.
§ 111-3 § 111-6
111:588
be completely visible from the outside of the vehicle. A temporary vehicle
storage permit(s) may not be transferred from one vehicle to another.
§ 111-7. Removal of flammable liquids.
Before a temporary motor vehicle storage permit is issued, the person,
owner or lessee applying for the permit must sign a statement certifying
that all gas, oil and/or other flammable liquids have been removed/drained
from the vehicle(s).
§ 111-8. Storage of materials in motor vehicles.
It shall be unlawful to store any type of flammable material (liquid, solid or
gas) in any motor vehicle or to store engine parts, lumber, garbage, rubbish
or any other material that may pose a hazard to the health, welfare or safety
of the residents of the Borough of Steelton or that may attract vermin or
present a rodent harborage.
§ 111-9. Refusal of motor vehicle storage permit.
§ 111-10. Removal of motor vehicle stored without permit.
Any motor vehicle that is classified a nuisance, stored on private grounds
without a permit issued by the Code Enforcement Officer or Steelton police,
as herein required, shall be removed by the owner or occupier of said
A. Any person aggrieved by a refusal of the Code Enforcement Officer or
Steelton police to issue a permit may request and shall be granted a
hearing by the Borough Council, provided he/she shall file with said
Council a written petition requesting such hearing and setting forth a
brief statement of the grounds therefor within 10 days after notice that
a permit has been refused. The hearing shall commence not later than
30 days after the date on which the petition was filed unless postponed
for sufficient cause. The hearing shall be conducted by the Council or
the Council may appoint any member or group of members to act as
hearing officer or officers, and to conduct the hearing.
B. After such hearing, the decision or, where no decision is called for, the
findings shall be made by the Council, but the parties may waive
decision or findings by the Council and accept the decision or findings
of the hearing officer or officers as final.
C. The Borough Council shall initially establish, by ordinance, reasonable
fees with respect to hearings before the Council or its appointed
hearing officer or officers. Fees for said hearings may include
compensation for the Secretary, notice and advertising costs and
necessary administrative overhead connected with the hearing. The
costs, however, shall not include legal expenses, engineering expenses,
architectural or expert witness costs or other technical consultants. The
Borough Council may, from time to time, change such fees by
resolution.
§ 111-6 VEHICLES, STORAGE ON PRIVATE PROPERTY § 111-10
111:589
grounds after notice to do so, and in default thereof, the Borough may cause
the same to be done and collect the costs thereof, together with a penalty
of 10% of such costs in the manner provided by law for the collection of
municipal claims or by action of assumpsit or may seek relief by bill in
equity. Attorney fees shall be added to the amount collected above.
§ 111-11. Inspection.
The Code Enforcement Officer or Steelton police and/or his/her/their
authorized representative is hereby empowered to inspect grounds on
which motor vehicles are stored to determine if there is compliance with the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 111-12. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $30 nor more
than $600 and costs of prosecution or, in default of payment of such fines
and costs, to undergo imprisonment for not more than 30 days, provided
that each day's continued violation of any provision of this chapter, after
notice thereof, shall constitute a separate violation and shall be punishable
as such.
Chapter 120
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 18.
Building construction — See Ch. 44.
Massage parlors — See Ch. 49, Art. III.
Sexually oriented business operations — See
Ch. 49, Art. IV.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 82.
Real estate registration — See Ch. 84.
Sewers — See Ch. 90.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 93.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 94.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
99.
Trailers, trailer camps and tourist
camps — See Ch. 105.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 108.
Storage of vehicles on private property — See
Ch. 111.
§ 111-10 § 111-12
120:590
ARTICLE I
Title, Authority and Objectives
§ 120-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Borough of Steelton
Zoning Ordinance."
§ 120-2. Authority and purpose.
This chapter is adopted by virtue of the authority contained in the Borough
Code, Act of July 10, 1947, P.L. 1621, as amended and supplemented, for the
purpose of promoting the health, safety, morals and the general welfare of
the Borough of Steelton.
§ 120-3. Community development objectives.
The community development objectives are enumerated as follows:
§ 120-4. Social objectives.
The social objectives are as follows:
A. To provide an overall agreed-upon framework of policy against which
individual proposals can be evaluated by the legislative body of the
community.
B. To provide a framework within which physical planning for needed
facilities can be accomplished.
C. To establish long-range development responsibilities and policies to
which individual property owners, businessmen and industrialists can
prepare and coordinate their plans for development.
D. To establish a consensus about long-term growth potentials, objectives
and priorities so that the community can undertake development
projects based upon logic, realism, coordination and economy.
A. Social planning. To develop a mechanism for social planning in the
community for coordinating effort, avoiding duplication and more
adequately meeting unmet or partially served needs of the community.
B. Health and environmental sanitation.
(1) To provide and make available to all members of the community the
best health care and environmental sanitation possible.
(2) To support local, county and state agencies in overall health
planning and development of preventative health programs.
(3) To enforce all ordinances in such areas as air and water pollution.
C. Housing.
§ 120-1 ZONING § 120-4
120:591
§ 120-5. Economic objectives.
The community relies on the economy of the surrounding region for
employment opportunities, commercial development and industrial growth.
Thus, the Borough will continue to be a bedroom community and be located
near both commercial and employment centers.
(1) To provide decent housing for every member of the community in
order to meet their physical and psychological needs.
(2) To provide adequate enforcement of all codes and ordinances
which will ensure the health, safety and welfare of residents of the
Borough.
(3) To develop residential opportunities which are flexible and open,
permitting a mixture of people in all areas.
(4) To encourage housing and land development procedures which
permit improvement and experimentation in housing types and
construction, lot sizes, open space and community facilities.
D. Recreation.
(1) To enhance and enrich the lives of the members of the community
by providing the means for a more stimulating and rewarding use
of increasing leisure time.
(2) To provide that recreational facilities such as playgrounds and
parks are to be improved and expanded.
(3) To provide reserve sites for active and passive recreation in areas
of potential urbanization.
A. Personal.
(1) To provide that the community should be based on an economy
capable of assuring employment opportunities and a rising
standard of living.
(2) To increase labor productivity through such measures as retraining
and general adult education, improving vocational-technical
education for prospective entrants to the labor force and
implementing retention programs for prospective school dropouts.
(3) To support and assist in all projects which will contribute to the
alleviation of unemployment and underemployment and the raising
of incomes.
B. Commercial.
(1) To encourage new commercial development which will take the
form of unified and concentrated centers.
(2) To provide varied sites suitable for a variety of outlets.
§ 120-4 § 120-5
120:592
§ 120-6. Physical objectives.
The physical objectives are as follows:
(3) To plan for a minimum conflict with other area activities.
(4) To effectively use and develop old commercial centers that are
important to the area's economy.
C. Industrial.
(1) To develop a physical framework which is conducive to the
retention of existing industries and the attraction of new economic
activities in the Borough.
(2) To provide space for industry which is free from residential and
other nonresidential land use intrusions.
(3) To seek the minimization of industrial blight and the blight effects
of industries on their neighbors.
A. Land use.
(1) To establish a land use pattern which provides the maximum
opportunity for meeting human needs while complementing the
distinctive features of the natural environment.
(2) To adopt and enforce effective land use controls.
(3) To support and assist the Tri-County Regional Planning
Commission in promoting the orderly physical development of
Cumberland, Dauphin and Perry County areas.
(4) To coordinate and interrelate local planning to the plans of the tricounty
area.
B. Transportation.
(1) To develop a community-wide circulation system for serving
existing and anticipated future land use, providing maximum
convenience of movement to the population and shaping the extent
and direction of community growth.
(2) To design the local street system to discourage through traffic in
residential neighborhoods.
(3) To support the Tri-County Regional Planning Commission and the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation in the planning and
design of major thoroughfares.
(4) To encourage the growth of public transportation in suburban
areas.
C. Aesthetic.
§ 120-5 ZONING § 120-6
120:593
(1) To conserve and develop those natural resources upon which the
future well-being and indeed the existence of the community are
dependent and take immediate steps to prevent either depletion or
pollution of these resources.
(2) To place all utilities underground whenever feasible.
(3) To enforce local ordinances prohibiting trash burning.
D. Utilities.
(1) To develop a maximum relationship between the development of
land and the provisions of adequate public facilities.
(2) To expand water service to adequately serve all deficient or
potential growth areas.
(3) To provide that the county should assume responsibility for solid
wastes disposal and create an office or department of solid waste
management.
(4) To reserve land for future facilities and utility rights-of-way.
E. Floodplain management. To adopt and enforce effective land use
controls in areas subject to flooding in order to prevent the loss of
property and life, the creation of health and safety hazards, the
disruption of commerce and governmental services, the extraordinary
and unnecessary expenditure of public funds for flood protection and
relief and the impairment of the tax base by:
(1) Regulating uses, activities and development which, acting alone or
in combination with other existing or future uses, activities, and
development, will cause unacceptable increases in flood heights,
velocities and frequencies.
(2) Restricting or prohibiting certain uses, activities and development
from locating within areas subject to flooding.
(3) Requiring all those uses, activities and developments that do occur
in flood-prone areas to be protected and/or floodproofed against
flooding and flood damage.
(4) Protecting individuals from buying lands and structures which are
unsuited for intended purposes because of flood hazards.
§ 120-6 § 120-6
120:594
ARTICLE II
Definitions and Word Usage
§ 120-7. Word usage.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words shall, for the
purpose of this chapter, imply the usage herein indicated:
§ 120-8. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words shall, for the
purpose of this chapter, have the meanings indicated:
ACCESS DRIVE — A paved surface, other than a street, which provides
vehicular access from a street or private road to a lot.
ACCESSORY BUILDING — A building detached from and subordinate to the
main building on the same lot and used for purposes customarily incidental
to the main building.
ACCESSORY USE — A use customarily incidental and subordinate to the
principal use or building and located on the same lot with such principal use
or building.
ADULT ARCADE — Any place to which the public is permitted or invited
wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or
mechanically controlled still or motion-picture machines, projectors or
other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or
fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so
displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing
of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.[Added
6-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-7; approved 6-19-1995]
ADULT BOOKSTORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE [Added 6-19-1995 by Ord.
No. 95-7; approved 6-19-1995] —
A. Words used in the present tense include the future tense.
B. The singular includes the plural.
C. The word "person" includes a corporation as well as an individual.
D. The word "lot" includes the words "plot" or "parcel."
E. The term "shall" is always mandatory.
F. The word "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or building shall
be construed to include the words "intended, arranged or designed to
be used or occupied."
A commercial establishment which has a substantial or significant
portion of its stock-in-trade, and offers for sale or rental for any form of
consideration, any one or more of the following:
A.
§ 120-7 ZONING § 120-8
120:595
ADULT CABARET — A nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar commercial
establishment which regularly features:[Added 6-19-1995 by Ord. No.
95-7; approved 6-19-1995]
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — A commercial establishment
where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, videocassettes,
slides or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are
characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas.[Added 6-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-7;
approved 6-19-1995]
ADULT THEATER — A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar
commercial establishment which regularly features persons who appear
in a state of nudity or live performances which are characterized by the
exposure of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities.[Added
6-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-7; approved 6-19-1995]
AGRICULTURE — The tilling of the soil, the raising of the crops,
horticulture and gardening.
ALLEY — A public thoroughfare other than a side street which affords only
a secondary means of access to abutting property and not intended for
general traffic circulation.
Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or
photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes or video
reproductions, slides or other visual representations distinguished
or characterized by their emphasis on matters depicting,
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas; or
(1)
Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use
in connection with specified sexual activities.
(2)
A commercial establishment may have substantial or significant
portions of its stock-in-trade in other goods and/or services that do
not involve the offering for sale or rental of material distinguished
or characterized by its emphasis on matters depicting, describing or
relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and
still be categorized as an "adult bookstore" or "adult video store." Such
other business purposes will not serve to exempt such commercial
establishment from being categorized as an "adult bookstore" or "adult
video store" so long as one of its principal business purposes meets the
definition of an "adult bookstore" or "adult video store" set forth above.
B.
A. Persons who appear in the state of nudity;
Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified
anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities;
B.
Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic
reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description
of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
C.
§ 120-8 § 120-8
120:596
ALTERATIONS — As applied to a building or structure, any change or
rearrangement in the total floor area or an enlargement, whether by
extending on a side or by increasing in height, or the moving from one
location or position to another.
ALTERATIONS, STRUCTURAL — Any change in the supporting members of
a building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders.
ANIMAL HOSPITAL — A building used for the treatment, housing or
boarding of small domestic animals such as dogs, cats, rabbits and birds or
fowl by a veterinarian.
APARTMENT — A dwelling unit within a multiple dwelling. This
classification includes apartments in apartment houses, apartment hotels,
bachelor apartments, studio apartments and kitchenette apartments.
Conversion apartments are not included in this classification.
APARTMENT CONVERSION — A multifamily dwelling constructed by
converting an existing dwelling into apartments for more than two families.
APARTMENT HOUSE — A building occupied by three or more dwelling
units.
APPLICANT — A landowner or developer who has filed an application for
development, including his heirs, successors and assigns.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — Every application, whether
preliminary or final, required to be filed and approved prior to start of
construction or development, including but not limited to an application
for a building permit for the approval of a subdivision plat or plan or for
approval of a development plan.
AREA, BUILDING — The total area taken on a horizontal plane at the main
grade level of the main building and all accessory building exclusive of
uncovered porches, terraces and steps.
AREA, LOT — The total area within the lot lines.
AUTO BODY SHOP — Any structure or any building or part thereof that is
used for the repair or painting of bodies, chassis, wheels, fenders, bumpers
and/or accessories of automobiles and other vehicles of conveyance.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION — Any area of land, including any
structure thereon or any building or part thereof, which is used for the retail
sale of gasoline, oil, other fuel or accessory for motor vehicles and which
may include facilities used for polishing, greasing, washing, dry cleaning or
otherwise cleaning or servicing such motor vehicles.
BASEMENT — A story partly underground but having 1/2 or more of its
height above the average level of the adjoining ground.
BOARDINGHOUSE — A building where, for compensation, lodging and
meals are provided for at least three but not more than 15 persons.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Steelton.[Added 6-19-1995 by Ord. No.
95-7; approved 6-19-1995]
§ 120-8 ZONING § 120-8
120:597
BUILDING — Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls
and intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals or
chattels and including covered porches or bay windows and chimneys.
BUILDING, ACCESSORY — A subordinate building or a portion of the main
building on a lot, the use of which is customarily incidental to that of the
main or principal building.
BUILDING, DETACHED — A building surrounded by open space on the
same lot.
BUILDING, HEIGHT OF — The vertical distance measured from the average
elevation of the proposed finished grade at the front of the building to the
highest point of the roof for flat roofs, to the deckline of mansard roofs and
to the mean height between eaves and ridge for gable, hip and gambrel
roofs.
BUILDING LINE — A line parallel to the front, side or rear lot line set so as
to provide the required yard.
BUILDING, MAIN — A building in which is conducted the principal use of
the lot on which it is located.
CARPORT — See "garage, private."
CARTWAY — That portion of a street or alley which is improved, designed
or intended for vehicular use.
CELLAR — A story partly underground and having more than 1/2 of its clear
height below the average level of the adjoining ground. A cellar shall not be
considered in determining the required number of stories.
COLLOCATION — The act of placing two or more antennas on one
communications tower or other structure.[Added 5-19-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-2, approved 5-19-2003]
COMMON OPEN SPACE — A parcel or parcels of land or an area of water
or combination of land and water within a development site and designed
and intended for the use or enjoyment of residents of a planned residential
development, not including streets, off-street parking areas and areas set
aside for public facilities. Common open space shall be substantially free of
structures but may contain such improvements as are in the development
plan as finally approved and as are appropriate for the recreation of
residents.
COMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA — Any device used for the transmission or
reception of radio, television, wireless telephone, pager, commercial mobile
radio service or any other wireless communications signals, including
without limitation omnidirectional or whip antennas and directional or
panel antennas, owned or operated by any person or entity licensed by
the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) to operate such device.
This definition shall not include private residence-mounted satellite dishes
or television antennas or amateur radio equipment including, without
limitation, ham or citizen band radio antennas.[Added 5-19-2003 by Ord.
No. 2003-2, approved 5-19-2003]
§ 120-8 § 120-8
120:598
COMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT BUILDING — An unmanned building or
cabinet containing communications equipment required for the operation of
communications antennas and covering an area on the ground not greater
than 250 square feet.[Added 5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-2, approved
5-19-2003]
COMMUNICATIONS TOWER — A structure other than a building, such as
a monopole, self-supporting or guyed tower, designed and used to support
communications antennas.[Added 5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-2,
approved 5-19-2003]
CONDITIONAL USES — Conditional uses shall be allowed or denied by
the governing body after recommendations by the Planning Commission,
pursuant to express standards and criteria set forth in this chapter.
COURT — An unoccupied open space, other than a yard, on the same lot
with a building, which space is bounded on two or more sides by the walls
of such building.
COURT, INNER — A court that does not extend to a street, alley, yard or
outer court.
COURT, OUTER — A court which extends to a street, alley, yard or other
court.
COVERAGE — The percentage of the plot or lot area covered by the building
area.
CROSSWALK — A right-of-way, publicly or privately owned, intended for
furnishing access for pedestrians.
CUL-DE-SAC — A street intersecting another street at one end and
terminating at the other in a vehicular turnaround.
CURB LEVEL — The officially established grade of the curb in front of the
midpoint of the lot.
DEVELOPER — Any landowner, agent of such landowner or tenant with
permission of such landowner, who makes or causes to be made a
subdivision of land or a land development.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN — The provisions for development of a planned
residential development, including a plat of subdivision; all covenants
relating to use, location and bulk of buildings and other structures; intensity
of use or density of development streets, ways and parking facilities;
common open space and public facilities. The phrase "provisions of the
development plan," when used in this chapter, shall mean written and
graphic materials referred to in this definition.
DISTRICT, ZONE — Includes all buildings, lots and surface areas within
certain designated boundaries as indicated on the Zoning Map.100
DOG KENNEL — A structure for keeping three or more dogs that are more
than six months old.
100. Editor's Note: A copy of the current Zoning Map is on file in the office of the Borough
Secretary.
§ 120-8 ZONING § 120-8
120:599
DUMP — A lot or land or part thereof used primarily for the disposal
by abandonment, dumping, burial, burning or any other means, and for
whatever purposes, of garbage, sewage, trash, refuse, junk, discarded
machinery, vehicles or parts thereof or waste material of any kind.
DWELLING — A building designed for residential purposes and used as the
living quarters for one or more families.
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY — A building used by three or more families
living independently of each other and doing their own cooking; including
apartment houses.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY, ATTACHED (ROW) — A building used by one
family and having two party walls in common with other buildings.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY, DETACHED — A building used by one family,
having only one dwelling unit and having two side yards.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY, SEMIDETACHED — A building used by one
family, having one side yard and one party wall in common with another
building.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY, DETACHED — A building used by two families,
with one dwelling unit arranged over the other, and having two side yards.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY, SEMIDETACHED — A building used by two
families, with one dwelling unit arranged over the other, having one side
yard and having one party wall in common with another building.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms used for living and sleeping
purposes and having a kitchen with fixed cooking facilities arranged for
occupancy by one family.
ELECTRIC TRANSMISSION AND DISTRIBUTION FACILITIES — Electric
public utilities transmission distribution facilities, including substations.
ESCORT — A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a
companion, guide or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to
privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another
person.[Added 6-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-7; approved 6-19-1995]
ESCORT AGENCY — A person or business association who furnishes, offers
to furnish or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business
purposes for a fee, tip or other consideration.[Added 6-19-1995 by Ord.
No. 95-7; approved 6-19-1995]
FAMILY — one or more persons occupying one dwelling unit and
maintaining one common household, not including occupants of a club,
fraternity or lodging or boarding house.
FENCE — Any freestanding and uninhabitable structure constructed of
wood, glass, metal, plastic materials, wire, wire mesh or masonry, singly
or in combination, erected for the purpose of screening or dividing one
property from another to assure privacy, or to protect the property so
screened or divided, or to define and mark the property line, when such
structure is erected on or within two feet of any wall, it is considered to
§ 120-8 § 120-8
120:600
be a fence; also, for the purpose of this chapter, when the term "lot line" is
used in relation to fences it shall be synonymous with rear yard lot lines,
side yard lot lines, front yard lot lines and the area within two feet of the
same. Fences are not synonymous with garden structures which are defined
elsewhere herein.
FLOOD — A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
FLOOD-FRINGE AREA — The remaining portions of a floodplain which are
located outside of the floodway.
FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA —
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes or adjustments to properties and structures, which
changes reduce or eliminate flood damage to lands, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and contents of buildings.
FLOODWAY — The area of a floodplain required to carry and discharge
flood waters of a given magnitude. For the purpose of this chapter, the
floodway shall be capable of accommodating a flood of the one-hundredyear
magnitude.
FLOOR AREA, HABITABLE — The sum of the horizontal areas of all rooms
used for habitation, such as living room, dining room, kitchen or bedroom,
but not including hallways, stairways, cellars, attics, service rooms or utility
rooms, bathrooms or closets, and not unheated areas such as enclosed
porches, and not rooms without at least one window or skylight opening
onto an outside yard or court.
FLOOR AREA OF A BUILDING — The sum of the gross horizontal areas of
the several floors of a building and its accessory buildings on the same lot,
excluding cellar and basement floor areas not devoted to residential use,
but including the area of roofed porches and terraces. All dimensions shall
be measured between exterior faces of walls.
FLOOR AREA RATIO — The ratio of floor area of a building to its lot area.
When a floor area ratio of 0.4 is specified, the floor area of a building
constructed on a lot of 10,000 square feet is limited to a maximum of 4,000
square feet, the number of stories being optional, the building area may be
4,000 square feet for one story, 2,000 square feet for two stories, and so
forth.
GARAGE, PRIVATE — An enclosed or covered space for the storage of
one or more vehicles, provided that no business, occupation or service is
conducted for profit therein and that no space therein for more than one car
is leased to a nonresident of the premises.
A relatively flat or low land area adjoining a river, stream or
watercourse, which area is subject to partial or complete inundation.
A.
An area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation of surface
waters from any source.
B.
§ 120-8 ZONING § 120-8
120:601
GARAGE, PUBLIC — Any enclosed or covered space other than a private
garage, which space is used for storage, repair, rental, servicing or
supplying of gasoline or oil to motor vehicles.
GARDEN APARTMENT — A two-story multifamily dwelling containing onestory
dwelling units under one ownership.
GARDENING — The cultivation of herbs, fruits, flowers or vegetables,
excluding the keeping of livestock.
GRADE, FINISHED — The completed surfaces of lawns, walks and roads
brought to grades as shown on official plans or designs relating thereto.
HEIGHT OF A COMMUNICATIONS TOWER — The vertical distance
measured from the ground level to the highest point on a communications
tower, including antennas mounted on the tower.[Added 5-19-2003 by
Ord. No. 2003-2, approved 5-19-2003]
HEIGHT OF BUILDING — The vertical distance measured from the mean
level of the ground surrounding the building to a point midway between
the highest and lowest point of the roof, but not including chimneys, spires,
towers, elevator penthouses, tanks and similar projections.
HOME OCCUPATION — Any use customarily conducted entirely within a
dwelling and carried on by the residents therein, provided that the use is
clearly secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes, that
the exterior appearance of the structure or premises is constructed and
maintained as a residential dwelling and that no goods, other than signs as
provided herein, are publicly displayed on the premises.
HOSPITAL — A place for the diagnosis, treatment or other care of humans
and having facilities for inpatient care, including such establishments as a
sanitarium, sanatorium and preventorium.
HOTEL — A building used as the more or less temporary abiding place of
16 or more individuals who are, for compensation, lodged, with or without
meals, and in which no provision is made for cooking in any individual
room or suite. A hotel may include restaurants, newsstands and other
accessory services primarily for serving its occupants and, only incidentally,
the public.
INCINERATOR — An approved device in which combustible material, other
than garbage, is burned to ashes.
INDUSTRY — The manufacturing, compounding, processing, assembly or
treatment of materials, articles or merchandise.
JUNKYARD — Any lot, land or structure or part thereof used primarily
for the collecting, storage and/or sale of wastepaper, rags, scrap metal or
discarded material or for the collecting, dismantling, storage and salvaging
of machinery or vehicles not in running condition and/or for the sale of parts
thereof.
LAUNDERETTE — A business premises equipped with individual clothes
washing and/or drying machines for the use of retail customers, exclusive
§ 120-8 § 120-8
120:602
of laundry facilities provided as an accessory use in an apartment house or
an apartment hotel.
LOADING SPACE — An off-street space on the same lot with a building
or contiguous to a group of buildings, for the temporary parking of a
commercial vehicle while loading or unloading merchandise or materials,
and which abuts on a street or other appropriate means of access.
LODGING HOUSE — A building where, for compensation, rooms are
provided for at least three, but not more than 15, persons and, in which no
table board is furnished. (Also known as a "rooming house.")
LOT — A parcel of land, abutting a street, occupied by a building or
buildings and/or accessory buildings, together with such open space as
is required under the provisions of this chapter, having not less than the
minimum area and width required by this chapter for a lot in the district in
which such land is situated.
LOT, CORNER — A lot at the junction of and abutting on two or more
intersecting streets, or at the point of abrupt change of a single street,
where the interior angle is less than 135° and the radius of the street line is
less than 100 feet.
LOT, INTERIOR — A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT LINES — The lines bounding a lot as defined herein.
LOT, NONCONFORMING — A lot of record prior to the enactment of this
chapter, which lot, by reason of area or dimension, does not conform to the
requirements of the district in which it is located.
MANUFACTURING — The processing and/or converting of raw unfinished
or finished materials or products, or any or either of them, into an article
or substance of different character or for use for a different purpose;
industries furnishing labor in the case of manufacturing or the refinishing
of manufactured articles.
MOBILE HOME — A transportable, single-family dwelling intended for a
permanent occupancy, office or place of assembly contained in one unit or in
two units designed to be joined into one integral unit capable of again being
separated for repeated towing, which dwelling arrives at a site complete
and ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and
assembly operations, and is constructed so that it may be used without a
permanent foundation.
MOBILE HOME LOT — A parcel of land in a mobile home park, improved
with the necessary utility connections and other appurtenances necessary
for the erection thereon of a single mobile home, which parcel is leased by
the park owner to the occupants of the mobile home erected on the lot.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel of land under single ownership which
has been planned and improved for the placement of mobile homes for
nontransient use and which consists of two or more mobile home lots.
MOTEL — A building or group of buildings, whether detached or in
connected units, used as individual sleeping or dwelling units, designed
§ 120-8 ZONING § 120-8
120:603
with separate entrances and designed for year-round occupancy primarily
for transient automobile travelers and providing for accessory off-street
parking facilities. The term "motel" includes buildings designated as
"tourist courts," "tourist cabins," "motor lodges" and similar terms.
NO-IMPACT HOME-BASED BUSINESS — A business or commercial activity
administered or conducted as an accessory use which is clearly secondary
to the use as a residential dwelling and which involves no customer, client or
patient traffic, whether vehicular or pedestrian, pickup, delivery or removal
functions to or from the premises, in excess of those normally associated
with residential use. The business or commercial activity must satisfy the
following requirements:[Added 7-21-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-3,
approved 7-21-2003]
NONCONFORMING BUILDING — A building or structure which does not
conform to all the height, area, court and yard regulations of the district in
which it is located.
NONCONFORMING SIGN — A sign which does not conform to the
regulations of the districts in which it is located.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use which does not conform to the
regulations of a district in which it is located.
NUDE MODEL STUDIO — Any place where a person who appears in a
state of nudity or displays "specified anatomical areas" is provided to be
observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly
depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of
The business activity shall be compatible with the residential use of the
property and surrounding residential uses.
A.
The business shall employ no employees other than family members
residing in the dwelling.
B.
There shall be no display or sale of retail goods and no stockpiling or
inventory of a substantial nature.
C.
There shall be no outside appearance of a business use, including, but
not limited to, parking, signs or lights.
D.
The business activity may not use any equipment or process which
creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical or electronic
interference, including interference with radio or television reception,
which is detectable in the neighborhood.
E.
The business activity may not generate any solid waste or sewage
discharge in volume or type which is not normally associated with
residential use in the neighborhood.
F.
The business activity shall be conducted only within the dwelling and
may not occupy more than 25% of the habitable floor area.
G.
H. The business may not involve any illegal activity.
§ 120-8 § 120-8
120:604
consideration.[Added 6-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-7; approved
6-19-1995]
NUDITY or A STATE OF NUDITY — The appearance of a human bare
buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or female breast.[Added
6-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-7; approved 6-19-1995]
OFFICE BUILDING — A building designed or used primarily for office
purposes, no part of which is used for manufacturing or for dwelling other
than by a watchman or janitor.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD — A flood that, on the average, is likely to
occur once every 100 years, i.e., that has a 1% chance of occurring each
year, although the flood may occur in any year; for the purpose of this
chapter, the "regulatory flood."
OPEN SPACE — The unoccupied space open to the sky on the same lot with
the building.
PARKING SPACE — The space within a building or on a lot or parking lot,
for the parking or storage of one automobile.
PERMITTEE and/or LICENSEE — A person in whose name a permit and/or
license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as
the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a permit and/or
license.[Added 6-19-1995] by Ord. No. 95-7; approved 6-19-1995]
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITIES — Facilities for the provision
of personal wireless services.[Added 5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-2,
approved 5-19-2003]
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES — Include commercial mobile services,
unlicensed wireless services and common carrier wireless exchange access
services.[Added 5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-2, approved 5-19-2003]
PERSONS — An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
association or other legal entity.[Added 6-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-7;
approved 6-19-1995]
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — An area of land, controlled by
a landowner, to be developed as a single entity for a number of dwelling
units, the development plan for which does not correspond in lot size, bulk
or type of dwelling, density, lot coverage and required open space to the
regulations established in any one residential district created, from time to
time, under the provisions of this Zoning Chapter.
PLAT — A map, plan or layout showing the subdivision of land and
indicating the location and boundaries of individual properties.
PREMISES — Any lot, parcel or tract of land and any building constructed
thereon.
PUBLIC — Owned, operated or controlled by a government agency, federal,
state or local, including a corporation created by law for the performance
of certain specialized governmental functions and the Board of Public
Education.
§ 120-8 ZONING § 120-8
120:605
PUBLIC GROUNDS — Includes the following:
REGULATORY FLOOD — The flood which has been selected to serve as the
basis upon which the floodplain management provisions of this chapter and
other ordinances have been prepared; for purposes of this chapter, the onehundred-
year flood.
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The one-hundred-year flood
elevation.
RESIDENTIAL HOTEL — A hotel used by 16 or more permanent guests only
and not by transients.
RIGHT-OF-WAY STREET — A public thoroughfare for vehicular traffic and/
or pedestrian traffic, whether designated as a street, highway,
thoroughfare, parkway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane or alley or however
designated.
SANITARIUM, SANATORIUM — A private hospital, whether or not such
facility is operated for profit.
SCHOOL — Any place offering instruction in any branch of knowledge
under the supervision of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or a lawfully
constituted ecclesiastical governing body, person, partnership or
corporation meeting the requirements of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
SCREEN PLANTING — A vegetative material of sufficient height and
density to screen the view, in adjoining districts, of the structures and uses
on the premises upon which the screen planting is located.
SEMINUDE — A state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the
genitals, public region and areola of the female breast, as well as portions
of the body covered by supporting straps or devices.[Added 6-19-1995 by
Ord. No. 95-7; approved 6-19-1995]
SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER [Added 6-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-7;
approved 6-19-1995] — A business or commercial enterprise that, as one
of its primary business purposes, offers for any form of consideration:
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS — An adult arcade, adult bookstore or
adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motion-picture theater, adult theater,
escort agency, nude model studio or sexual encounter center.[Added
6-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-7; approved 6-19-1995]
A. Parks, playgrounds and other public areas.
Sites for schools or sewage treatment, refuse disposal and other
publicly owned or operated facilities.
B.
Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons
of the opposite sex; or
A.
Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the
same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or
seminudity.
B.
§ 120-8 § 120-8
120:606
SIGN — Any structure or device for visual communication that is used for
the purpose of bringing the subject thereof to the attention of the public, but
not including any flag, badge or insignia of any government or government
agency or of any civic, charitable, religious, patriotic, fraternal or similar
organization.
SIGN, CHARITABLE EVENT — A sign which advertises a special event held
a maximum of nine days in any calendar year that primarily is conducted
to benefit a United States Internal Revenue Service certified tax-exempt
nonprofit organization.[Added 10-18-1999 by Ord. No. 99-4, approved
10-18-1999]101
SIGN, GARAGE SALE — A sign which advertises an occasional garage
sale/porch or yard sale.[Added 10-18-1999 by Ord. No. 99-4, approved
10-18-1999]
SIGN, MESSAGE DISPLAY — A sign directly attached to a nonmovable
freestanding sign. A message display sign is used to exhibit daily, weekly,
or monthly customer specials, special hours, and or limited products
offered.[Added 9-20-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-9, approved 9-20-2004]
SIGN, MOVABLE FREESTANDING — A sign which is self-supporting upon
the ground, constructed in a framed design, is intended for the display of
daily specials, discounts, special events, or other daily changing activities,
and is required to be removed upon the daily close of business.[Added
9-20-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-9, approved 9-20-2004]
SIGN, NONMOVABLE FREESTANDING — A sign which is supported by
means of poles, pylons or similar standards in the ground; a nonmovable
sign is not attached to a building and does not require a secondary means
of support, such as guide wires, and shall include message display
signs.[Added 9-20-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-9, approved 9-20-2004]
SIGN, TEMPORARY — A sign constructed of paper, cloth, canvas, wood,
metal or any lightweight material intended to be displayed for a period
of time not exceeding 30 days.[Added 10-18-1999 by Ord. No. 99-4,
approved 10-18-1999]
SIGN, WINDOW — A sign which is readily visible and can be at least
partially read from an exterior lot line and which is attached to a window
or transparent door or that can be read through a window or transparent
door.[Added 10-18-1999 by Ord. No. 99-4, approved 10-18-1999]
SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS — The Zoning Hearing Board shall hear and decide
requests for special exceptions in accordance with standards and criteria
established by the governing body. In granting a special exception, the
Zoning Hearing Board may attach such reasonable conditions and
safeguards, in addition to those expressed in this Zoning Chapter, as it may
deem necessary to implement the purpose of Act 247102 and this chapter.
101. Editor's Note: The definition of SIGN, FREESTANDING, added 10-18-1999 by Ord. No.
99-4, approved 10-18-1994, which immediately followed this definition, was repealed
9-20-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-9, approved 9-20-2004. See now the definitions of SIGN,
MOVABLE FREESTANDING, and SIGN, NONMOVABLE FREESTANDING.
§ 120-8 ZONING § 120-8
120:607
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS — The male genitals in a state of sexual
arousal and/or the vulva or more intimate parts of the female
genitals.[Added 6-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-7; approved 6-19-1995]
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — Includes any of the following:[Added
6-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-7; approved 6-19-1995]
STORY — That portion of a building included between the surface of any
floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there be no floor above
it, then the space between any floor and the ceiling next above it.
STREET — A public thoroughfare which affords primary vehicular access to
abutting properties.
STREET LINE — The dividing line between the street and the lot.
STRUCTURE — Any combination of materials, other than a building, which
forms a construction that is safe and stable, including but not limited
to flagpoles, stadiums, platforms, towers, sheds, storage bins, fences
exceeding four feet in height, signs, signposts, lights and light standards
for other than residential use, but excepting patios, driveways, walks and
parking areas at yard grade.
SUBDIVISION — An area of land divided by the owner or agent, either by
lots or by metes and bounds, into lots or parcels, two or more in number, for
the purpose of conveyance, transfer, improvement or sale. The appurtenant
roads, streets, lanes, alleys and ways dedicated or intended to be dedicated
to public uses, or the use of purchasers or owners of lots fronting thereon
are included. The word "subdivision" includes the words "resubdivision,"
"plat," "replat," "plan" or "replan."
SUBSTANTIAL ENLARGEMENT OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS
— The increase in floor areas occupied by the business by more than 25%,
as the floor areas exist on date of enactment of this ordinance.[Added
6-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-7; approved 6-19-1995]
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any repair, reconstruction or
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the
actual cash value of the structure, either before improvement is started or,
if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage
occurred.
The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, public region,
buttocks, anus or female breasts;
A.
Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy;
B.
C. Masturbation, actual or simulated; or
Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities
set forth in Subsections A through C above.
D.
102. Editor's Note: Refers to the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10101 et
seq.
§ 120-8 § 120-8
120:608
SWIMMING POOL — A portable or permanent structure located above,
or recessed at, ground level and designed to hold water for wading or
swimming purposes beginning at a height above 12 inches and not to
exceed a height or depth for safety; overall area in size shall be governed
by its location.
TELEPHONE CENTRAL OFFICE — A building and its equipment erected
and used for the purpose of facilitating transmission and exchange of
telephone and radio messages between subscribers and for other business
of the telephone company, provided that in a residential district a telephone
central office shall not include public business facilities, storage of
materials, trucks or repair facilities or housing of repair crews.
THEATER — A building or part of a building devoted to the showing of
moving pictures or theatrical productions on a commercial basis.
TOURIST HOME — A dwelling in which overnight accommodations are used
by transient guests for compensation.
TRAILER COACH — MOBILE HOME — Any portable or mobile vehicle or
structure designed or used for living purposes, regardless of whether the
wheels, rollers or skids are attached or unattached.
TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED
BUSINESS — Includes any of the following:[Added 6-19-1995 by Ord. No.
95-7; approved 6-19-1995]
UNDEVELOPED LAND — Any lot, tract or parcel of land which has not been
graded or in any other manner prepared for the construction of a building.
USE — The specific purpose for which land or a building is designed,
arranged or intended or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained.
The term "permitted use" or its equivalent shall not be deemed to include
any nonconforming use.
VARIANCE — The permission granted by the Zoning Hearing Board for an
adjustment to some regulation which, if strictly adhered to, would result in
an unnecessary physical hardship, where the permission granted would not
be contrary to the public interest and would maintain the spirit and original
intent of this chapter.
WINDOW — An opening to the outside, other than a door, which provides
all or part of the required natural light, natural ventilation or both to an
interior space.
A. The sale, lease or sublease of the business;
The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the
business, whether by sale, exchange or similar means; or
B.
The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal device which
transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer
by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person
possessing the ownership or control.
C.
§ 120-8 ZONING § 120-8
120:609
YARD — An unoccupied space, other than a court, open to the sky, on the
same lot with a building or structure.
YARD, FRONT — A yard extending the full width of the lot and situated
between the street line and the front building line. The depth of the "front
yard" shall be measured between the front building line and the street line.
YARD, REAR — A yard extending the full width of the lot and situated
between the rear lot line and the rear building line. The depth of the "rear
yard" shall be measured between the rear lot line and the rear building line.
YARD, SIDE — A yard between the side building line and the side lot line
extending from the front yard to the rear yard. Any lot line not a rear lot
line or a front lot line shall be deemed a side lot line.
§ 120-8 § 120-8
120:610
ARTICLE III
Regulations Applicable in All Districts
§ 120-9. Scope of article.
The following regulations shall qualify or supplement the district
regulations appearing elsewhere in this chapter.
§ 120-10. Use regulations.
A. (Reserved)103
B. Manufacturing. In order that the Zoning Officer may have a reasonable
basis upon which to approve a proposed industrial operation for
conformity with the requirements of this chapter, the following data
shall be submitted with an application for a permit:
(1) Plot plan.
(2) Architectural plan.
(3) Description of operation.
(4) Engineering and architectural plans for water supply and sewage
disposal.
(5) Plans for prevention or control of noise, vibration, glare, fire
hazards, air pollution, water pollution and traffic.
(6) Proposed fuel.
(7) Number of shifts and maximum employment per shift.
(8) Additional pertinent data as may be required by the Zoning Officer.
C. Mining and quarrying. In districts where permitted, mining and
quarrying shall be subject to the following safeguards and regulations:
(1) Open excavations, pits and quarries shall be enclosed with a fence
not less than six feet in height.
(2) All pits or quarries below the grade of a lot or street line shall be
more than 100 feet from any lot or street line.
(3) All rock crushers, cement plants or other crushing, grinding,
polishing or cutting machinery or other physical or chemical
processes for such treatment shall be operated or carried on in
such a way so as not to create a hazard to health, safety or welfare
of the public by the emission of odor, dust, smoke, gas, vibration,
illumination or noise beyond the limits of the premises on which
such use is a lawful, permitted use.
103. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A, Conversion apartments, was repealed 11-21-1994 by
Ord. No. 94-9, approved 11-21-1994.
§ 120-9 ZONING § 120-10
120:611
(4) When deemed necessary for the protection of the public, the
Planning Commission and the Borough Council may require the
planting of a hedge and/or the erection of a fence. Any planting
and/or fence shall be subject to approval of the Planning
Commission and the Borough Council.
D. Municipal use. In any district, a building may be erected, altered or
extended and land may be developed which is arranged, intended or
designed for municipal uses, including municipal recreation use.
E. Prohibited uses.
(1) Dwellings in commercial and industrial districts. Hereafter, a
building shall not be erected or converted in the commercial or
industrial districts established on the Zoning Map,104 for use as a
dwelling unless the dwelling use is incidental to the principal use of
the premises.
(2) The primary living and sleeping quarters of dwelling units shall not
be permitted in cellars.
(3) The following uses are prohibited in all districts throughout the
municipality.
(a) The incineration, reduction or storage of garbage, offal,
animals, fish or refuse, unless by the authority of or under the
supervision of the municipality.
(b) Dumps and dumping of any kind, unless by the authority of or
under the supervision of the municipality.
(c) The stripping of topsoil for sale, exclusive of the process of
grading a lot preparatory to the construction of a building for
which a zoning permit has been issued.
(d) Junkyards.
F. Public utility facilities. Public utility facilities shall be permitted in any
district, without regard to the use and area regulations; provided,
however, that buildings or structures erected for these utilities shall be
subject to the following regulations:
(1) Front, side and rear yards shall be provided in accordance with the
regulations of the district in which the facility is located.
(2) Height shall be required by the district regulations.
(3) Unhoused equipment shall be enclosed with a chain link fence six
feet in height, topped with barbed wire.
104. Editor's Note: A copy of the current Zoning Map is on file in the office of the Borough
Secretary.
§ 120-10 § 120-10
120:612
(4) Housed equipment. When the equipment is totally enclosed within
a building, no fence or screen planting shall be required and the
yards shall be maintained in conformity with the district in which
the facility is located.
(5) Screen planting in residential and C-N Districts. The required fence
for unhoused equipment shall be surrounded by an evergreen
planting as approved by the Planning Commission.
(6) The external design of the building shall be in conformity with the
buildings in the district.
(7) Access for unhoused equipment. Where vehicular access is across
the front yard, the gate shall be constructed of solid materials
having not less than 50% solid in ratio to open space.
(8) Plans of the facility shall be submitted to the Planning Commission
for review and approval.
G. Mobile home parks. Where permitted as a conditional use, as a land
development, plats shall be prepared and submitted to the municipality
in accordance with the requirements of the municipality's Subdivision
and Land Development Ordinance105 for action by the governing body.
H. Clubs, lodges, union halls and fraternal organizations. In districts
where permitted or where permitted as a conditional use, these and
similar uses are restricted to those not conducted primarily for gain,
although a dining room may be operated for the benefit of club
members, provided that no sign advertising the sale of food or
beverages will be permitted. Buildings or structures hereafter
converted or erected for such use are subject to all applicable
regulations for the district in which the facility is to be located.
I. Garden apartments. In districts where permitted, all garden
apartments shall comply with the following:
(1) There shall be not more than 18 dwelling units per building.
(2) No garden apartment building shall be in excess of three stories in
height.
(3) Lot area per dwelling unit shall not be less than the area required
by the district regulations, when served by both public water and
sanitary sewers.
(4) Where public sewers and water are not provided, the lot size shall
be increased in area as required by applicable state and Borough
regulations governing on-lot disposal systems.
(5) All applicable provisions of this chapter.
105. Editor's Note: See Ch. 99, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 120-10 ZONING § 120-10
120:613
J. Home occupations. Home occupations are permitted as a conditional
use subject to the following conditions:
(1) The home occupation shall be carried on completely within the
dwelling unit or accessory building.
(2) Not more than one person other than the occupants of the dwelling
unit shall be employed.
(3) Not more than 1/2 the floor area of a main building shall be devoted
to home occupation.
(4) Articles sold or offered for sale shall be limited to those produced
on the premises.
(5) There shall be no exterior display or sign, except as permitted in
the regulation on signs in this chapter; no exterior storage of
materials; and no other exterior indication of the home occupation
or variation of the residential character of the main building.
(6) No offensive noise, vibration, smoke or other particulate matter,
heat, humidity, glare or other objectionable effects shall be
produced.
(7) A home occupation may include, but is not limited to, a professional
or a medical or osteopathic physician, dentist, podiatrist,
chiropodist, lawyer, engineer, architect, artist, teacher or
dressmaker or barbershop, beauty parlor or real estate or
insurance office.
(8) A home occupation shall not be interpreted to include a commercial
stable or kennel.
(9) A home occupation shall provide parking in accordance with the
provisions of Article XVI entitled "Off-Street Parking." [Added
7-21-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-3, approved 7-21-2003]
K. Medical or dental clinical buildings. Where permitted as a conditional
use in a residential district, a building for use as a medical or dental
clinic may be erected and used subject to the following conditions:
(1) The building shall be occupied and used only by persons licensed to
practice the healing arts in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and
their staffs.
(2) The lot area shall not be less than 15,000 square feet.
(3) The front yard depth shall be 35 feet; the side yard width shall be
35 feet; the rear yard depth shall be 35 feet.
(4) Parking shall be provided on the basis of three parking spaces per
doctor, plus one additional space for every employee. The size and
location of these spaces shall be in accordance with the provisions
of Article XVI entitled "Off-Street Parking."
§ 120-10 § 120-10
120:614
(5) An architectural sketch of the building and a plot plan showing the
size and location of the building, parking areas, driveways and the
plan for sewage disposal shall be submitted to the governing body
and Planning Commission for review and approval.
(6) Where two or more buildings are proposed as a land development,
plats shall be prepared and submitted to the municipality in
accordance with the requirements.
L. Motels. In districts where permitted, motels shall be subject to the
following safeguards and regulations:
(1) Where two or more buildings are proposed, as a land development,
plats shall be prepared and submitted to the municipality in
accordance with the requirements of the municipality's Subdivision
and Land Development Ordinance106 for action by the governing
body.
(2) No motel shall have a lot area of less than one acre; and where one
building is proposed, plans shall be submitted to and approved by
the Zoning Hearing Board.
(3) The motel shall be connected to a public sanitary sewer and water
supply, where feasible, or a sanitary sewerage collection and
treatment system and water supply approved by the Department of
Environmental Resources.107
(4) Front, side and rear yards of the motel shall be permanently
landscaped and maintained in good condition.
(5) At least one parking space shall be provided on the premises for
each accommodation. Off-street parking and loading spaces for
other facilities developed as part of the motel premises shall be
provided as required by Article XVI of this chapter.
(6) Every unit shall be provided with running hot and cold water and
separate toilet facilities.
(7) Motel buildings or parts thereof shall be placed no closer to any lot
line than 30 feet.
(8) The space between motel buildings shall be not less than 20 feet,
and the space between the fronts or rears of units shall be not less
than the dimensions required for courts, where such are formed by
the arrangement of units, except where parking is proposed. In
such cases the distance between the fronts and/or rears of units
shall be approved by the Planning Commission as required by
Subsection L(1) above.
106. Editor's Note: See Ch. 99, Subdivision and Land Development.
107. Editor's Note: Said Department was split in 1995 into the Department of Environmental
Protection and the Department of Conservation and Natural Resources.
§ 120-10 ZONING § 120-10
120:615
(9) When the application for a permit is for a single motel building, a
plan shall be submitted to the Zoning Officer showing the
following:
(a) Extent and area of property.
(b) Entrances, exits, driveways, roads, parking areas and walks.
(c) Location of the main building and accessory buildings.
(d) Plan for water supply.
(e) Plan for sewage disposal.
(f) Plan for storm drainage.
(g) Plan for soil erosion and sedimentation control approved by the
County Conservation District.
(h) Plan for supply of electricity, gas and other utilities.
(i) Where entrances and exits of driveways are located on state
highways, copies of permits secured from the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation shall be submitted with the plan.
(10) Before issuing a permit the Zoning Officer shall submit the plan for
such single motel building proposal to the Zoning Hearing Board
for approval.
M. Outdoor recreation areas, private or semiprivate. Where permitted as a
conditional use, private or semiprivate recreation areas shall be subject
to the following conditions:
(1) The minimum lot area shall be not less than 1/2 acre.
(2) Where two or more buildings or structures are proposed, as a land
development, plats shall be prepared and submitted to the
municipality in accordance with the requirements of the
municipality's Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.108
(3) Where only one building structure is proposed, plans shall be
submitted to the Zoning Hearing Board for review and approval.
(4) Such recreation use shall not be primarily for gain or profit.
(5) Parking shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of
Article XVI of this chapter.
(6) Social and fraternal buildings shall be permitted only when
incidental to and accessory to the primary use of the area.
(7) A buffer yard of not less than 15 feet nor more than 30 feet in
width, as determined by the municipal agency responsible for
108. Editor's Note: See Ch. 99, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 120-10 § 120-10
120:616
approval for the specific use, and a screen planting shall be
provided at a height and type as approved by the responsible
agency under Subsection M(1) and (2) above.
N. Swimming pools, private. Private swimming pools shall be a permitted
accessory use in any district and shall comply with the following
conditions and requirements:
(1) The pool is intended and is to be used solely for the enjoyment of
the occupants of the principal use of the property on which it is
located.
(2) The pool must be located within a side or rear yard and may be
located no closer than six feet to any property line of the property
on which it is located; provided, however, that, to the extent a
property line includes a street right-of-way or cartway within the
lot, no portion of the structure of the pool shall encroach on said
cartway or improved right-of-way; to the extent such right-of-way is
not improved, no portion of the aforesaid pool structure may
encroach upon said unimproved right-of-way without the specific
written permission of the Borough Council of the Borough of
Steelton. [Amended 7-20-1981 by Ord. No. 81-4, approved
7-20-1981]
(3) Every outdoor swimming pool of permanent construction, whether
above or below ground, shall be completely surrounded by a fence
or wall not less than four feet in height, which fence shall be so
constructed as not to have openings, holes or gaps larger than six
inches in any dimension; and if a picket fence is erected or
maintained, the horizontal dimension of space between pickets
shall not exceed six inches.
(4) A dwelling or an accessory building may be used as part of such
enclosure.
(5) All gates or doors opening through such enclosure shall be
equipped with a self-closing and self-latching and locking device for
keeping the gate or door securely closed at all times when not in
actual use, except that the door of the dwelling which forms a part
of the enclosure need not be so equipped.
(6) The property or the immediate area in which is located any outdoor
pool capable of containing water 18 inches or more in depth shall
be completely surrounded by a fence, hedge or wall not less than
four feet in height, which fence may be so constructed as to have
openings, holes or gaps not larger than two inches in a horizontal
dimension. Should the wall of the pool be above ground, the height
of the required fence may be reduced so that the total height of the
wall of the pool and the fence shall be not less than four feet. When
located in a required yard, any portion of the fence which exceeds
four feet in height shall have openings equal to 50% or more of the
§ 120-10 ZONING § 120-10
120:617
area, over four feet in height. When located in a required yard, such
fence shall not exceed eight feet in height.
O. Townhouses. In districts where permitted, all townhouses shall comply
with the following:
(1) There shall be not more than 12 units in a row.
(2) Lot area per dwelling unit shall not be less than the area required
by the district regulations, when served by both public water and
sanitary sewers.
(3) When public water and sewers are not provided, the lot size shall
be increased in area as required by applicable state or municipal
regulations governing on-lot disposal systems.
(4) All applicable provisions of this chapter.
P. Automobile or gasoline service stations. In districts where permitted,
service stations shall be subject to the following safeguards and
regulations:
(1) Hereafter, no service station shall be located nearer than 1,000 feet
to the lot line of any school, hospital or nursing or convalescent
home.
(2) Driveways shall be located as provided in Article XVIII.
(3) All driveways and service areas shall be paved with a surfacing
material as approved by the municipality.
(4) Driveway areas and service areas shall be distinguished from
sidewalk areas by painted lines.
(5) Motor vehicles shall not be permitted to be parked or to stand on
sidewalk areas.
(6) Minimum frontage on an interior lot shall be not less than 125 feet,
and on a corner lot on a side street, not less than 100 feet and the
front street, not less than 125 feet.
(7) Gasoline pumps shall be set not less than 25 feet from any lot line
and not less than 30 feet from any residential zone boundary line,
and shall be so located that vehicles stopped for service will not
extend over the property line.
Q. Churches, hospitals, municipal buildings, schools and other public and
semipublic buildings. In districts where permitted, these uses shall
meet the following requirements:
(1) The lot area shall be determined on the basis of building size, yard
requirements listed below and parking requirements, but in no
case shall the lot area be less than 20,000 square feet.
§ 120-10 § 120-10
120:618
(2) Lot coverage. Lot area covered by all buildings, including
accessory buildings, shall not be greater than 30% of the area of
the lot.
(3) Width regulations. The lot width at the required building line shall
be based on the building size and yard requirements, but in no case
shall the lot width be less than 100 feet in width.
(4) Yard regulations. Each lot shall have yards not less than the
following depths or widths:
(a) Front yard depth, 50 feet.
(b) Side yard: two in number; width, not less than 20 feet on an
interior lot. On a corner lot the side yard abutting the street
shall be not less than 50 feet in width.
(c) Rear yard depth, 50 feet.
(5) Height. The height of a building shall be not more than 35 feet,
except as provided in § 120-11.
(6) Off-street parking. Parking shall be provided in accordance with
the provisions of Article XVI hereof. Portions of the required front
yard setback may be used for off-street parking when authorized as
a special exception.
(a) Service and access drives shall be at least 15 feet wide and not
over 25 feet wide and shall be permitted to cross required yard
areas, provided that the center line of the permitted drive shall
not be a lesser angle to the street line than 60°.
(b) If greater controls are established for the district in which
these uses are to be located, such control or controls shall take
precedent over any or all of the foregoing.
(7) Existing structures cannot be remodeled, converted or otherwise
used for schools, hospitals, churches or other public uses until such
plans are presented to the Zoning Hearing Board, together with
approvals as may be necessitated by state and local law and rules
and regulations of the Department of Labor and Industry, the State
Department of Environmental Resources109 and others. If the
Zoning Hearing Board finds any such plans and proposals are not in
conflict with the intent and purposes of this chapter, such uses may
be permitted.
R. Uses not provided for. Whenever, in any district established under this
chapter, a use is neither specifically permitted nor denied and an
application is made by a property owner to the Zoning Officer for such
use, the Zoning Officer shall refer the application to the Zoning Hearing
109. Editor's Note: Said Department was split in 1995 into the Department of Environmental
Protection and the Department of Conservation and Natural Resources.
§ 120-10 ZONING § 120-10
120:619
Board which shall have the authority to permit the use or deny the
use. The use may be permitted if it is similar to and compatible with
permitted uses in the district and in no way is in conflict with the
general purpose and intent of this chapter.
S. Location of sexually oriented businesses. [Added 6-19-1995 by Ord.
No. 95-7; approved 6-19-1995]
(1) A person is guilty of a violation of this chapter if he or she operates
or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business outside of the
district in which a sexually oriented business is a permitted use. No
sexually oriented business shall be located outside a district in
which a sexually oriented business is a permitted use. Sexually
oriented businesses as defined herein shall be permitted in the
Commercial-Neighborhood (C-N) and Manufacturing-Heavy (M-H)
Districts as a special exception, provided that:
(a) The applicant for special exception demonstrates that the
proposed use does not constitute a violation of Subsections
S(1) through (8) hereinafter set forth.
(b) The applicant for special exception demonstrates that all other
provisions of this chapter are being met in relation to the
zoning district in which the proposed use is to be located.
(2) A person is guilty of a violation of this chapter if he or she operates
or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business within 500
feet of: [Amended 12-6-1999 by Ord. No. 99-9, approved
12-6-1999]
(a) A public library.
(b) A public park adjacent to any residential district.
(c) A church.
(d) A school.
(3) A person is guilty of a violation of this chapter if he or she causes or
permits the operation, establishment, substantial enlargement or
transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business
within 500 feet of another sexually oriented business.
(4) A person is guilty of a violation of this chapter if he or she causes or
permits the operation, establishment or maintenance of more than
one sexually oriented business in the same building, structure or
portion thereof; or the increase of floor areas of any sexually
oriented business in any building, structure or portion thereof
containing another sexually oriented business.
(5) For the purpose of this section, measurement shall be made in a
straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects,
from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as a part
§ 120-10 § 120-10
120:620
of the premises where a sexually oriented business is conducted, to
the nearest property line of the premises of a public library, church
or school or to the nearest boundary of an affected public park.
[Amended 12-6-1999 by Ord. No. 99-9, approved 12-6-1999]
(6) For purposes of Subsection S(3) of this section, the distance
between any two sexually oriented businesses shall be measured in
a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects,
from the closest exterior wall of the structure in which each
business is located.
(7) Any sexually oriented business lawfully operating on the date of
enactment of this section that is in violation of Subsections S(1)
through (6) of this section shall be deemed a nonconforming use.
Such nonconforming uses shall not be increased, enlarged,
extended or altered, except that the use may be changed to a
conforming use. In the event that two or more sexually oriented
businesses are within 500 feet of one another and otherwise in a
permissible location, the sexually oriented business which was first
established as continually operating at a particular location is the
conforming use and the later-established business is
nonconforming.
(8) A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use
is not rendered a nonconforming use by the location, subsequent to
the grant or renewal of the sexually oriented business permit, of a
public library, church, school or public park within 500 feet of the
sexually oriented business. This provision applies only to the
renewal of a valid permit and does not apply when an application
for a permit is submitted after a permit has expired or has been
revoked. [Amended 12-6-1999 by Ord. No. 99-9, approved
12-6-1999]
(9) Repealer. All ordinances or parts of ordinances that are
inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed; nothing contained in
this subsection shall in any way change or modify the terms and
provisions of Chapter 49, Conduct, Article III, Human Body
Massage Establishments, of the Code of the Borough of Steelton.
T. Wireless telecommunications facilities. [Added 5-19-2003 by Ord.
No. 2003-2, approved 5-19-2003]
(1) Purpose. In recognition of the quasi-public nature of personal
wireless service facilities, the purpose of this subsection is:
(a) To regulate the placement, construction and modification of
communications and transmissions antennas and
communications towers to protect the public safety and
welfare.
(b) To accommodate the need for communications antennas while
regulating their location in the Borough.
§ 120-10 ZONING § 120-10
120:621
(c) To minimize adverse visual effects of antennas and
communications towers through proper design, siting,
painting, and vegetative screening.
(d) To encourage collocation of antennas and the use of existing
structures to reduce the number of such structures needed in
the future.
(e) To avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from
communications tower failure and falling ice or debris, through
engineering and proper siting of communications towers.
(f) To minimize any adverse effects of location and design of
personal wireless facilities on residential property values.
(g) To ensure that antennas and communications towers will be
removed in the event that such structures are abandoned or
become obsolete and are no longer necessary.
(h) To promote collocation of emergency services antennas.
(2) Wireless communications facilities shall comply with the following
provisions in addition to any other and all other ordinance
provisions of this chapter or provisions of other ordinances of the
Borough of Steelton which may additionally pertain to wireless
communications facilities:
(a) Communications antennas may be attached to buildings or
structures (i.e., water tower or tall building) and shall be a
permitted use in all districts, provided that the following
requirements are met:
[1] Antennas shall not be installed on any property containing
a single-family or two-family residential dwelling.
[2] Antennas shall not exceed the height of the existing
structure by more than 20 feet.
[3] Omnidirectional or whip communications antennas shall
not exceed 20 feet in height and seven inches in diameter.
[4] Directional or panel communications antennas shall not
exceed five feet in height or width with a maximum surface
area of 15 square feet.
[5] Any applicant proposing communications antennas to be
mounted on a building or other structure shall submit
evidence from a Pennsylvania registered professional
engineer certifying that the proposed installation will not
exceed the structural capacity of the building or other
structure, considering wind, ice, and other loads
associated with the antenna location.
§ 120-10 § 120-10
120:622
[6] Any applicant proposing communications antennas to be
mounted on a building or other structure shall submit
detailed construction and elevation drawings indicating
how the antennas will be mounted on the structure for
review by the Borough of Steelton Code Enforcement
Office for compliance with the Borough of Steelton's
Building Code and other applicable law.
[7] Any applicant proposing communications antennas to be
mounted on a building or other structure shall submit
evidence of agreements and/or easements necessary to
provide access to the building or structure on which the
antennas are to be mounted so that installation and
maintenance of the antennas and communications
equipment building can be accomplished.
[8] Communications antennas shall comply with all applicable
standards established by the Federal Communications
Commission governing human exposure to
electromagnetic radiation.
[9] Communications antennas shall not cause radio frequency
interference with other communications facilities located
in the Borough of Steelton, nor shall they create crosstalk
or otherwise interfere with other methods of telephone
communication.
[10] A communications equipment building shall be subject to
the height and setback requirements of the applicable
zoning district for an accessory structure.
[11] The owner or operator of communications antennas shall
be licensed by the Federal Communications Commission to
operate such antennas.
[12] Communications antennas and supporting electrical and
mechanical equipment must be of a neutral color that is
identical to or closely compatible with the color of the
supporting structure so as to make the antenna and
related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible.
[13]New communications antennas shall be collocated on
existing buildings or structures that contain existing
communications antennas unless the applicant
demonstrates that a good faith effort has been made to
obtain permission to collocate the communications
antennas on an existing building or structure containing
existing communications antennas by showing evidence in
writing that all owners of such buildings and structures
within a 1/4 mile radius of the proposed communications
antenna site have been contacted and that one or more of
the following reasons for not using such structure apply:
§ 120-10 ZONING § 120-10
120:623
[a] The proposed antennas and related equipment would
exceed the structural capacity of the existing
structure and its reinforcement cannot be
accomplished at a reasonable cost.
[b] The proposed antennas and related equipment would
cause radio frequency interference with other existing
equipment for that existing structure and the
interference cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost.
[c] Such existing structures do not have adequate
location, space, access or height to accommodate the
proposed equipment or to allow it to perform its
intended function.
[d] Addition of the proposed antennas and related
equipment would result in electromagnetic radiation
from such structure exceeding applicable standards
established by the Federal Communications
Commission governing human exposure to
electromagnetic radiation.
[e] A commercially reasonable agreement could not be
reached with the owners of such structures.
(3) Communications towers are permitted as a special exception in CH,
C-N, and C-C Districts provided that the following requirements
are met:
(a) The applicant shall demonstrate that it is licensed by the
Federal Communications Commission to operate a
communications tower, if applicable, and communications
antennas.
(b) Any applicant proposing construction of a new
communications tower shall demonstrate showing evidence in
writing that a good faith effort has been made to obtain
permission to mount the communications antennas on an
existing building, structure or communications tower. A good
faith effort shall require that all owners of potentially suitable
structures within a 1/4 mile radius of the proposed
communications tower site be contacted and that one or more
of the following reasons for not selecting such structure apply:
[1] The proposed antennas and related equipment would
exceed the structural capacity of the existing structure
and its reinforcement cannot be accomplished at a
reasonable cost.
[2] The proposed antennas and related equipment would
cause radio frequency interference with other existing
§ 120-10 § 120-10
120:624
equipment for that existing structure and the interference
cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost.
[3] Such existing structures do not have adequate location,
space, access or height to accommodate the proposed
equipment or to allow it to perform its intended function.
[4] Addition of the proposed antennas and related equipment
would result in electromagnetic radiation from such
structure exceeding applicable standards established by
the Federal Communications Commission governing
human exposure to electromagnetic radiation.
[5] A commercially reasonable agreement could not be
reached with the owners of such structures.
(c) Communications towers shall be located a minimum of 500 feet
from any existing residential structure.
(d) In all other respects, communications towers permitted under
this section shall comply with the requirements set forth for
communications towers in an M-H District.
(4) Communications towers are permitted in the M-H District and shall
comply with the following provisions in addition to other ordinance
provisions:
(a) Yard regulations.
[1] Communications towers shall be set back from all property
lines or lease lines the greater of a distance equal to 35%
of the height of the structure or to the yard setbacks
applicable to the zoning district in which the structure is to
be located, whichever is greater.
[2] Communications towers shall be set back a minimum of
500 feet from R-SU, R-TU, R-TS, R-MU, C-N, C-C, and C-H
Districts, as well as 500 feet from residential structures in
all other districts.
[3] Communications equipment buildings shall comply with
the yard requirements of the zoning district in which they
are located.
[4] Where required, buffer yards shall be provided in
accordance with the provisions of § 120-13, Yard
regulations, Subsection C, Buffer yards.
(b) Height regulations.
[1] Communications towers, including attached antennas,
shall be kept to a minimum height needed to function in
accordance with industry standards. In case of co-usage,
§ 120-10 ZONING § 120-10
120:625
the communications structure height may be adjusted to
account for other users. In no case shall any
communications tower exceed a maximum height of 200
feet.
[2] Communications equipment buildings shall comply with
building height requirements in the zoning district in
which they are located.
(c) Separation. A minimum of 10 feet shall be maintained between
any communications tower, or portion thereof, and all buildings
except the associated communications equipment building.
(d) Access. Access shall be provided to the lot or leased parcel on
which the communications tower or communications
equipment building is located by means of a public street and/
or easement to a public street. The easement shall be a
minimum of 20 feet in width and the access shall be paved to a
width of at least 10 feet for its entire length.
(e) Off-street parking. A minimum of one paved off-street parking
space shall be provided on the lot or leased parcel on which the
communications tower and/or communications equipment
building is located. The required parking shall be in
accordance with the provisions of Article XVI, Off-Street
Parking, § 120-54, General regulations.
(f) Fencing.
[1] A fence shall be required around the equipment
building(s) and other equipment. The fence shall be a
minimum of six feet in height and a maximum of eight feet
in height; shall completely enclose the antenna, support
structure and related facilities, shall not contain openings
greater than nine square inches; and shall contain, at all
entrances, gates which shall be locked except during such
times as the site is manned by authorized operations or
maintenance personnel.
[2] All guy wires associated with guyed communications
towers shall be clearly marked so as to be visible at all
times and shall be located within the fenced enclosure.
(g) Landscaping. The following landscaping shall be required to
screen as much of the communications tower as possible, the
fence surrounding the tower and any other ground-level
features (such as a building) and in general soften the
appearance of the personal wireless service facility site. If the
antenna is mounted on an existing structure and other
equipment is housed inside an existing structure, landscaping
shall not be required.
§ 120-10 § 120-10
120:626
[1] An evergreen screen shall be required to surround the
site. The screen can be either a hedge (planted three feet
on center maximum) or a row of evergreen trees (planted
eight feet on center maximum). The evergreen screen shall
be a minimum height of six feet at planting and shall grow
to a minimum of 15 feet at maturity.
[2] In addition, existing vegetation on and around the site
shall be preserved to the greatest extent possible.
[3] Where buffer yards and screen planting are required
elsewhere in this chapter, the required screen planting
shall be in addition to the landscaping required in this
subsection.
(h) Communications tower color. Communications towers shall be
painted in a color that best allows blending into the
surroundings, unless otherwise required by the FAA
regulations. The use of grays, blues, and greens may be
appropriate.
(i) Communications tower equipment and accessory buildings.
Accessory buildings must conform to all requirements of the
zoning district in which the antenna and support structure are
located.
(j) Lighting. No signs or lights shall be mounted on a
communications tower, except as may be required by the
Federal Communications Commission, Federal Aviation
Administration or other governmental agency which has
jurisdiction. Site lighting shall be allowed provided such
lighting does not shine or reflect on adjacent properties.
(k) Compliance and safety.
[1] The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed
antenna and communications tower are safe and the
surrounding areas will not be negatively affected by
support structure failure, falling ice or other debris.
[2] The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed
communications tower and communications antennas
proposed to be mounted thereon comply with all
applicable standards established by the Federal
Communications Commission governing human exposure
to electromagnetic radiation.
[3] All communications towers shall be fitted with
anticlimbing devices, as approved by the manufacturers.
§ 120-10 ZONING § 120-10
120:627
[4] Communications towers shall comply with all applicable
Federal Aviation Administration, Commonwealth Bureau
of Aviation and applicable airport zoning regulations.110
[5] Inspection. Beginning in December of 2003 and by
December of each odd-numbered year thereafter, the
owner of the communications tower shall have the tower
inspected by an expert who is regularly involved in the
maintenance, inspection and/or erection of
communications towers. At a minimum, this inspection
shall be conducted in accordance with the Tower
Inspection Class Checklist provided in the Electronics
Industries Association (EIA) Standard 222, Structural
Standards for Steel Antenna Towers and Antenna Support
Structures. A copy of said inspection report shall be
provided to the Borough Code Enforcement Office.
(l) Removal. Any communications facility that is no longer in use
for its approved purpose shall be removed at the owner's
expense. The owner shall provide the Borough Code
Enforcement Office with a copy of the notice to the FCC of
intent to cease operations. If the facility remains unused for a
period of six consecutive months, the owner shall be given 90
days from the end of the six-month period to remove the
communications structure and all accessory structures. In the
case of multiple operators sharing use of a single
communications tower, this provision shall not become
effective until all users cease operations. The equipment on the
ground is not to be removed, however, until the tower portion
of the communications facility has first been dismantled and
removed.
(5) Where a communications tower and/or communications equipment
building are proposed as a use by special exception, application
shall be submitted to the Borough of Steelton Zoning Hearing
Board. A plan shall be submitted to the Planning Commission for
review and its recommendations shall be forwarded to the Zoning
Hearing Board.
(6) Prior to the issuance of a building permit for the erection of a
communications tower or communications equipment building,
applicants must receive approval of a land development plan from
the Borough Council of the Borough of Steelton. The land
development plan shall comply with the Code of the Borough of
Steelton, Pennsylvania, Chapter 99, Subdivision and Land
Development ("Steelton Subdivision Ordinance").
110. Editor's Note: See Art. XV, Airport Zoning, of this chapter.
§ 120-10 § 120-10
120:628
§ 120-11. Height regulations.
§ 120-12. Area regulations.
Unless the regulations of the district in which they are located require
greater lot areas or lot widths, the following regulations shall apply:
(7) A formal land development plan shall not be required if the antenna
is to be mounted on an existing structure in accordance with the
provisions of this subsection.
(8) Amateur radio. These regulations shall not govern any tower, or the
installation of any antenna that is under 70 feet in height and is
owned and operated by a federally licensed amateur radio status
operator.
U. No-impact home based businesses. No-impact home based businesses
shall be permitted in all residential districts (R-SU, R-TS, R-TU and RMU)
as a use permitted by right, except that such permission shall not
supersede any deed restriction, covenant or agreement restricting the
use of land nor any master deed, bylaw or other document applicable to
a common interest ownership community. [Added 7-21-2003 by Ord.
No. 2003-3, approved 7-21-2003]
A. The height of any building may exceed the maximum permitted height
by one foot for each additional foot by which the width of each yard
exceeds the minimum yard regulation for the district in which the
building is located, except for those buildings which are controlled by a
floor area ratio.
B. Height regulations shall not apply to spires, belfries, cupolas,
penthouses or domes not used for human occupancy, nor to chimneys,
ventilators, skylights, water tanks, bulkheads or utility poles or towers,
silos and ornamental or necessary mechanical appurtenances.
C. For all residential uses accessory buildings shall not exceed 14 feet in
height.
A. On a lot held in single and separate ownership which does not fulfill the
regulations for the minimum area and yard dimensions for the district
in which it is located, a building may be erected, altered, and used
thereon, provided the yard space is not less than the minimum specified
herein.
B. The area, width and depth of lots shall provide adequate open space for
off-street loading, unloading and/or parking space and yards.
C. Lots not served by a public sewer system shall be of the dimensions and
area necessary to provide for all the requirements for on-site sewage
disposal systems established by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Resources.111 Specific lot sizes shall be determined on
the basis of percolation tests as required by the Pennsylvania
§ 120-10 ZONING § 120-12
120:629
§ 120-13. Yard regulations.
Department of Environmental Resources. Reports on said percolation
tests shall be submitted to the Zoning Officer.
A. Front yards.
(1) When a vacant lot is situated between two lots each occupied by a
principal building (within 25 feet of the side lot line of such vacant
lot), which building extends into the required front yard, the front
yard of such vacant lot may be the average depth of the front yards
of such two adjacent occupied lots.
(2) Where a vacant lot adjoins only one lot occupied by a principal
building (within 25 feet of the common side lot line), which building
extends into the required front yard of such occupied lot, the front
yard depth of such vacant lot may be the average depth of the front
yard of such adjacent lot and the front yard required for the district
in which such vacant lot is located. However, the second vacant lot
from the original occupied lot must have at least the minimum front
yard depth required in the district.
(3) An accessory building shall not be erected or substantially altered
within any front yard.
(4) Parking shall not be permitted in front yards in residential districts,
except on a lawful service or access drive.
B. Side yards.
(1) On a corner lot, the side yard abutting the street shall have a width
equal to the depth of the front yard required in the district and shall
be subject to all front yard requirements of this chapter.
(2) On a lot held in single and separate ownership at the effective date
of this chapter, with a lot width less than required for the zone
district, only one single-family dwelling may be erected, and side
yards shall be provided according to the following requirements.
(a) On interior lots with a width of 50 feet or more, two side yards
shall be provided as required by the district regulations.
(b) On corner lots with a width of 50 feet or more, two side yards
shall be provided. The exterior side yard may be reduced by
the number of feet by which the lot width is less than the
district requires, but may not be reduced to less than the
required interior side yard. The interior side yard shall be
provided as required by the district regulations.
111. Editor's Note: Said Department was split in 1995 into the Department of Environmental
Protection and the Department of Conservation and Natural Resources.
§ 120-12 § 120-13
120:630
(c) On lots less than 50 feet, but not less than 27 feet, in width, two
side yards shall be provided, each equaling 20% of the lot
width.
(d) On lots less than 27 feet, but not less than 20 feet, in width, the
building shall be 16 feet in width and only one side yards shall
be provided, equaling in width the difference between the lot
width and 16 feet. One side wall of the building shall be
constructed abutting the lot line without openings but shall not
be constructed as a party wall.
(e) On lots less than 20 feet in width, a building shall be
constructed the full width of the lot. Side walls abutting the lot
lines shall have no openings and shall not be constructed as
party walls. For such dwellings, constructed to a depth of more
than two rooms, a court not less than six feet in width shall be
provided, abutting the side wall for all rooms beyond the
second room.
(3) On a lot, in a commercial or industrial district, held in single and
separate ownership at the effective date of this chapter, with a lot
width less than required for the zone district, the required side
yards shall be determined by the Zoning Hearing Board upon
application for a variance based on the same criteria as listed
under Subsection B(2) above for residential structures.
(4) An accessory building may be erected within one of the side yards
or within the rear yard provided that:
(a) Such accessory building shall be not less than 10 feet farther
back from the front lot line than the rear-most portion of the
main building.
(b) Where such side or rear yard is along an alley, the accessory
building shall be located not less than five feet from the alley.
(c) When not constructed on the side or rear lot line, the accessory
building shall be located not less than five feet from such lot
line.
(d) Where such side or rear yard is adjacent to another lot, the
accessory building shall be not less than three feet from any lot
line.
(e) When an accessory building is erected within the side or rear
yard adjacent to a side street on a corner lot, the accessory
building shall be not less than the required front yard depth
from the exterior side lot line.
(f) On a corner lot in any residential district, an accessory
building shall not be erected within 30 feet of the exterior side
lot line (street line); provided, however, that when the main
§ 120-13 ZONING § 120-13
120:631
building exists on both the corner lot and the lot abutting the
rear of the corner lot, an accessory building may be erected
at the average distance from the street line established by the
existing main buildings.
(5) A carport, open on three sides, may be erected within one of the
side yards when attached to a main building existing at the
effective date of this chapter, provided that the carport shall be not
less than three feet from the side lot line.
C. Buffer yards.
(1) Where a commercial or manufacturing use adjoins a residential
district, a buffer yard of a width as hereinafter required shall be
provided along the lot lines in addition to the yards required for the
district in which it is located. Minimum required width for buffer
yards shall be as follows:
(a) C-N Commercial Neighborhood, 15 feet.
(b) C-C Commercial Central, 15 feet.
(c) C-H Commercial Highway, 15 feet.
(d) M-H Manufacturing Heavy, 30 feet.
(2) All buffer yard areas shall be planted and maintained with a plant
material and, in C and M Districts, a screen planting shall be
planted and maintained to the full length of side and rear lot lines
which do not abut streets.
(3) In R Districts, screen planting shall be planted and maintained in
the required buffer yards.
(4) Buffer yards shall not be used for parking.
(5) Buffer yards other than interior side buffer yards may be crossed by
access roads, service drives and utility easements not more than 35
feet in width, provided that the angle of the center line of the road,
drive or easement crosses the lot line and buffer yard at not less
than 60°.
(6) If a front yard of 30 feet or more in depth is provided, the buffer
yard may coincide with the front 30 feet of the front yard.
D. Projections in yards.
(1) Cornices, eaves, gutters, bay windows or chimneys may project not
more than 24 inches into the front, side or rear yard of a lot.
(2) Covered porches, whether enclosed or unenclosed, and carports
shall be considered as part of the main building and shall not
project into any yard.
§ 120-13 § 120-13
120:632
§ 120-14. Courts.
Courts shall conform to the following requirements:
E. Obstruction to vision.
(1) Walls, fences, signs or other structures shall not be erected or
altered, and hedges, trees or other growth shall not be planted or
maintained, which may cause danger to traffic on a street or road
by obstructing the view.
(2) On corner lots, no wall, fence, sign or other structure in excess of
3 1/2 feet in height shall be erected or altered and no hedge or
growth in excess of 3 1/2 feet in height shall be permitted within 25
feet, in any direction, of the intersection of street right-of-way lines.
F. Fences and walls.
(1) Fences and walls may be erected, altered and maintained within
the yards, provided that any such fence or wall in the front yard
shall not exceed 3 1/2 feet in height. Any fence or wall in the side or
rear yard may be six feet or more in height, provided that any fence
or wall exceeding six feet in height shall contain openings therein
equal to 50% of that portion of the fence or wall exceeding six feet.
(2) All yards used for the storage of any material needed for the
operation or conduct of a manufacturing or commercial enterprise
shall be enclosed by a solid wall, uniformly painted board fence or
screen planting on all sides which face upon a lot in a more
restricted zone.
A. An open space in the form of an inner court or outer court shall be
provided in connection with any building in any residential or business
district, wherever any room therein, in which a person or persons live,
sleep or congregate, cannot be adequately lighted and ventilated. Such
court shall be adjacent to such rooms, the windows of which shall open
in such court. This section shall not apply to specialized commercial or
manufacturing processes where controlled light and/or ventilation are
required.
B. Outer court.
(1) The width of any outer court upon which windows open from a
living room, bedroom or dining room shall be not less than the
height of any wall opposite such windows, except as provided in
§ 120-13B(2). However, when the depth of such court is less than
six feet, the minimum width may be as little as twice the depth.
(2) The depth of an outer court formed by walls on three sides shall be
not greater than 1 1/2 times the width.
(3) The width of an outer court shall be not less than 2/3 the height of
any opposing wall forming said court.
§ 120-13 ZONING § 120-14
120:633
§ 120-15. Habitable floor area.
The minimum habitable floor area of a dwelling unit hereafter erected shall
be 600 square feet. In the case of apartment houses, the minimum habitable
floor area shall be not less than 300 square feet per apartment, except those
apartments designed for and occupied exclusively by one person, which
apartments shall each contain not less than 150 square feet of habitable
floor area.
§ 120-16. Illumination.
§ 120-17. Reduction of lot dimensions.
The area, width or depth of any lot shall not be reduced by subdivision, sale
or development so that the lot width, lot area, lot area per dwelling unit,
courts and yards, or other spaces are smaller or so that the coverage is
greater than prescribed herein.
§ 120-18. Waste and sewage disposal.
C. Inner court.
(1) The least dimension of an inner court shall be not less than the full
height of the walls enclosing such court, but not less than 50 feet
for apartment buildings and not less than 10 feet for two-family
dwellings.
(2) An open and unobstructed passageway shall be provided for each
inner court. Such passageway shall have sufficient cross-section
area and headroom for the passage of fire-fighting equipment and
shall be continuous from the inner court to a yard or an
unobstructed open area with access to a street.
A. The illumination of any sign shall be arranged in such a manner that the
direct rays of light source shall not enter any residential building or fall
within the right-of-way of any street or highway.
B. The illumination of the exterior grounds of commercial and industrial
establishments shall be arranged in such a manner that the direct rays
of the light source shall not enter any residential building or fall within
the right-of-way of any street or highway.
A. All methods and plans for the on-lot disposal of sewage or wastes shall
be designed in accordance with all applicable regulations pertaining to
the treatment and disposal of sewage and wastes. A certificate or
statement of adequacy from the appropriate agency, or the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources,112 shall be a
prerequisite to the issuance of a zoning permit.
112. Editor's Note: Said Department was split in 1995 into the Department of Environmental
Protection and the Department of Conservation and Natural Resources.
§ 120-14 § 120-18
120:634
§ 120-19. Performance standards.
Hereafter, all uses of land, buildings and structures or industrial processes
shall be prohibited that may be noxious or injurious by reason of the
production or emission of dust, smoke, refuse matter, odor, gas fumes,
noise, vibration or similar substances or conditions; provided, however,
that any uses may be permitted, except those specifically prohibited in
the district regulations or general provisions, if adequate provisions and
safeguards to protect the health, safety, morals and the general welfare
of the community are established by a written agreement, subject to the
securing of a permit therefor and subject to the carrying out of such
provisions, restrictions and safeguards.
§ 120-20. Drainage regulations.
A building may be erected or used and a lot may be used or occupied only
when in conformity with the following regulations:
B. No materials or wastes shall be deposited upon a lot in such form or
manner that they may be transferred off the lot by natural causes or
forces, nor shall any substance which can contaminate a stream or
watercourse or otherwise render such stream or watercourse
undesirable as a source of water supply or recreation or which will
destroy aquatic life be allowed to enter any stream or watercourse.
C. All materials or wastes which might cause fumes or dust or which
constitute a fire hazard or which may be edible or otherwise attractive
to rodents or insects shall be stored outdoors unless enclosed in
containers which are adequate to eliminate such hazards.
A. Obstructions. The following shall not be placed or caused to be placed
in a stream channel or open drainageway: fences, except two-wire
fences; other structures or matter which may impede, retard or change
the direction of the flow of water in such stream or open drainageway
or that will catch or collect debris carried by such water, or that is
placed where the natural flow of the stream would carry the same
downstream to the damage or detriment of either public or private
property adjacent to the said stream or open drainageway.
B. Structure effect. Any structures permitted shall be constructed and
placed on the lot so as to offer the minimum obstruction to the flow of
water, and shall be designed to have a minimum effect upon the flow
and height of floodwater.
C. Structure anchoring. Any structure permitted shall be firmly anchored
to prevent the structure from floating away thus threatening life or
property downstream, or to further restrict bridge openings and other
restricted sections of the stream or drainageway.
D. Private sewage disposal systems. Private sewage disposal systems shall
not be constructed within a stream or drainageway.
§ 120-18 ZONING § 120-20
120:635
E. Municipal liability. The granting of a zoning permit in any floodplain
district shall not constitute a representative guaranty or warranty of
any kind or nature by the municipality or by an official or employee
thereof of the practicability or safety of any structure use of other plan
proposed, and shall create no liability upon or cause of action against
such public body, official or employee for any damage that may result
pursuant thereto.
F. Installation of fill materials.
(1) Fill may be placed at and within the outer line of a modified stream
or drainageway when approved as a special exception by the
Zoning Hearing Board and subject to the following conditions:
(a) Satisfactory evidence shall be submitted to the Board
indicating that the cross-sectional area of the modified stream
or drainageway will not be significantly reduced.
(b) Satisfactory evidence shall be submitted to the Board
indicating that there will be no adverse flooding conditions
created by the proposed fill.
(c) Permission shall be obtained for the proposed fill from the
Division of Encroachments of the Water and Power Resources
Board of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Resources,113 pursuant to the state regulation of water
obstructions.
(d) Under no circumstances shall any fill be placed within the
floodway portion of any floodplain.
(2) When fill is used:
(a) It shall extend laterally 15 feet beyond any building line from
all points.
(b) It shall consist of soil or small rock materials only. Sanitary
landfills shall not be permitted.
(c) The fill material shall be compacted to provide the necessary
permeability and resistance to erosion, scouring or settling.
(d) No fill slopes shall be steeper than one vertical or two
horizontal, unless substantiating data, justifying steeper
slopes, are submitted to and approved by the Zoning Officer.
(e) It shall be used only to the extent to which it does not adversely
affect adjacent properties.
G. State regulations. All regulations of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
governing stream encroachments shall remain in full force and effect.
113. Editor's Note: Said Department was split in 1995 into the Department of Environmental
Protection and the Department of Conservation and Natural Resources.
§ 120-20 § 120-20
120:636
§ 120-21. Control of traffic.
The application for a permit for any and all uses shall be accompanied by a
site plan showing building location, service and parking areas and access to
highways. Where a driveway or access road gives access to a state road or
highway, approval by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation shall
be required.
In cases of inconsistency with regulations of this chapter, the more
restrictive provisions shall govern.
H. Reduction of lot area. Where the configuration of a stream and
drainageway is such that minimum lot area or width regulations cannot
be reasonably met, adjacent land within other districts may be applied
to meet requirements. In such cases, the largest lot area and width of
the district involved shall apply. All other district regulations shall
remain in force.
§ 120-20 ZONING § 120-21
120:637

ARTICLE IV
Nonconforming Buildings and Uses
§ 120-22. Scope of article.
All lawful uses of land or of a building, sign or other structure existing
on the effective date of this chapter may be continued, altered, restored,
reconstructed, changed, sold or maintained even though such use may not
conform to the use, height, area, yard and other regulations of the district
in which it is located, provided such nonconforming conditions shall comply
with the following.
§ 120-23. Conditions required for continuation; permit required.
§ 120-24. Nonconforming buildings and uses for which construction
has not been completed.
A. The owner of the premises occupied by a lawful nonconforming use or
building existing at the effective date of this chapter shall secure a
certificate of nonconformance which shall be for the purpose of
ensuring to the owner the right to continue a nonconforming building
or use.
B. All nonconforming signs, billboards or advertising signboards,
including poster panels, bulletins and the like, shall be made to conform
to all pertinent regulations or be removed within two years after the
effective date of this chapter. During this period they may be continued
and maintained.
C. Business identification signs, nonconforming business identification
signs or existing nonconforming uses may be continued and
maintained, provided that such signs shall conform to the general
regulations of Article XVII, Signs.
A. Where a building permit has been issued 90 or more days prior to the
effective date of this chapter and the proposed building or use does not
conform to the requirements of this chapter, the proposed building or
use shall be considered the same as a lawful building or use and shall be
regulated by the requirements of this article.
B. Where a building permit has been issued less than 90 days prior to the
effective date of this chapter and the proposed building or use does not
conform to the requirements of this chapter, the proposed building or
use shall be considered the same as a lawful building or use and shall be
regulated by the requirements of this article only if at least one of the
following conditions has been met prior to the effective date of this
chapter:
(1) Construction other than excavation has been started.
(2) A contract for construction other than excavation has been let.
§ 120-22 ZONING § 120-25
120:639
§ 120-25. Alterations.
§ 120-26. Extensions or enlargements.
A. Should any nonconforming structure or nonconforming portion of the
structure be damaged or destroyed, by fire, explosion or an act of God,
to an extent of more than 50% of its replacement cost at the time of
destruction, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with all
regulations prescribed in this chapter.
B. Minor repairs and structural alterations may be made to a
nonconforming building or a building occupied by a nonconforming use,
provided that:
(1) Repair or reconstruction is commenced within one year from the
date of damage to the building and is carried to completion without
undue delay.
(2) The reconstructed building does not exceed in height, area and
volume the building destroyed.
(3) The reconstructed building shall comply with the area regulations
of the district in which it is located.
A. The types of extension and enlargement listed below are permitted for
nonconforming uses and buildings existing on the effective date of this
chapter:
(1) The extension of a nonconforming use of land upon a lot occupied
by such use.
(2) The extension or enlargement of a conforming building occupied by
a nonconforming use.
(3) The extension or enlargement of a nonconforming building
occupied by a nonconforming use.
(4) The extension or enlargement of a nonconforming building
occupied by a conforming use.
B. The foregoing extensions or enlargements of such nonconforming
buildings or uses shall be subject to the following conditions:
(1) The extension or enlargement shall conform to the height, area,
yard and coverage regulations of the district in which it is located.
(2) The entire building or use shall be provided with off-street parking
and loading spaces as required by Article XVI entitled "Off-Street
Parking."
(3) The extension or enlargement does not replace a conforming use.
(4) The extension or enlargement of the nonconforming building or use
shall not be permitted to extend into vacant parcels of land
§ 120-25 § 120-26
120:640
§ 120-27. Changes in use.
A nonconforming use may be changed to another nonconforming use of
the same or more restricted classification. Whenever a nonconforming use
has been changed to a more restricted classification or to a conforming
use, such use shall not thereafter be changed to a use of less restricted
classification.
§ 120-28. Abandonment.
If the nonconforming use of a building or land ceases for a period of one
year, the subsequent use of such building or land shall be in conformity with
the provisions of this chapter with the following exception:
adjacent to the initial parcel existing and occupied on the effective
date of this chapter, where such vacant parcels have been recorded
separately or acquired following the effective date of this chapter.
(5) A nonconforming use may be changed to another nonconforming
use of the same or more restricted classification. Whenever a
nonconforming use has been changed to a more restricted
classification or to a conforming use, such use shall not thereafter
be changed to a use of less restricted classification.
A. Hereafter, the removal of a nonconforming trailer coach — mobile
home from the site it occupied shall constitute abandonment of the
space so occupied, and subsequent use of said trailer space shall
conform with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 120-26 ZONING § 120-28
120:641

ARTICLE V
Districts Established
§ 120-29. Designation of districts.
For the purpose of this chapter, the Borough of Steelton is hereby divided
into districts which shall be designated as follows:
FW Floodway District
FF Flood-Fringe District
R-SU Residential District, Single-Family, Urban
R-TS Residential District, Two-Family, Suburban
R-TU Residential District, Two-Family, Urban
R-MU Residential District, Multifamily, Urban
C-N Commercial District, Neighborhood
C-C Commercial District, Central
C-H Commercial District, Highway
M-H Manufacturing District, Heavy
§ 120-30. Map established.
The boundaries of the districts shall be as shown upon the map attached
to and made a part of this chapter, which map shall be designated "Zoning
Map."114 The said map and all the notations, references and other data
shown thereon are hereby incorporated by reference into this chapter as if
all were fully described herein.
§ 120-31. Boundaries indicated.
A. The boundaries between districts are, unless otherwise indicated,
either the center lines of streets, alleys, railroad rights-of-way or lot
lines or such lines extended or lines parallel thereto.
B. Where district boundaries approximate the location of the above lines,
they shall be construed to be on those lines.
C. Where figures are shown on the Zoning Map between a street, alley,
railroad right-of-way or lot line and a district boundary line, they
indicate that the district boundary line runs parallel to that line at a
distance therefrom equivalent to the number of feet so indicated.
D. Where district boundaries are not clearly fixed by the above methods,
they shall be determined by the use of the scale of the Zoning Map.
114. Editor's Note: A copy of the current Zoning Map is on file in the office of the Borough
Secretary.
§ 120-29 ZONING § 120-32
120:643
§ 120-32. Interpretation of boundaries.
When a district boundary line divides a lot held in single and separate
ownership at the effective date of this chapter, the regulations of either
abutting district may be construed by the owner to be applicable to the
portion of such lot in the other abutting district for a distance of not more
than 50 feet beyond the district boundary line.
§ 120-32 § 120-32
120:644
ARTICLE VI
Floodplain Districts
§ 120-33. General provisions.
§ 120-34. Designation.
A. Applicability. These provisions shall apply to all lands within the
jurisdiction of Steelton Borough and shown on the official Zoning
Map115 as being located within the boundaries of the Floodway and
Flood-Fringe Districts.
B. Interpretation of district boundaries. Where interpretation is needed
concerning the exact location of any boundary of the Floodway or
Flood-Fringe Districts, the Zoning Hearing Board shall make the
necessary determination. The person questioning or contesting the
location of the district boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity
to present his case to the Board and to submit his own technical
evidence if he so desires.
C. Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be used and no
structure shall be located, relocated, constructed, reconstructed,
enlarged or structurally altered except in full compliance with the
terms and provisions of this chapter and any other applicable ordinance
and regulations which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of this
chapter.
D. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
(1) The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this
chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is
based on acceptable engineering methods of study. Larger floods
may occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by
man-made or natural causes, such as ice jams and bridge openings
restricted by debris. This chapter does not imply that area outside
the floodplain districts will be free from flooding or flood damages.
(2) This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Borough of
Steelton or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages
that result from reliance on this chapter of any administrative
decision lawfully made thereunder.
A. Identification and description of districts. The Floodway and Flood-
Fringe Districts shall include all areas of the Borough subject to
inundation by waters of the one-hundred-year flood (Regulatory Flood).
The basis for the identification and delineation of these areas shall be
the Flood Insurance Study dated December 1974 and the Flood
Boundary and Floodway Map Index with maps numbered 01F and 02F
and the FIA Map Index with FIA Flood Hazard Boundary Map and FIA
115. Editor's Note: A copy of the current Zoning Map is on file in the office of the Borough
Secretary.
§ 120-33 ZONING § 120-34
120:645
§ 120-35. Basic considerations.
§ 120-36. Provisions applicable to Floodway District. [Amended
8-30-1977 by Ord. No. 77-4]
In the Floodway District, no new construction or development shall be
permitted (including fences, with the exception of two-wire fences), except
Flood Insurance Rate Map Nos. H-01, I-01 and H-02, I-02 and Plate 1
and 2 of Flood Profiles dated November 1974, all as prepared for the
Borough and the Federal Insurance Administration by the Susquehanna
River Basin Commission.
B. Map showing floodplain areas. For the purposes of this chapter, the
boundaries of all identified floodplain areas within the Borough are
shown on the Official Maps of Flood-Prone Areas of the Borough of
Steelton, which is declared to be part of this chapter and which is
available for inspection at the Borough offices.
C. Changes in floodplain area boundaries. The delineation of any
floodplain area, including any Floodway or Flood-Fringe Area within,
may be revised by Borough Council where necessary because of natural
or man-made changes which have occurred and/or where more detailed
studies undertaken by a qualified agency or individual may document
the need for such revision. All such changes shall be subject to the
review and approval of the Federal Insurance Administrator.
[Amended 8-30-1977 by Ord. No. 77-4]
A. All uses, activities and development occurring within any Floodway or
Flood-Fringe District shall be undertaken only in strict compliance with
the provisions of this chapter and with all other applicable codes and
ordinances such as the Borough Building Code and Borough
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.116 Under no
circumstances shall any use, activity and/or development adversely
affect the capacity of the channels of floodways of any watercourse,
drainage ditch or any other drainage facility or system.
B. In addition, whenever a developer intends to alter or relocate a
watercourse within the Floodway or Flood-Fringe District, the
developer shall notify, in writing, by certified mail, all affected adjacent
communities and the Pennsylvania Department of Community Affairs117
of all such intended activities prior to any alteration or relocation of the
watercourse and shall submit copies of such notification to the Federal
Insurance Administrator. The developer shall also assure the Borough
Council, in writing, that the flood-carrying capacity within the altered
or relocated watercourse in question will be maintained. [Added
8-30-1977 by Ord. No. 77-4]
116. Editor's Note: See Ch. 44, Building Construction; Ch. 108, Uniform Construction Codes;
and Ch. 99, Subdivision and Land Development.
117. Editor's Note: Now the Department of Community and Economic Development.
§ 120-34 § 120-36
120:646
where the effect of such construction on flood heights is fully offset by
accompanying stream improvements which have been approved by all
appropriate local and/or state authorities.
A. Permitted uses. In the Floodway District the following uses and
activities are permitted, provided that they are in compliance with the
provisions of the underlying district and are not prohibited by any other
ordinance and provided that they do not require structures, fill or
storage of materials and equipment:
(1) Agricultural uses, such as general farming, pasture, grazing,
outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, truck farming, forestry, sod
farming and wild crop harvesting.
(2) Public and private recreational uses and activities, such as parks,
day camps, picnic grounds, golf courses, boat launching and
swimming areas, hiking and horseback riding trails, wildlife and
nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries and fishing areas.
(3) Residential uses such as yard areas, gardens, play areas and
pervious parking areas.
(4) Industrial and commercial uses such as yard areas, pervious
parking and loading areas, airport landing strips, etc.
B. Uses permitted by special exceptions. The following uses and activities
may be permitted by special exception, provided that they are in
compliance with the provisions of the underlying district and are not
prohibited by any other ordinance:
(1) Structures accessory to the uses and activities in Subsection A
above.
(2) Utilities and public facilities and improvements such as railroads,
streets, bridges, transmission lines, pipelines, water and sewage
treatment plants and other similar or related uses.
(3) Water-related uses and activities, such as marinas, docks, wharves,
piers, etc.
(4) Extraction of sand, gravel and other materials.
(5) Temporary uses such as circuses, carnivals and similar activities.
(6) Storage of materials and equipment, provided that they are not
buoyant, flammable or explosive and are not subject to major
damage by flooding and provided that such material and equipment
is firmly anchored to prevent flotation or movement and/or can be
readily removed from the area within the time available after flood
warning.
(7) Other similar uses and activities.
§ 120-36 ZONING § 120-36
120:647
§ 120-37. Provisions applicable to Flood-Fringe District.
§ 120-38. Factors to be considered in granting special exceptions.
In passing upon application for special exceptions within any Floodway or
Flood-Fringe District, the Zoning Hearing Board shall consider all relevant
factors specified in other sections of this chapter and:
C. All uses, activities and structural developments shall be undertaken in
strict compliance with the floodproofing provisions contained in all
other applicable codes and ordinances.
A. In the Flood-Fringe District the development and/or use of land shall be
permitted in accordance with the regulations of the underlying district,
provided that all such uses, activities and/or development shall be
undertaken in strict compliance with the floodproofing and related
provisions contained in all other applicable codes and ordinances.
B. Under no circumstances, however, shall materials that are buoyant,
flammable or explosive or which at times of flooding could be injurious
to human, animal or plant life, be stored below an elevation of 1 1/2 feet
above the regulatory flood elevation.
A. The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or
velocities caused by encroachments.
B. The danger that materials may be swept on to other lands or
downstream to the injury of others.
C. The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability of
these systems to prevent disease, contamination and unsanitary
conditions.
D. The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owners.
E. The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the
community.
F. The requirements of the facility for a waterfront location.
G. The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding for the
proposed use.
H. The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development and
development anticipated in the foreseeable future.
I. The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and
floodplain management program for the area.
J. The safety of and access to the property, in times of flood, of ordinary
and emergency vehicles.
§ 120-36 § 120-38
120:648
§ 120-39. Nonconforming structures and uses.
A structure or use of a structure or premises which lawfully existed before
the enactment of these provisions, but which is not in conformity with these
provisions may be continued subject to the following conditions:
K. The expected height, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the floodwaters expected at the site.
L. Such other factors as are relevant to the purposes of this chapter.
A. Existing nonconformities (structures and/or uses) located in the
Floodway District shall not be expanded or enlarged, unless the effect
of the proposed expansion or enlargement on flood heights is fully offset
by accompanying stream improvements.
B. Any modification, alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement of
any kind to a nonconformity (structure and/or use), regardless of
location, to an extent or amount of less than 50% of its value, shall be
elevated and/or floodproofed to the greatest extent possible.
C. The modification, alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement of
any kind to a nonconformity (structure and/or use), regardless of
location, to an extent or amount of 50% or more of its value, shall be
undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this and any
other applicable chapter.
D. Uses or adjuncts thereof which are or become nuisances shall not be
permitted to continue.
§ 120-38 ZONING § 120-39
120:649

ARTICLE VII
R-SU Residential District, Single-Family, Urban
§ 120-40. District provisions.
In the R-SU Residential District, the following regulations shall apply:
A. Uses permitted.
(1) Single-family detached dwellings.
(2) Churches or similar places of worship, parish houses, convents.
(3) Public and private schools, including colleges and institutions of
higher education.
(4) Public parks, playgrounds and municipal recreation areas.
(5) Municipal buildings, public libraries and museums.
(6) Electric and telephone public utility transmission and distribution
facilities, including substations, water pumping stations and
reservoirs.
(7) Home occupations and household pets.
(8) Signs when erected and maintained in accordance with the
provisions of Article XVII appearing herein, entitled "Signs."
(9) Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above
uses.
B. Height regulations.
(1) The height of a building shall be not greater than 35 feet.
(2) The height of a dwelling shall be not less than one story.
C. Area regulations. The lot area per dwelling unit shall be not less than
6,000 square feet.
D. Width regulations. For a dwelling the lot width at the building line shall
be not less than 60 feet on an interior lot and 70 feet on a corner lot.
E. Yard regulations. Each lot shall have front, side and rear yards of not
less than the depth or width indicated below:
(1) Front yard depth: 20 feet.
(2) Side yard: two in number; width: 10 feet each on an interior lot. On
a corner lot, the side yard abutting the street shall be not less than
20 feet in width.
(3) Rear yard depth: 25 feet.
F. Coverage regulations. The coverage shall be no more than 30%.
§ 120-40 ZONING § 120-40
120:651
G. Off-street parking. Parking shall be provided in accordance with the
provisions of Article XVI.
§ 120-40 § 120-40
120:652
ARTICLE VIII
R-TS Residential District, Two-Family, Suburban
§ 120-41. District provisions.
In the R-TS Residential District, the following regulations shall apply:
A. Uses permitted.
(1) Single-family detached dwellings.
(2) Single-family semidetached dwellings.
(3) Two-family detached dwellings.
(4) Churches and similar places of worship, parish houses, convents.
(5) Public and private schools, including colleges and institutions of
higher education.
(6) Public parks, playgrounds and municipal recreation areas.
(7) Municipal buildings, public libraries and museums.
(8) Home occupations and household pets.
(9) Electric and telephone public utility transmission and distribution
facilities, including substations, water pumping stations and
reservoirs.
(10) Signs when erected and maintained in accordance with the
provisions of Article XVII appearing herein, entitled "Signs."
(11) Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above
uses.
B. Uses by special exception. The following uses shall be permitted as a
special exception when authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board after
review by the Planning Commission:
(1) Clubs, lodges, union halls and fraternal organizations.
(2) Medical and dental clinical buildings.
C. Height regulations.
(1) The height of a building shall be not greater than 35 feet.
(2) The height of a dwelling shall be not less than one story.
D. Area regulations. For each type of dwelling, the lot area per dwelling
unit shall be not less than indicated below:
(1) Single-family detached dwelling: 6,000 square feet.
(2) Single-family semidetached dwelling: 3,500 square feet.
§ 120-41 ZONING § 120-41
120:653
(3) Two-family detached dwelling: 3,000 square feet.
E. Width regulations. For each type of dwelling, the lot width shall be not
less than indicated below:
(1) Single-family detached dwelling: 60 feet on an interior lot and 70
feet on a corner lot.
(2) Single-family semidetached dwelling: 35 feet on an interior lot and
45 feet on a corner lot.
(3) Two-family detached dwelling: 60 feet on an interior lot and 70 feet
on a corner lot.
F. Yard regulations. Each lot shall have front, side and rear yards of not
less than the depth or width indicated below:
(1) Front yard depth: 20 feet.
(2) Side yard or yards width: 10 feet each on an interior lot. On a
corner lot, the side yard abutting the street shall be not less than
20 feet in width.
(3) Rear yard depth: 25 feet.
G. Coverage regulations. The coverage shall be no more than 30%.
H. Off-street parking. Parking shall be provided in accordance with the
provisions of Article XVI.
§ 120-41 § 120-41
120:654
ARTICLE IX
R-TU Residential District, Two-Family, Urban
§ 120-42. District provisions.
In the R-TU Residential District, the following regulations shall apply:
A. Uses permitted.
(1) Single-family detached dwellings.
(2) Single-family semidetached dwellings.
(3) Two-family detached dwellings.
(4) Churches or similar places of worship, parish houses and convents.
(5) Public and private schools, including colleges and institutions of
higher education.
(6) Public parks, playgrounds and municipal recreation areas.
(7) Municipal buildings, public libraries and museums.
(8) Home occupations and household pets.
(9) Hospitals and sanitariums.
(10) Electric and telephone public utility transmission and distribution
facilities, including substations, water pumping stations and
reservoirs.
(11) Signs when erected and maintained in accordance with the
provisions of Article XVII appearing herein, entitled "Signs."
(12) Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above
uses.
B. Conditional uses. Conditional uses may be allowed or denied by
Borough Council after recommendation by the Planning Commission,
pursuant to the standards and criteria set forth in § 120-10.
(1) Trailer coaches or mobile homes within mobile home parks.
C. Uses by special exception. The following uses shall be permitted as a
special exception when authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board after
review by the Planning Commission:
(1) Clubs, lodges, union halls and fraternal organizations.
(2) Medical and dental clinical buildings.
(3) Single-family attached dwelling (row houses and townhouses), if
the following criteria are met: [Added 3-21-1994 by Ord. No.
94-4, approved 3-21-1994]
§ 120-42 ZONING § 120-42
120:655
(a) Area, width and coverage regulations. The lot area per
dwelling unit and lot width shall not be less, and the coverage
shall not be greater, than indicated below:
Lot Width
Dwelling Type
Lot Area Per
Dwelling Unit
(square feet)
Interior
(feet)
Corner
(feet) Coverage
Single-family
attached
1,800 18 — 50%
(b) Each end unit shall be deemed a single-family semidetached
dwelling(s) and shall require side yard(s) meeting the R-TU
requirements, i.e., 10 feet.
D. Height regulations.
(1) The height of a building shall be not greater than 35 feet.
(2) The height of a dwelling shall be not less than one story.
E. Area regulations. For each type of dwelling, the lot area per dwelling
unit shall be not less than indicated below:
(1) Single-family detached dwelling: 5,000 square feet.
(2) Single-family semidetached dwelling: 3,000 square feet.
(3) Two-family detached dwelling: 2,500 square feet.
F. Width regulations. For each type of dwelling, the lot width shall be not
less than indicated below:
(1) Single-family detached dwelling: 50 feet on an interior lot and 50
feet on a corner lot.
(2) Single-family semidetached dwelling: 30 feet on an interior lot and
30 feet on a corner lot.
(3) Two-family detached dwelling: 50 feet on an interior lot and 50 feet
on a corner lot.
G. Yard regulations. Each lot shall have front, side and rear yards of not
less than the depth or width indicated below:
(1) Front yard depth: 10 feet.
(2) Side yard or yards width: 10 feet each on an interior lot. On a
corner lot, the side yard abutting the street shall be not less than
10 feet in width.
(3) Rear yard depth: 25 feet.
§ 120-42 § 120-42
120:656
H. Coverage regulations. The coverage shall be no more than 30%.
I. Off-street parking. Parking shall be provided in accordance with the
provisions of Article XVI.
§ 120-42 ZONING § 120-42
120:657

ARTICLE X
R-MU Residential District, Multifamily, Urban
§ 120-43. District provisions.
In the R-MU Residential District, the following regulations shall apply:
A. Uses permitted.
(1) Single-family detached dwellings.
(2) Single-family semidetached dwellings.
(3) Single-family attached dwelling (row houses and townhouses).
(4) Two-family detached dwellings (double duplex dwellings).
(5) Two-family semidetached dwellings (duplex dwellings).
(6) Apartment dwellings when the building is constructed on the basis
of a floor area ratio of not more than 1.3.
(7) Lodging and boarding houses.
(8) Churches or similar places of worship, parish houses, convents.
(9) Public and private schools, including colleges and institutions of
higher education.
(10) Public parks, playgrounds and municipal recreation areas.
(11) Municipal buildings, public libraries and museums.
(12) Home occupations and household pets.
(13) Hospitals and sanitariums.
(14) Electric and telephone public utility transmission and distribution
facilities, including substations, water pumping stations and
reservoirs.
(15) Signs when erected and maintained in accordance with the
provisions of Article XVII appearing herein, entitled "Signs."
(16) Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above
uses.
B. Uses by special exception. The following uses shall be permitted as a
special exception when authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board after
review by the Planning Commission:
(1) Clubs, lodges and fraternal organizations.
(2) Medical and dental clinical buildings.
C. Height regulations.
§ 120-43 ZONING § 120-43
120:659
(1) The height of a building shall be not more than 35 feet, except for
apartments, in which case the floor area ratio shall control.
(2) The height of a dwelling shall be not less than one story.
D. Area, width and coverage regulations.
(1) The lot area per dwelling unit and lot width shall be not less, and
the coverage shall be not greater, than indicated below:
Lot Width
Dwelling Type
Lot Area per
Dwelling
Unit
(square feet)
Interior
(feet)
Corner
(feet) Coverage
Single-family
detached
5,000 50 50 30%
Single-family
semidetached
3,000 30 30 30%
Single-family
attached
1,800 18 — 50%
Two-family
detached
2,500 50 50 30%
Two-family
semidetached
1,500 30 30 30%
Apartments 625 — — —
(2) For nonresidential buildings, the coverage shall be no more than
30%.
E. Yard regulations. Each lot shall have front, side and rear yards of not
less than the depth or width indicated below:
(1) Front yard depth: 10 feet for all categories except apartment
dwellings.
(2) Side yard or yards width: 10 feet each, for all categories except for
apartment dwellings or attached dwellings, on interior lots. On a
corner lot the side yard abutting the street shall be not less than 10
feet in width.
(3) Rear yard depth: 25 feet for all categories except apartment
dwellings.
(4) For apartment dwellings of one or two stories, there shall be a front
yard, two side yards and a rear yard, each of not less than 10 feet.
For each story over two, five feet of width of depth shall be added to
each yard.
§ 120-43 § 120-43
120:660
F. Off-street parking. Parking shall be provided in accordance with the
provisions of Article XVI.
§ 120-43 ZONING § 120-43
120:661

ARTICLE XI
C-N Commercial District, Neighborhood
§ 120-44. District provisions.
In the C-N Commercial District, the following regulations shall apply:
A. Uses permitted.
(1) All uses permitted in any residential district; provided, however,
that a residential use shall be permitted only when accessory and
incidental to one or more of the following uses.
(2) Stores for the retailing of food, drugs, confectionery, hardware,
bakery products, clothing, household appliances, flowers or house
plants.
(3) Personal service shops, including barbers, beauty parlors, tailors,
shoe repair and dry cleaning.
(4) Banks, business and professional offices.
(5) Railway or bus passenger stations, telegraph offices and express
offices.
(6) Automobile service stations.
(7) Electric and telephone public utility transmission and distribution
facilities, including substations, water pumping stations and
reservoirs.
(8) Mortuary and undertaking establishments.
(9) Municipal buildings or uses.
(10) Restaurants, taverns, cafes and other places serving food or
beverages.
(11) Private schools conducted for gain or profit.
(12) Business identification signs when erected and maintained in
accordance with the provisions of Article XVII appearing herein,
entitled "Signs."
(13) Other uses similar to those enumerated above.
(14) Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above
uses.
B. The above specified stores, shops and businesses shall be retail
establishments exclusively and shall be permitted only under the
following conditions:
§ 120-44 ZONING § 120-44
120:663
(1) Such stores, shops or businesses, except those permitted in
Subsection A(6), (7) and (9) above, shall be conducted within an
enclosed building.
(2) Such uses, operations or products shall not be objectionable due to
odor, dust, smoke, noise, vibration or other similar causes.
C. Height regulations.
(1) The height of a building shall be not greater than 35 feet.
(2) The height of a dwelling shall be not less than one story.
D. Yard regulations. Each lot shall have front, side and rear yards of not
less than the depth or width indicated below:
(1) Front yard: none required.
(2) Side yard: two in number; width: 10 feet each side of a principal
building, provided that when a written agreement is provided by
adjoining property owners, no side yard shall be required where
two or more commercial uses abut side to side. However, in no case
shall party walls be permitted between properties of separate
ownership. In the case of a series of abutting structures abutting
and paralleling a public right-of-way, an open and unobstructed
passage for vehicles and pedestrians, of at least 20 feet in width,
shall be provided at grade level at intervals of not more than 400
feet.
(3) Rear yard depth: 20 feet.
(4) Buffer yards shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of
Article III appearing herein.
E. Coverage regulations. The coverage shall be no more than 60%.
F. Off-street parking. Parking shall be provided in accordance with the
provisions of Article XVI.
§ 120-44 § 120-44
120:664
ARTICLE XII
C-C Commercial District, Central
§ 120-45. District provisions.
In the C-C Commercial District, the following regulations shall apply:
A. Uses permitted.
(1) All uses permitted in any residential district; provided, however,
that a residential use shall be permitted only when accessory and
incidental to one or more of the following permitted uses.
(2) Amusement enterprises including theaters, billiard or pool parlors,
bowling alleys, skating rinks or similar uses or places of assembly.
(3) Clubs, lodges, union halls and fraternal organizations.
(4) Department stores.
(5) Garages for the storage and repair of motor vehicles, but not
automobile body shops.
(6) Medical and dental clinics and laboratories.
(7) Florists or nurseries, provided that all incidental equipment and
supplies, including fertilizers and empty cans, are kept within the
building.
(8) Stores for the retailing of food, drugs, confectionery, hardware,
bakery products, clothing, household appliances, flowers or house
plants.
(9) Personal service shops, including barbers, beauty parlors, tailors,
shoe repair and dry cleaning.
(10) Banks, business and professional offices.
(11)Railway or bus passenger stations, telegraph offices and express
offices.
(12) Automobile service stations.
(13) Electric and telephone public utility transmission and distribution
facilities, including substations, water pumping stations and
reservoirs.
(14) Mortuary and undertaking establishments.
(15) Municipal buildings or uses.
(16) Restaurants, tea rooms, cafes and other places serving food or
beverages.
(17) Private schools conducted for gain or profit.
§ 120-45 ZONING § 120-45
120:665
(18) Business identification, billboards and signs when erected and
maintained in accordance with the provisions of Article XVII
appearing herein, entitled "Signs."
(19) Other uses similar to those enumerated above.
(20) Hotels, motels or residential hotels.
(21) Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above
uses.
B. The above specified stores, shops and businesses shall be retail
establishments exclusively and shall be permitted only under the
following conditions:
(1) Such stores, shops or businesses, except those permitted in
Subsection A(2), (12), (13) and (15) above, shall be conducted
within an enclosed building.
(2) Such uses, operations or products shall not be objectionable due to
odor, dust, smoke, noise, vibration or other causes.
(3) There shall be no manufacture, compounding, processing or
treatment of products other than that which is clearly incidental
and essential to a retail store or business and when all such
products are sold at retail on the premises.
C. Height regulations. The height of a building shall be not greater than 35
feet.
D. Yard regulations. Each lot shall have front, side and rear yards of not
less than the depth or width indicated below:
(1) Front yard: none required.
(2) Side yards: two in number; width: 10 feet each side of a principal
building, provided that when a written agreement is provided by
adjoining property owners, no side yard shall be required where
two or more commercial uses abut side to side. However, in no case
shall party walls be permitted between properties or separate
ownership. In the case of a series of abutting structures abutting
and paralleling a public right-of-way, an open and unobstructed
passage for vehicles and pedestrians, of at least 20 feet in width,
shall be provided at grade level at intervals of not more than 400
feet.
(3) Rear yard depth: 20 feet.
(4) Buffer yards shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of
Article III appearing herein.
E. Off-street parking. Parking shall be provided in accordance with the
provisions of Article XVI.
§ 120-45 § 120-45
120:666
ARTICLE XIII
C-H Commercial District, Highway
§ 120-46. District provisions.
In the C-H Commercial District, the following regulations shall apply:
A. Uses permitted.
(1) Churches or similar places of worship, parish houses, convents.
(2) Hospitals and sanitariums.
(3) Municipal buildings, public libraries, museums and firehouses.
(4) Clubs, lodges, union halls and fraternal organizations.
(5) Public and private schools, including colleges and institutions of
higher education.
(6) Public parks, playgrounds and municipal recreation areas.
(7) Public utility and communications buildings and structures, where
operation requirements necessitate locating within the district.
(8) Automobile service station, automobile sales garage, automobile
sales lot, car wash, drive-in bank, restaurants, taverns, food
supermarket, motels and tourist homes.
(9) Business identification signs when erected and maintained in
accordance with the provisions of Article XVII appearing herein,
entitled "Signs."
(10) Residential uses; provided, however, that a residential use shall be
permitted only when accessory and incidental to one or more of the
above permitted uses.
(11) Other uses similar in character to those enumerated above.
(12) Accessory uses and buildings customarily incidental to the above
permitted uses.
B. The above specified stores, shops and businesses shall be retail
establishments exclusively and shall be permitted only under the
following conditions:
(1) Such uses, operations or products shall not be objectionable due to
odor, dust, smoke, noise, vibration or other similar causes.
(2) There shall be no manufacture, compounding, processing or
treatment of products other than that which is clearly incidental
and essential to a retail store or business and when all such
products are sold at retail on the premises.
§ 120-46 ZONING § 120-46
120:667
C. Height regulations. The height of a building shall be no greater than 35
feet.
D. Yard regulations. Each lot shall have front, side and rear yards of not
less than the depth or width indicated below:
(1) Front yard depth: 25 feet.
(2) Side yard: two in number; width: 10 feet each side of a principal
building, provided that when a written agreement is provided by
adjoining property owners, no side yard shall be required where
two or more commercial uses abut side to side. However, in no case
shall party walls be permitted between properties of separate
ownership. In the case of a series of abutting structures abutting
and paralleling a public right-of-way, an open and unobstructed
passage for vehicles and pedestrians, of at least 20 feet in width,
shall be provided at grade level intervals of not more than 400 feet.
(3) Rear yard: not required.
E. Coverage regulations. The coverage shall be no more than 60%.
F. Off-street parking. Parking shall be provided in accordance with the
provisions of Article XVI.
§ 120-46 § 120-46
120:668
ARTICLE XIV
M-H Manufacturing District, Heavy
§ 120-47. District provisions.
In the M-H Manufacturing District, the following regulations shall apply:
A. Uses permitted.
(1) Automobile service stations, automobile sales, trailer coach sales,
service garages, auto sales lots, automobile assembling, auto body
shops, painting, upholstery reconditioning, vehicle repair or
overhauling, tire retreading or recapping, welding shops and the
like.
(2) Brick, pottery, tile or terra cotta manufacture.
(3) Bottling works and bookbinding.
(4) Building materials storage, lumberyards and lumber mills.
(5) Blacksmith and machine shops, drop hammers and automatic
screw machines.
(6) Carpenter, cabinet making, furniture repair and upholstery,
electrician, metal working, tinsmith, plumbing and gas, steam or
hot water fitting shops.
(7) Contractor's equipment, sales, service and storage.
(8) Mixing plants for concrete and asphalt.
(9) Cleaning, dyeing and steam laundry.
(10) Freight terminal and freight yards.
(11) Metal fabrication, forging and boiler works.
(12) Gas (illuminating or heating) manufacture and storage.
(13) Grain elevators and bulk storage of petroleum and similar
products.
(14)Railroad yards, repair shops, roundhouses and truck terminals.
(15) Electric and telephone public utility transmission and distribution
facilities, including substations, water pumping stations and
reservoirs. Electric power stations, electric and telephone public
utility transmissions.
(16) Laboratories and lithographing.
(17) Laundries, cleaning, dyeing, carpet and rug cleaning.
(18) Distribution plants, parcel delivery and service industries.
§ 120-47 ZONING § 120-47
120:669
(19) The manufacturing, compounding, processing or treatment of such
products as bakery goods, candy, cosmetics, dairy products, drugs,
pharmaceutical and food products.
(20) The manufacture, compounding, assembling or treatment of
articles or merchandise from the following previously prepared
materials; bone, cellophane, canvas, cloth, cork, feathers, felt, film,
fur, glass, hair, leather, paper, plastics, precious or semiprecious
metals or stones, shell, textiles, tobacco, wood, yarns and paint.
(21) The manufacturing of pottery and figurines or other similar
ceramic products, using only clay, and kilns fired only by electricity
or gas.
(22) The manufacture, processing or storage of explosives, paint,
petroleum or gasoline.
(23) Lime kilns, flour mills, manufacture or processing of cement.
(24) Foundries, steel mills, manufacture or processing of rubber
products and plastics.
(25) Printing and newspaper publishing.
(26) Electrical, optical and textile manufacturing.
(27) Mining and quarrying, including rock crushing, grinding, polishing
or cutting.
(28) Wholesale businesses, welding shops, warehouses and cold storage
plants.
(29) Business identification, billboards and signs when erected and
maintained in accordance with the provisions of Article XVII
appearing herein, entitled "Signs."
(30) All uses similar to the above and not otherwise prohibited by law.
(31) Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above
uses. However, no building, structure or portion thereof shall be
hereafter erected, structurally altered or converted for any use
permitted in any residential district except accessory buildings
which are incidental to the use of the land.
B. Height regulations. The height of a building shall be not greater than 35
feet.
C. Yard regulations. Each lot shall have front, side and rear yards of not
less than the depth or width indicated below:
(1) Front yard depth: 60 feet.
(2) Side yard: two in number; 10 feet each side of a principal building,
provided that when a written agreement is provided by adjoining
§ 120-47 § 120-47
120:670
property owners, no side yard shall be required where two or
more manufacturing uses abut side to side. However, in no case
shall party walls be permitted between properties of separate
ownership.
(3) Rear yard depth: 30 feet.
(4) Buffer yards shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of
Article III appearing herein.
D. Coverage regulations.
(1) The coverage shall be no more than 60%.
(2) At least 10% of the lot area shall be covered with vegetative
material.
E. Off-street parking. Parking shall be provided in accordance with the
provisions of Article XVI.
§ 120-47 ZONING § 120-47
120:671

ARTICLE XV
Airport Zoning
[Amended 5-20-1991 by Ord. No. 91-4, approved 5-20-1991118]
§ 120-48. Statutory authority; declaration of policy.
§ 120-49. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings given to them in this section unless the context clearly indicates
otherwise:
AIRCRAFT — Any contrivance, except an unpowered hang glider or
parachute, used for manned ascent into or flight through the air.
A. This article is adopted pursuant to the authority conferred by 1984
Pennsylvania Laws, P.L. 837, No. 164, codified at 74 Pa.C.S.A. § 5911 et
seq., and the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247 (53
P.S. § 10101 et seq.).
B. It is hereby found that an obstruction (as defined herein) has the
potential for endangering the lives and property of users of the Borough
of Steelton and property or occupants of land in its vicinity; that an
obstruction may affect existing and future instrument approach
minimums of the Capital City and Harrisburg International Airports;
and that an obstruction may reduce the size of areas available for the
landing, takeoff and maneuvering of aircraft, thus tending to destroy or
impair the utility of the Capital City and Harrisburg International
Airports and the public investment therein. Accordingly, it is declared
that:
(1) The creation or establishment of an obstruction has the potential of
being a public nuisance and may injure the region served by the
Capital City and Harrisburg International Airports.
(2) It is necessary in the interest of the public health, safety, morals
and general welfare that the creation or establishment of
obstructions that are a hazard to air navigation be prevented.
(3) The prevention of these obstructions should be accomplished, to
the extent legally possible, by the exercise of the police power
without compensation.
C. It is further declared that the prevention of the creation or
establishment of hazards to air navigation, the elimination, removal,
alteration or mitigation of hazards to air navigation or marking and
lighting of obstructions are public purposes for which a political
subdivision may raise and expend public funds and acquire land or
interests in land.
118. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the repeal of former Article XV, Planned
Residential Developments.
§ 120-48 ZONING § 120-49
120:673
AIRPORT (Capital City Airport and Harrisburg International Airport) —
Any area of land or water which is used or intended to be used for the
landing and takeoff of aircraft and any appurtenant areas which are used
or intended to be used for airport buildings or air navigation facilities or
rights-of-way, together with all airport buildings and facilities thereon. As
used herein, the term "airport" includes public airports but excludes private
airports and heliports. Public and private airports are defined separately in
this section.
AIRPORT ELEVATION — (Capital City Airport, 347 feet, and Harrisburg
International Airport, 310 feet). The highest point of an airport's usable
landing area measured in feet above sea level.
AIRPORT HAZARD — Any structure or object, natural or man-made, or use
of land which obstructs the airspace required for flight or aircraft in landing
or taking off at an airport or is otherwise hazardous, as defined by the term
"airport hazard" in 74 Pa.C.S.A. § 5102.
AIRPORT HAZARD AREA — Any area of land or water upon which an airport
hazard might be established if not prevented as provided for in this article
and the Act 164 of 1984 (Pennsylvania Laws relating to aviation).
APPROACH SURFACE — A surface longitudinally centered on the extended
runway center line, extending outward and upward from the end of the
primary surface and at the same slope as the Approach Surface Zone height
limitation slope set forth in § 120-50 of this article. In plan, the perimeter of
the approach surface coincides with the perimeter of the Approach Surface
Zone.
APPROACH, TRANSITIONAL, HORIZONTAL AND CONICAL SURFACE
ZONES — These zones are set forth in § 120-50 of this article.
BOARD OF APPEALS — The Steelton Zoning Hearing Board.
CONICAL SURFACE — A surface extending outward and upward from the
periphery of the horizontal surface at a slope of 20 to one for a horizontal
distance of 4,000 feet.
DEPARTMENT — The Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
FAA — The Federal Aviation Administration of the United States
Department of Transportation.
HEIGHT — For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set
forth in this article and shown on the Zoning Map,119 the datum shall be
mean sea level elevation unless otherwise specified.
HORIZONTAL SURFACE — A horizontal plane 150 feet above the
established airport elevation, the perimeter of which, in plan, coincides with
the perimeter of the Horizontal Surface Zone.
119. Editor's Note: A copy of the current Zoning Map is on file in the office of the Borough
Secretary.
§ 120-49 § 120-49
120:674
LARGER-THAN-UTILITY RUNWAY — A runway that is constructed for and
intended to be used by propeller-driven aircraft of greater than 12,500
pounds' maximum gross weight and jet-powered aircraft.
NONCONFORMING USE — Any preexisting structure, object of natural
growth or use of land which is inconsistent with the provisions of this article
or an amendment thereto.
NONPRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY — A runway having an existing
instrument approach procedure utilizing air navigation facilities with only
horizontal guidance or area-type navigation equipment, for which a
straight-in nonprecision instrument approach procedure has been approved
or planned.
OBSTRUCTION — Any structure, growth or other object, including a mobile
object, which exceeds a limiting height set forth in § 120-50 of this article.
PERSON — An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company,
association, joint-stock association or governmental entity; includes a
trustee, a receiver, an assignee or a similar representative of any of them.
PRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY — A runway having an existing
instrument approach procedure utilizing an instrument landing system
(ILS) or a precisions approach radar (PAR). It also means a runway for
which a precision approach system is planned and is so indicated on an
approved airport layout plan or any other planning document.
PRIMARY SURFACE — A surface longitudinally centered on a runway. When
the runway has a specially prepared hard surface, the primary surface
extends 200 feet beyond each end of that runway. For military runways or
when the runway has no specially prepared hard surface or planned hard
surface, the primary surface ends at each end of that runway. The width of
the primary surface is set forth in § 120-50 of this article. The elevation of
any point on the primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest
point on the runway center line.
PRIVATE AIRPORT — An airport which is privately owned and which is not
open or intended to be open to the public, as defined in 74 Pa.C.S.A. § 5102.
PUBLIC AIRPORT — An airport which is either publicly or privately owned
and which is open to the public, defined in 74 Pa.C.S.A. § 5102.
RUNWAY — A defined area on an airport prepared for landing and takeoff
of aircraft along its length.
STRUCTURE — An object, including a mobile object, constructed or
installed by man, including, but without limitation, buildings, towers,
cranes, smokestacks, earth formation and overhead transmission lines.
TRANSITIONAL SURFACES — These surfaces extend outward at ninetydegree
angles to the runway center line and the runway center line
extended at a slope of seven feet horizontally for each foot vertically from
the sides of the primary and approach surfaces to where they intersect
the horizontal and conical surfaces. Transitional surfaces for those portions
of the precision approach surfaces which project through and beyond the
§ 120-49 ZONING § 120-49
120:675
limits of the conical surface extend a distance of 5,000 feet measured
horizontally from the edge of the approach surface and at ninety-degree
angles to the extended runway center line.
TREE — Any object of natural growth.
UTILITY RUNWAY — A runway that is constructed for and intended to be
used by propeller-driven aircraft of 12,500 pounds' maximum gross weight
or less.
VISUAL RUNWAY — A runway intended solely for the operation of aircraft
using visual approach procedures.
§ 120-50. Establishment of zones.
In order to carry out the provisions of this article there are hereby created
and established certain zones which include all of the land lying beneath
the approach surfaces, transitional surfaces, horizontal surfaces and conical
surfaces as they apply to the Capital City Airport and the Harrisburg
International Airport. Such zones are shown on the Capital City Airport
and Harrisburg International Airport Height Limitation and Zoning District
Map prepared by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, Bureau of
Aviation, and dated Spring 1989, which is attached to this article and made
a part hereof.120 An area located in more than one of the following zones is
considered to be only in the zone with the more restrictive height limitation.
The various zones are hereby established and defined as follows:
A. Utility Runway Visual Approach Surface Zone. The zone is established
beneath the visual approach surface. The inner edge of this zone
coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 250 feet wide.
The zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 1,250 feet at a
horizontal distance of 5,000 feet from the primary surface. Its center
line is the continuation of the center line of the runway.
B. Utility Runway Nonprecision Instrument Approach Surface Zone. The
zone is established beneath the nonprecision instrument approach
surface. The inner edge of this zone coincides with the width of the
primary surface and is 500 feet wide. The zone expands outward
uniformly to a width of 2,000 feet at a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet
from the primary surface. Its center line is the continuation of the
center line of the runway.
C. Runway Larger Than Utility Visual Approach Surface Zone. The zone is
established beneath the visual approach surface. The inner edge of this
zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 500 feet
wide. The zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 1,500 feet at a
horizontal distance of 5,000 feet from the primary surface. Its center
line is the continuation of the center line of the runway.
120. Editor's Note: Said map is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 120-49 § 120-50
120:676
D. Runway Larger Than Utility With a Visibility Minimum Greater Than 3/4
Mile Nonprecision Instrument Approach Surface Zone (Capital City
Airport). The zone is established beneath the nonprecision instrument
approach surface. The inner edge of this zone coincides with the width
of the primary surface and is 500 feet wide. The zone expands outward
uniformly to a width of 3,500 feet at a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet
from the primary surface. Its center line is the continuation of the
center line of the runway.
E. Runway Larger Than Utility With a Visibility Minimum As Low As 3/4
Mile Nonprecision Instrument Approach Surface Zone. The zone is
established beneath the nonprecision instrument approach surface. The
inner edge of this zone coincides with the width of the primary surface
and is 1,000 feet wide. The zone expands outward uniformly to a width
of 4,000 feet at a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet from the primary
surface. Its center line is the continuation of the center line of the
runway.
F. Precision Instrument Runway Approach Surface Zone (Harrisburg
International Airport). The zone is established beneath the precision
instrument approach surface. The inner edge of this zone coincides
with the width of the primary surface and is 1,000 feet wide. The zone
expands outward uniformly to a width of 16,000 feet at a horizontal
distance of 50,000 feet from the primary surface. Its center line is the
continuation of the center line of the runway.
G. Transitional Surface Zones. The zones are established beneath the
transitional surfaces adjacent to each runway and approach surface as
indicated on the Height Limitation and Zoning District Map.121
H. Horizontal Surface Zones. The zone is established beneath the
horizontal surface, 150 feet above the established airport elevation, the
perimeter of which is constructed by swinging arcs of 5,000 feet and
10,000 feet radii from the center of each end of the primary surface of
each runway and connecting the adjacent arcs by drawing lines tangent
to those arcs. The radius of each arc is 5,000 feet for all runways
designated as utility or visual and 10,000 feet for all other runways. The
radius of the arc specified for each end of a runway will have the same
arithmetical value. That value will be the highest determined for either
end of the runway. When a five-thousand-foot are is encompassed by
tangents connecting two adjacent ten-thousand-foot arcs, the fivethousand-
foot arc shall be disregarded on the construction of the
perimeter of the horizontal surface. The Horizontal Surface Zone does
not include the Approach Surface and Transitional Surface Zones.
I. Conical Surface Zone. The zone is established beneath the conical
surface. This zone commences at the periphery of the horizontal surface
and extends outward therefrom a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet.
121. Editor's Note: Said map is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 120-50 ZONING § 120-51
120:677
§ 120-51. Height limitations.
Except as otherwise provided in this article, no structure shall be erected,
altered or maintained and no tree shall be allowed to grow in any zone
created by this article to a height in excess of the applicable height limit
herein established for such zone. Such applicable height limitations are
hereby established for each of the zones in question as follows:
A. Utility Runway Visual Approach Surface Zone: slopes 20 feet outward
for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same elevation
as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 5,000
feet along the extended runway center line.
B. Utility Runway Nonprecision Instrument Approach Surface Zone:
slopes 20 feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and
at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a
horizontal distance of 5,000 feet along the extended runway center line.
C. Runway Larger Than Utility Visual Approach Surface Zone: slopes 20
feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the
same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal
distance of 5,000 feet along the extended runway center line.
D. Runway Larger Than Utility With A Visibility Minimum Greater Than 3/
4 Mile Nonprecision Instrument Approach Surface Zone (Capital City
Airport): slopes 34 feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the
end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending
to a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet along the extended runway
center line.
E. Runway Larger Than Utility With A Visibility Minimum As Low As 3/4
Mile Nonprecision Instrument Approach Surface Zone: slopes 34 feet
outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same
elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance
of 10,000 feet along the extended runway center line.
F. Precision Instrument Runway Approach Surface Zone (Harrisburg
International Airport): slopes 50 feet outward for each foot upward
beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary
surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet along the
extended runway center line; thence, slopes upward 40 feet
horizontally for each foot vertically to an additional horizontal distance
of 40,000 feet along the extended runway center line.
G. Transitional Surface Zones.
(1) Slopes seven feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the
sides of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and the
approach surface and extending to a height of 150 feet above the
airport elevation, which is as follows:
(a) Capital City Airport: 347 feet above mean sea level.
§ 120-51 § 120-51
120:678
§ 120-52. General requirements.
(b) Harrisburg International Airport: 310 feet above mean sea
level.
(2) In addition to the foregoing, when an airport has a precision
instrument runway approach zone, there are established height
limits sloping seven feet outward for each foot upward beginning at
the sides of and at the same elevation as the approach surface and
extending to where they intersect the conical surface. Where the
Precision Instrument Runway Approach Zone projects beyond the
Conical Zone, there are established height limits sloping seven feet
outward for each foot upward beginning at the sides of and at the
same elevation as the approach surface and extending a horizontal
distance of 5,000 feet measured at ninety-degree angles to the
extended runway center line.
H. Horizontal Surface Zone. Established at 150 feet above the established
airport elevation or at a height as follows:
(1) Capital City Airport: 497 feet above mean sea level.
(2) Harrisburg International Airport: 460 feet above mean sea level.
I. Conical Surface Zone: slopes 20 feet outward for each foot upward
beginning at the periphery of the horizontal surface and at 150 feet
above the established airport elevation and extending to a height of 350
feet above the established airport elevation or at a height as follows:
(1) Capital City Airport: 697 feet above mean sea level.
(2) Harrisburg International Airport: 660 feet above mean sea level.
J. Excepted height limitations. Nothing in this article shall be construed
as prohibiting the construction or maintenance of any structure or
growth of any tree to a height up to 75 feet above the surface of the
land.
A. Reasonableness. All airport zoning regulations adopted under this
article shall be reasonable; none shall impose any requirement or
restriction unless it is reasonably necessary to effectuate the purpose of
this article. In determining what regulations it may adopt, each
municipality and joint Airport Zoning Board shall consider, among other
factors, the character of the flying operations expected to be conducted
at the airport, the nature of the terrain within the airport hazard area,
the character of the neighborhood and the uses to which the property to
be zoned is put and adaptable.
B. Use restrictions. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article,
no use may be made of land or water within any zone established by this
article in such manner as to create electrical interference with
navigational signals or radio communication between the airport and
§ 120-51 ZONING § 120-52
120:679
§ 120-53. Permits and variances.
aircraft, make it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights
and others, result in glare in the eyes of pilots using the airport, impair
visibility in the vicinity of the airport, create bird strike hazards or
otherwise in any way endanger or interfere with the landing, takeoff or
maneuvering of aircraft intending to use the airport.
C. Nonconforming uses.
(1) Regulations not retroactive. The regulations prescribed by this
article shall not be construed to require the removal, lowering or
other change or alteration of any structure or tree not conforming
to the regulations as of the effective date of this article or otherwise
interfere with the continuance of any nonconforming use, except as
provided in § 120-53 (relating to permits and variances). Nothing
contained herein shall require any change in the construction,
alteration or intended use of any structure, the construction or
alteration of which was begun prior to the effective date of this
article and which is diligently executed.
(2) Marking and lighting. Notwithstanding the preceding provision of
this subsection, the owner of any existing nonconforming structure
or tree is hereby required to permit the installation, operation and
maintenance thereon or nearby of such markers and lights as shall
be deemed necessary by the Zoning Officer to indicate to the
operators of aircraft in the vicinity of the airport the presence of
such airport obstruction. Such markers and lights shall be
installed, operated and maintained at the expense of the owner.
A. Future uses.
(1) Except as specifically provided in Subsection A(1)(a), (b) or (c)
hereunder, no material change shall be made in the use of land, no
structure shall be erected or otherwise established and no tree
shall be planted in any zone hereby created unless a permit
therefor shall have been applied for and granted. Each application
for a permit shall indicate the purpose for which the permit is
desired, with sufficient particularity to permit it to be determined
whether the resulting use, structure or tree would conform to the
regulations herein prescribed. If such determination is in the
affirmative, the permit shall be granted. No permit for a use
inconsistent with the provisions of this article shall be granted
unless a variance has been approved in accordance with this
§ 120-53D, except as follows:
(a) In the area lying within the limits of the Horizontal Zone and
Conical Zone, no permit shall be required for any tree or
structure less than 75 feet of vertical height above the ground,
except when, because of terrain, land contour or topographic
§ 120-52 § 120-53
120:680
features, such tree or structure would extend above the height
limits prescribed for such zones.
(b) In areas lying within the limits of the Approach Zones but at a
horizontal distance of not less than 4,200 feet from each end of
the runway, no permit shall be required for any tree or
structure less than 75 feet of vertical height above the ground,
except when, because of terrain, land contour or topographic
features, such tree or structure would extend above the height
limit prescribed for such Approach Zones.
(c) In the areas lying within the limits of the Transition Zones
beyond the perimeter of the Horizontal Zones, no permit shall
be required for any tree or structure less than 75 feet of
vertical height above the ground, except when such tree or
structure, because of terrain, land contour or topographic
feature, would extend above the height limit prescribed for
such Transition Zones.
(2) Nothing contained in any of the foregoing exceptions shall be
construed as permitting or intending to permit any construction or
alteration of any structure or growth of any tree in excess of any of
the height limits established by this article, except that no permit is
required to make maintenance repairs to or to replace parts of
existing structures which do not enlarge or increase the height of
an existing structure.
B. Existing uses. Before any nonconforming structure may be replaced,
substantially altered or rebuilt or tree allowed to grow higher or be
replanted, a permit must be secured from the municipality authorizing
the replacement or change. No permit shall be granted that would allow
the establishment or creation of an obstruction or permit a
nonconforming use, structure or tree to become a greater hazard to air
navigation than it was on the effective date of this article or any
amendments thereto or than it is when the application for a permit is
made.
C. Nonconforming uses abandoned or destroyed. Whenever the Zoning
Officer determines that a nonconforming tree or structure has been
abandoned or more than 80% torn down, physically deteriorated or
decayed, no permit shall be granted that would allow such structure or
tree to exceed the applicable height limit or otherwise deviate from this
article.
D. Variance.
(1) Any person desiring to erect any structure or increase the height of
any structure or permit the growth of any object of natural growth
or otherwise use his property in violation of airport zoning
regulations may apply for a variance from the zoning regulations in
question pursuant to § 120-76D. A variance shall only be granted
after the requirements of § 120-76D are satisfied. A variance may
§ 120-53 ZONING § 120-53
120:681
§ 120-53.1. Zoning Hearing Board.
The Zoning Hearing Board shall, in addition to the other powers granted to
it pursuant to § 120-76, have and exercise the following powers:
be allowed where a literal application or enforcement of the
regulations would result in practical difficulty or unnecessary
hardship and the relief granted would not be contrary to the public
interest but would do substantial justice and would be in
accordance with the spirit of the regulations and this article. Any
variance may be granted subject to any reasonable conditions that
the Zoning Hearing Board may deem necessary to effectuate the
purposes of this article. Notwithstanding any other provision of
law, if the Zoning Hearing Board decides to grant a permit or
variance under this article, it shall notify the Department of
Transportation of its decision. This notice shall be in writing and
shall be sent so as to reach the Department at least 10 days before
the date upon which the decision is to issue.
(2) The application for variance shall be accompanied by a
determination from the Federal Aviation Administration as to the
effect of the proposal on the operation of air navigation facilities
and the safe, efficient use of navigable airspace. Additionally, no
application for variance to the requirements of this article may be
considered by the Board of Adjustment unless a copy of the
application has been furnished to the Airport Manager (or person
of equivalent description) for advice as to the aeronautical effects
of the variance. If the Airport Manager (or person of equivalent
description) does not respond to the application within 15 days
after receipt, the Board of Adjustment may act without such input
to grant or deny said application.
E. Hazard marking and lighting. In granting any permit or variance under
this section, the Board shall, if it deems the action advisable to
effectuate the purpose of this article and reasonable under the
circumstances, so condition the permit or variance as to require the
owner of the structure or object of natural growth in question to permit
the municipality, at its own expense, or require the person or persons
requesting the permit or variance to install, operate and maintain
thereon, at the owner's expense, such markers and lights as may be
required by guidelines or regulations adopted by the Federal Aviation
Administration.
F. Conflicts. In the event of conflict between any airport zoning
regulations adopted under this article and any other regulations
applicable to the same area, whether the conflict is with respect to the
height of structures or trees, and the use of land or any other matter
and whether the other regulations were adopted by the municipality
which adopted the airport zoning regulations or by some other
municipality or otherwise, the more stringent limitation or requirement
shall govern and prevail.
§ 120-53 § 120-53.1
120:682
§ 120-53.2. Acquisition of air rights.
In any case in which it is desired to remove, lower or otherwise terminate
a nonconforming structure or use or the approach protection necessary
cannot, because of constitutional limitations, be provided by airport zoning
regulations or it appears advisable that the necessary approach protection
be provided by acquisition of property rights rather than the airport zoning
regulations, the Borough or the municipality or municipal authority owning
the airport or served by it may acquire by purchase, grant or condemnation,
in the manner provided by the law under which municipalities are
authorized to acquire real property for public purposes, such air right,
aviation easement or other estate or interest in the property or
nonconforming structure or use in question as may be necessary to
effectuate the purpose of this article. In the case of the purchase of any
property or any easement or estate or interest therein or the acquisition
thereof by the power of eminent domain, the Borough or municipality or
municipal authority making the purchase or exercising the power shall, in
addition to the damages for the taking, injury or destruction of property,
also pay the cost of the removal and relocation of any structure or any
public utility which is required to be moved to a new location.
A. To hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision or
determination made by the Zoning Officer in the enforcement of this
Article XV.
B. To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of this Article XV
upon which such Zoning Hearing Board may be required to pass.
C. To hear and decide specific variances.
§ 120-53.1 ZONING § 120-53.2
120:683

ARTICLE XVI
Off-Street Parking
§ 120-54. General regulations.
§ 120-55. Required facilities.
A. Off-street parking facilities shall be provided to lessen congestion in the
streets. The facilities required herein shall be available to patrons
throughout the house of operation of the particular business or use for
which such facilities are provided. As used herein, the term "parking
space" includes either covered garage space or uncovered parking lot
space located off the public right-of-way.
B. Outdoor parking spaces and the approaches thereto shall be paved.
Such outdoor parking space shall be deemed to be part of the open
space of the lot on which it is located.
C. A garage or carport may be located wholly or partly inside the walls of
the principal building; the garage shall conform to all accessory
building requirements. The garage may be constructed under a yard or
court, provided that the level of such yard or court shall conform to the
general level of the other yards or courts on the lot. The space above an
underground garage shall be deemed to be part of the open space of the
lot on which it is located.
A. Any of the following buildings hereafter erected and any building
hereafter converted into one of the following buildings and any open
area hereafter used for commercial purposes shall be provided with not
less than minimum parking spaces as set forth below, which spaces
shall be readily accessible to, and within a reasonable distance from,
the buildings served thereby. Such spaces shall be on the same lot as
the principal building or open area, except when otherwise authorized
as a special exception, conforming to the following regulations.
B. Off-street parking space requirements.
Uses Required Parking Spaces
Single-and two-family dwellings 1 for each family or dwelling unit
Home occupation dwellings
[Added 7-21-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-3, approved 7-21-2003]
1 in addition to the required offstreet
parking space number for the
dwelling
Multiple dwellings 1.5 spaces per dwelling unit
Hotels, motels, tourist houses,
boarding- and lodging houses
1 space for each guest room
Churches and schools 1 for each 3.5 seats in an
auditorium or 1 for each 17
classroom seats, whichever is
greater
§ 120-54 ZONING § 120-55
120:685
§ 120-56. Location.
Parking spaces for multiple dwelling buildings or commercial or industrial
uses shall be readily accessible to, and within a reasonable distance from,
the buildings served thereby. Such spaces shall be on the same lot and in
the same zoning district as the principal building or open area, except when
otherwise authorized, as a special exception, conforming to the following
regulations:
Uses Required Parking Spaces
Community buildings and social
halls
1 for each 100 square feet of floor
area
Dance halls, swimming pools,
roller rinks, clubs, lodges and
other similar places
1 for each 100 square feet of floor
area or of water area in swimming
pool
Sports arenas, auditoriums,
theaters, assembly halls
1 for each 3.5 seats
Bowling alleys 5 for each alley
Restaurants, taverns, and
nightclubs
1 for each 2.5 seats
Retail stores and shops 1 for each 120 square feet of floor
area
Food supermarkets 1 for each 200 square feet of floor
area
Funeral homes, mortuaries 5 for each parlor
Furniture or appliance stores 1 for each 200 square feet of floor
area
Banks or professional offices 1 for each 200 square feet of floor
area or fraction thereof
Service stations 2 for each service bay
Manufacturing plants, research
or testing laboratories, bottling
plants
1 for each 1,000 square feet of floor
area, plus 1 for each 2 employees in
the maximum working shift, the
total parking area shall not be less
than 25% of the building floor area
Medical and dental offices 5 spaces for each doctor or dentist
Hospitals, nursing and
convalescing homes
1 for each 3 beds, plus 1 for each
employee
Open areas used for commercial
purposes
At least 1 parking space for each
1,500 square feet of area or
fraction thereof
A. The required parking spaces shall be suitable within 600 feet of the
principal building or open space in question.
§ 120-55 § 120-56
120:686
§ 120-57. Design standards.
The minimum dimensions of parking facilities to be provided shall be as
follows:
B. That such spaces shall be in the same ownership as the principal use to
which they are accessory and shall be subject to deed restrictions
acceptable to the Zoning Hearing Board, binding the owner and his
heirs or assigns to maintain the required number of parking spaces
throughout the life of the principal use.
A. In all districts net parking space per vehicle shall be not less than 10
feet wide and 20 feet long.
B. In all districts, except for single-family dwellings, there shall be no less
than 20 feet of open space between the curbline or edge of any parking
area and the outside wall of any building.
C. Parking lot dimensions shall be no less than those listed in the following
table:
Aisle Width
Angle of
Parking
(degrees)
Parking Bay
Width
(feet)
Depth
from
Curb*
(feet)
One-Way
(feet)
Two-Way
(feet)
90° 10 20 24 24
60° 10 22 18 20
45° 10 21 15 20
30° 10 19 12 20
NOTES:
* Depth from curb is the perpendicular measurement from curb or
edge of the parking lot toward the interior portion of the lot to be
occupied by the parked vehicles and not including any part of the
drive.
D. All dead-end parking lots shall be designed to provide sufficient backup
area for the end stalls of the parking area.
E. Parking areas shall be designed so that each motor vehicle may proceed
to and from parking space provided for it without requiring the moving
of any other motor vehicle.
F. The width of entrance and exit drives shall be a minimum of 12 feet for
one-way use only and a minimum of 20 feet for two-way use, except
where ninety-degree parking is used, in which case the minimum shall
be not less than 24 feet and a maximum of 24 feet at the street line.
§ 120-56 ZONING § 120-57
120:687
§ 120-58. Drainage, surfacing and maintenance standards.
§ 120-59. Lighting requirements.
Any lighting used to illuminate off-street parking or loading areas shall be
arranged so that the direct rays from the luminaries will not fall on any
residential district beyond the property line.
§ 120-60. Loading space.
G. Setback for parking areas shall be provided as follows:
(1) All parking spaces and access drives shall be at least 20 feet from
any multiple dwelling building, commercial building and industrial
building on the lot.
(2) All parking spaces and access drives shall be at least five feet from
any exterior lot line, except where buffer yards are required, in
which case such parking spaces and access drives may not
encroach on the buffer yard area.
(3) Except at entrances and exit drives parking areas shall be
physically separated from any public and/or private streets by a
minimum five-foot planting strip. In no case shall parking areas be
designed to require or encourage cars to back into a public or
private street in order to leave the parking areas.
H. Separate parking areas on a parcel or development shall be physically
separated from one another by eight-foot planting strips.
I. A structure or planting material shall be provided of sufficient height
and density to screen off-street parking lots from the public street's
view and from the ground level of adjoining residential districts.
A. The area of the parking lot, including driveways, shall be graded,
surfaced with asphalt or other suitable material and drained to the
satisfaction of the Municipal Engineer to the extent necessary to
prevent dust, erosion or excessive water flow across streets or
adjoining property.
B. Parking areas shall be kept clean and free from rubbish and debris.
A. In addition to the off-street parking space required above, all
commercial and industrial establishments, hospitals or sanitariums and
other similar uses shall provide adequate off-street area for loading and
unloading of supplies to and from vehicles.
B. At least one loading berth shall be provided; however, should the gross
floor area of the main building and buildings accessory thereto used for
commercial and/or industrial purposes exceed 10,000 square feet, one
additional loading berth shall be provided for each 10,000 square feet
§ 120-57 § 120-60
120:688
of gross floor area. The off-street loading berth shall be not less than 10
feet wide and 35 feet in length and 14 feet in height.
C. Hotels shall have at least one loading berth, with an additional loading
berth when the gross floor area exceeds 50,000 square feet.
§ 120-60 ZONING § 120-60
120:689

ARTICLE XVII
Signs
§ 120-61. Purpose; compliance with article required. [Amended
10-18-1999 by Ord. No. 99-4, approved 10-18-1999]
§ 120-62. Regulations in residential districts.
The following types of signs, and no other, shall be permitted in residential
districts:
A. Purpose. This article is primarily intended to:
(1) Promote and maintain overall community beautification.
(2) Establish reasonable time, place and manner regulations on the
exercise of free speech, without regulating content of signs.
(3) Promote traffic safety by avoiding distractions and sight distance
obstructions.
(4) Protect property values and ensure compatibility with the
character of neighboring, existing and planned land use.
(5) Carry out the goals of the Pennsylvania Outdoor Advertising
Control Act of 1971 (36 P.S. § 2718.101 et seq.).
B. Compliance with article required. Signs may be erected and maintained
only when in compliance with the provisions of this article and any and
all other ordinances and regulations relating to the erection, alteration
or maintenance of signs and similar devices.
A. Signs advertising the sale or rental of the premises upon which they are
erected by the owner or broker or any other person interested in the
sale or rental of such premises may be erected and maintained,
provided:
(1) The size of any such sign is not in excess of six square feet.
(2) Not more than two signs are placed upon any property in single and
separate ownership, unless such property fronts upon more than
one street, in which event two such signs may be erected on each
frontage.
B. Signs advertising the sale and development of the premises upon which
they are erected, when erected in connection with the development of
the premises by a builder, contractor, developer or other person
interested in such sale or development, may be erected and maintained,
provided:
(1) The size of any sign is not in excess of 20 square feet.
(2) Not more than two signs are placed upon any property in single and
separate ownership, unless such property fronts upon more than
§ 120-61 ZONING § 120-62
120:691
§ 120-63. Business identification signs.
Signs bearing the name of the occupant and products manufactured,
processed, sold or displayed may be erected and maintained on the
premises in commercial and industrial districts subject to the following
regulations:
one street, in which event two such signs may be erected on each
frontage.
C. Signs indicating the location and direction of premises available for, or
in process of, development, but not erected upon such premises, and
having inscribed thereon the name of the owner, developer, builder or
agent may be erected and maintained, provided:
(1) The size of any such sign is not in excess of six square feet and not
in excess of four feet in length.
(2) Not more than one such sign is erected on each 500 feet of street
frontage.
D. Signs bearing the word "sold" or the word "rented," with the name of
the persons effecting the sale or rental, provided the conditions in
Subsection A hereof, are complied with.
E. Signs of mechanics, painters and other artisans during the period such
persons are performing work on the premises on which such signs are
erected, provided:
(1) The size thereof is not in excess of 12 square feet.
(2) Such signs are removed promptly upon completion of the work.
F. Signs indicating the private nature of a driveway or trespassing signs,
provided that the size of any such sign shall not exceed two square feet.
G. Signs of schools, colleges, churches, hospitals, sanitariums or other
institutions of a similar nature, provided:
(1) The size of any such sign is not in excess of 20 square feet.
(2) Not more than two signs are placed on a property in single and
separate ownership, unless such property fronts upon more than
one street, in which event two such signs may be erected on each
frontage.
H. Signs advertising home occupations, which signs shall be not larger
than 6 inches by 18 inches, bearing the name and occupation (words
only) of the practitioner. Such signs may be illuminated if such lighting
is shielded or indirect, but shall not include neon signs.
A. Existing business identification signs on existing nonconforming uses
may be continued and maintained, provided that such signs shall
conform to the general regulations in § 120-65, and further provided
§ 120-62 § 120-63
120:692
§ 120-64. Billboards.
Billboards or advertising signboards, including poster panels, bulletins and
the like, may be erected and maintained in commercial and industrial
districts, except C-N and C-C Districts, under the following restrictions and
controls:
that such signs are not more nonconforming in any measurement than
the previous signs, including but not limited to height and total square
feet. [Amended 10-18-1999 by Ord. No. 99-4, approved
10-18-1999]
B. The sign surface area on lots where less than 10% of the lot area is
covered by buildings shall not exceed four square feet in area for each
lineal foot of street frontage.
C. The sign surface area on lots where 10% or more of the lot area is
covered by buildings shall be determined as follows:
(1) Lower level (story) signs. The total permitted sign surface area of
all business identification signs located on a building within the
lower two stories or 26 feet, whichever is lower, and/or
freestanding on the lot shall not exceed an area equal to 25% of
said lower two-story area of the building facade to which the sign is
oriented and/or attached; provided, however, that if more than one
sign is erected, the total permitted sign surface area shall be
reduced by 1/5 for each additional sign.
(2) Upper level (story) signs. The permitted sign surface area of all
business identification signs located on a building above the first
two stories shall not exceed an area equal to 10% of the area of the
building facade above the second story to which the sign is
attached; provided, however, that if more than one sign is erected,
the total permitted sign surface area shall be reduced by 1/5 for
each additional sign.
(3) Lower and upper level signs may be continuous; however, if not,
there shall be at least 13 feet or one story, whichever is lesser,
between upper level and lower level signs.
(4) Rooftop business identification signs shall be prohibited; no rooftop
signs shall be rented as billboards. [Amended 10-18-1999 by
Ord. No. 99-4, approved 10-18-1999]
(5) Existing business identification signs on existing nonconforming
uses may be continued and maintained, provided that such signs
shall conform to the general regulations below.
(6) Each window or door sign shall not exceed 30% of each window or
door area. [Added 10-18-1999 by Ord. No. 99-4, approved
10-18-1999; amended 9-20-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-9,
approved 9-20-2004]
§ 120-63 ZONING § 120-64
120:693
§ 120-65. General restrictions.
The following regulations shall apply to all permitted sign uses:
A. In commercial districts, no advertising signs shall be permitted to be
erected upon or within 200 feet of the premises containing a unified,
integrated shopping center.
B. In other commercial districts, advertising sign structures are limited to
only one for each street frontage. No such structure shall contain over
one advertising sign per facing, nor shall any individual advertising sign
exceed 20 feet in vertical measurements or 25 feet in length.
C. No advertising sign shall be permitted to be erected upon the roof of
any building, and advertising signs shall be required to set back 30 feet
from the front lot line or to the established building line, whichever is
less.
D. No advertising sign shall be permitted to be erected within 50 feet of
any adjoining residential district if visible from and designed to face
into such district.
E. Advertising signs, if lighted, shall be indirectly illuminated, and all such
signs shall conform to the height regulations for buildings in the district
in which they are located.
A. Signs must be constructed of durable materials, must be maintained in
good condition and not allowed to become dilapidated, and shall not be
hand-written. [Amended 9-20-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-9, approved
9-20-2004]
B. Signs shall not be placed in such a position that they will cause danger
to traffic on a street by obscuring the view.
C. Signs, other than an official sign, shall not be erected within the lines of
any street.
D. Signs and banners (except banners extending across streets under the
provisions of § 120-65R) that project beyond property lines or over
public sidewalk areas shall be a maximum width and height of four feet
at a minimum height above the sidewalk of 10 feet. [Amended
10-18-1999 by Ord. No. 99-4, approved 10-18-1999; 9-20-2004 by
Ord. No. 2004-9, approved 9-20-2004]
E. Signs shall not project above the height limit permitted in any district in
which they are located.
F. No sign shall be permitted which rotates and/or causes interruption or
flashing of light.
G. All signs erected within the right-of-way of a state highway shall be in
accordance with the regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation.
§ 120-64 § 120-65
120:694
H. A permit shall be required for the erection, alteration or reconstruction
of billboards or advertising sign boards, including poster panels,
bulletins, temporary or permanent business signs and the like. No sign
permit shall be issued until written permission from the building owner
for the placement of the sign is given to the zoning officer. [Amended
10-18-1999 by Ord. No. 99-4, approved 10-18-1999]
I. A permit shall not be required for the erection, alteration or
maintenance of any signs permitted in a residential district, with the
exception of a home occupation sign, for which a permit shall be
required. [Amended 10-18-1999 by Ord. No. 99-4, approved
10-18-1999]
J. All signs shall be removed when the circumstances leading to their
erection no longer apply, including, but not limited, to the following
circumstances: [Amended 10-18-1999 by Ord. No. 99-4, approved
10-18-1999]
(1) Following the closing of any business, any and all related exterior
signs, fixtures, hardware, frame work and bracing used to support
signs which hang over a sidewalk or other pedestrian walkway will
be removed within 30 days of the effective business closing date.
(2) Following the closing of any business:
(a) Signs must be changed to a blank face or to a "for rent, lease or
sale" sign.
(b) Internal light bulbs inside of the sign must not be visible.
(3) It shall be the responsibility of the building owner to ensure that
signs are removed or changed to a blank facing.
K. All nonconforming signs, billboards or advertising signboards,
including poster panels, bulletins and the like, shall be made to conform
to all pertinent regulations or be removed within two years after the
effective date of this chapter, except that business identification signs
on legal nonconforming uses may be continued and maintained as a
part of the legal nonconforming use.
L. Once an existing nonconforming sign is removed, it shall only be
replaced with a sign that conforms to this chapter. [Added 10-18-1999
by Ord. No. 99-4, approved 10-18-1999]
M. Freestanding signs. [Added 10-18-1999 by Ord. No. 99-4, approved
10-18-1999; amended 9-20-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-9, approved
9-20-2004]
(1) Movable freestanding signs.
(a) Movable freestanding signs (example: A-frame signs) are
permitted on the sidewalks.
§ 120-65 ZONING § 120-65
120:695
(b) Movable freestanding signs are subject to the following
conditions:
[1] Must be of a framed design.
[2] Must allow 36 inches of clearance for pedestrian traffic.
[3] Must be weatherproof.
[4] Must be no larger than four feet in height and two feet in
width.
[5] Must be located on the sidewalk adjacent to the property
within which the business is located.
[6] Does not require the use of electric power cords.
(c) The building owner, who will be jointly responsible with any
other sign permittee for the property (lessee, etc.) for
noncompliance, must indicate his, her or its consent in writing
to the use of the movable freestanding sign.
(d) Signs are subject to the same removal rules as any other sign
for a closed business; see § 120-65J.
(e) Signs are limited to one per business.
(2) Nonmovable freestanding signs:
(a) Are permitted if the building in which the business is located is
set back 30 feet or greater from the existing sidewalk and/or
street.
(b) Must identify the business name which it represents and may
contain contact telephone number, Web site address, and or
specialty sales/service statement.
(c) Shall be a maximum of four feet in height and five feet in width.
(d) Must be supported by pole, pylons or similar standards in the
ground and shall be a maximum height at the top of the sign of
25 feet.
(e) Must be weatherproof.
(f) Must be located on the property outside of the sidewalk area.
(g) Are subject to the same removal rules as any other sign for a
closed business; see § 120-65J.
(h) Are limited to one per property.
(i) Are permitted to have one message display sign permanently
affixed to the pole of a nonmovable freestanding sign and must
§ 120-65 § 120-65
120:696
be located directly below said nonmovable freestanding sign
not to exceed four feet in height and five feet in width.
(j) The building owner, who will be jointly responsible with any
other sign permittee for the property (lessee, etc.) for
noncompliance, must indicate his, her or its consent in writing
to the use of the nonmovable freestanding sign.
N. Temporary signs. [Added 10-18-1999 by Ord. No. 99-4, approved
10-18-1999]
(1) Temporary signs are not to be displayed for more than 30 days in
any calendar year. [Amended 9-20-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-9,
approved 9-20-2004]
(2) A permit is required for all temporary signs in any nonresidential
area, with the exception of signs indicating sale or rent of the
property and signs of contractors while they are actually working
on the property or charitable event signs.
(3) No temporary sign with an area of over 75 square feet is permitted.
(4) The total combined area of all temporary signs in use at any one
time shall not exceed 75 square feet.
(5) No temporary sign shall exceed 30 inches in height or 30 feet in
width.
(6) No permit fee shall be required for temporary signs.
(7) All temporary signs displayed outside the building must be
weatherproof.
(8) The building owner, who will be responsible for noncompliance,
must indicate his, her or its consent in writing to the use of the
temporary sign.
O. Business signs advertising daily specials, discounts, special events or
other daily changing activity: [Added 10-18-1999 by Ord. No. 99-4,
approved 10-18-1999]
(1) Must be framed and securely attached to building.
(2) Must be weatherproof.
(3) Must not exceed three square feet in area, 18 inches in length or 24
inches in width.
(4) Are to be considered in the overall square footage of allowable sign
area except in the case of business existing at the time of adoption
of this article and which are already at their allowable sign area.
(5) The permit fee shall be based on the square footage of sign.
§ 120-65 ZONING § 120-65
120:697
(6) The building owner, who will be responsible for noncompliance,
must indicate his, her or its consent in writing to the use of the
temporary sign.
(7) Are subject to the same removal rules as any other sign for a closed
business.
P. Garage sale and charitable event signs: [Added 10-18-1999 by Ord.
No. 99-4, approved 10-18-1999]
(1) Do not require a permit.
(2) Must contain the phone number or address of the person
responsible for removing signs; any sign not containing this
information will be removed immediately upon discovery by the
Borough.
(3) May not be displayed more than 15 days prior to the event and
must be removed within seven days following the event; signs
remaining after seven days will be subject to a fine equal to the cost
incurred by the Borough for removal.
Q. Mobile signs. [Added 10-18-1999 by Ord. No. 99-4, approved
10-18-1999]
(1) These standards recognize a sign on a mobile stand as a particular
type of sign that has the characteristics of a temporary sign but
that has been inappropriately used as a permanent sign. This
subsection is based on the policy that if the owner or user desires to
regularly display a sign for regularly changing messages, he, she or
it must erect a permanent sign meeting all of the requirements of
this article.
(2) Mobile signs are prohibited in all districts, except that a new
principal commercial use in the commercial light industrial
manufacturing or heavy industrial/manufacturing districts may use
one sign on a mobile stand with a maximum sign area of 20 square
feet for a maximum of 60 days; thereafter a permanent permitted
sign is required.
(3) A permit is required for this temporary use of a mobile sign.
(4) To ensure that a sign on a portable stand is removed within the
sixty-day limit, the applicant shall be required to pay a $150 deposit
to the Borough. This deposit shall be refunded if the sign is
removed within the sixty-day limit; thereafter, the sign may be
removed by the Borough, which shall apply the $150 deposit to the
costs of removal. Refusal to remove the sign after the 60 days shall
also constitute a zoning violation and be subject to the penalties
and enforcement procedures of this chapter.
R. Banners (extending across streets). Council must receive a request 90
days prior to the proposed date for the banner to be hung. All necessary
§ 120-65 § 120-65
120:698
§ 120-66. Nonconforming signs.
Existing signs may be continued, provided that signs conform to the general
requirements as set forth in § 120-65 above, of this article.
clearances must be presented, in writing, with the request. The banner
must meet all the requirements of this article. [Added 10-18-1999 by
Ord. No. 99-4, approved 10-18-1999]
S. Posting of street addresses. [Added 10-18-1999 by Ord. No. 99-4,
approved 10-18-1999]
(1) The street number address shall be displayed on all principal
structures, located on the mail box or on or abutting the front door,
as well as at the back of each property.
(2) Each number shall be three inches in height. Each number should
be visible from a street.
§ 120-65 ZONING § 120-66
120:699

ARTICLE XVIII
Motor Vehicle Access
§ 120-67. Scope of article.
Wherever motor vehicle access is provided from the street, or private road,
onto the lot, the following regulations shall apply.
§ 120-68. Accessways, driveways and curbs.
Access to the lot shall comply with the following regulations:
A. Access shall be by not more than two driveways for each 100 feet
frontage on any street.
B. No two of said driveways shall be closer to each other than 12 feet, and
no driveway shall be closer to a side property line than three feet, and
no flare shall cross an extended side property line.
C. Each driveway shall be paved and shall be not more than 35 feet in
width, measured at right angles to the center line of the driveway,
except as increased by permissible curb return radii. The entire flare of
any return radius shall fall within the right-of-way.
D. Driveways shall not cross the street right-of-way line within 40 feet of
the street right-of-way line of an intersecting street and in no case less
than 10 feet from the point of tangency when the intersecting street
lines are joined by a curve. Notwithstanding the above and when
deemed necessary for safety by the Planning Commission and/or the
Borough Council, this dimension shall be increased for driveways into
shopping centers or other commercial, industrial, public or institutional
uses.
E. Driveways shall not cross the street right-of-way within five feet of fire
hydrant, catch basin or drain inlet.
F. Driveways shall not cross the street right-of-way within 40 feet of
another driveway on the same lot, except that in the case where dual
access drives are deemed necessary to permit safe ingress and egress,
these dimensions may be reduced to not less than 12 feet between
access drives.
G. Driveways shall not cross the street right-of-way in all multifamily,
commercial and industrial districts within 20 feet of a property line,
unless two adjoining property owners mutually agree in a legally
recorded instrument to a common driveway.
H. For nondwelling uses, where there is an existing curb and gutter or
sidewalk on the street, a safety island along the entire frontage of the
property shall be provided, except for the permitted driveways. On the
two ends and street side of each such island shall be constructed a
concrete curb, the height, location and structural specifications of
§ 120-67 ZONING § 120-68
120:701
which shall be approved by the Municipal Engineer. Maximum and
minimum curb return radii permitted and minimum driveway approach
angles to the center line of the street are required as shown on Plate
1,122 attached to this chapter and made by this reference as much a part
of this chapter as if fully described and detailed herein.
I. For nondwelling uses, where there is no existing curb and gutter or
sidewalk, a curb, fence or pipe rail not exceeding two feet nor less than
eight inches in height, as shown on Plate 1,123 attached to this chapter,
shall be constructed along the entire length of the property line, except
in front of the permitted driveways.
J. For commercial and industrial districts when deemed necessary to
permit safe ingress and egress, acceleration and deceleration lanes
paralleling the street shall be installed at the expense of the property
owners.
K. General safety requirements; sight distance. Driveways shall be located
in safe relationship to sight distance and barriers to vision, and shall not
exceed a slope of 10% within 12 feet of the street line. Where drives
enter a bank through a cut, unless a retaining wall is used, the side
slopes of the cut shall be graded to not more than 1/2 foot vertical to
one foot horizontal within 10 feet of the point the drive intersects with
the right-of-way line.
L. Submission of plan. A scale drawing of proposed off-street parking and
loading areas, access drives and walks shall be submitted as part of the
required plot plan. Any plan requiring access onto a state highway shall
be approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation in
addition to Borough Council approval.
122. Editor's Note: A copy of Plate 1 is on file in the office of the Borough Secretary.
123. Editor's Note: A copy of Plate 1 is on file in the office of the Borough Secretary.
§ 120-68 § 120-68
120:702
ARTICLE XIX
Administration and Enforcement
§ 120-69. Amendments.
The Borough Council may, from time to time, on its own motion or on
petition or recommendation of the Planning Commission, amend,
supplement or repeal any of the regulations and provisions of this chapter
after public notice and hearing. Before the public hearing, each proposed
amendment, except those coming from the Planning Commission, must
be referred to the Planning Commission for its recommendations at least
30 days prior to the hearing on such amendment. If, after any public
hearing held upon an amendment, the proposed amendment is reversed or
further revised to include land not previously affected by it, the Borough
Council shall hold another public hearing before proceeding to vote on
the amendment. At least 30 days prior to the hearing on the ordinance
or amendments by the local governing body, the Borough Planning
Commission shall submit the proposed ordinance or amendments to the
County Planning agency for recommendations.
§ 120-70. Procedure upon curative amendments.
The procedure upon curative amendments shall be in accordance with the
requirements of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247, as
amended, Section 609.1.124
§ 120-71. Content of public notice.
Public notice of proposed zoning ordinances and amendments shall include
either the full text thereof or a brief summary setting forth the principal
provisions in reasonable detail and a reference to a place within the
municipality where copies of the proposed ordinance or amendment may be
examined, in addition to the time and place of hearing.
§ 120-72. Content of publication after enactment.
After enactment, if the advertisement of a zoning ordinance or amendment
is required by other laws respecting the advertisement of ordinances, such
advertisement may consist solely of a reference to the place or places within
the municipality where copies of such ordinance or amendment shall be
obtainable for a charge not greater than the cost thereof and available for
examination without charge. Zoning ordinances and amendments may be
incorporated into official ordinance books by reference with the same force
and effect as if duly recorded therein.
§ 120-73. Appointment of Zoning Officer; powers.
For the administration of this Zoning Chapter, a Zoning Officer, who may not
hold any elective office in the municipality, shall be appointed. The Zoning
124. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10609.1.
§ 120-69 ZONING § 120-73
120:703
Officer shall administer this Zoning Chapter in accordance with its literal
terms, and shall not have the power to permit any construction or any use
or change of use which does not conform to this Zoning Chapter.
§ 120-74. Duties of Zoning Officer.
It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer, and he is hereby given the power
and authority, to enforce the provisions of this chapter. The Zoning Officer
shall examine all applications for permits, issue permits for construction
and uses which are in accordance with the requirements of this chapter,
record and file all applications for permits with accompanying plans and
documents and make such reports as the Borough Council may require.
Permits for construction and uses which are a special exception or a
variance to requirements of this chapter shall be issued only upon written
order of the Zoning Hearing Board.
§ 120-75. Appeals.
All appeals from decisions of the Zoning Officer shall be taken in the manner
set forth in Article X, Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (Act 247),
as amended.125
§ 120-76. Appointment of Zoning Hearing Board; powers and
duties.
The Borough Council shall appoint a Zoning Hearing Board, which shall
have the number of members and such powers and authority as set forth in
Article IX of Act 247 of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as enacted or
hereafter amended. The duly established Zoning Hearing Board shall have
the following functions:
A. Hearings. The Board shall conduct hearings and make decisions in
accordance with Section 908, Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code (Act 247), as amended.126 Notice shall be given to the public, the
applicant, the county planning agency, the Zoning Officer, such other
persons as the Borough Council shall designate by ordinance and any
person who has made timely request for the same. Notices shall be
given at such time and in such manner as prescribed by ordinance or, in
the absence of ordinance provision, by rules of the Board. The Borough
Council may establish reasonable fees based on cost, to be paid by the
applicant and persons requesting any notice not required by ordinance.
B. Appeals. The Board shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by
the appellant that the Zoning Officer has failed to follow prescribed
procedures or has misinterpreted or misapplied any provision of this
chapter or map or any valid rule or regulation governing the action of
125. Editor's Note: Said Article X was repealed in 1988 by P.L. 1329, No. 170. See now 53 P.S.
§ 11001-A et seq.
126. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10908.
§ 120-73 § 120-76
120:704
the Zoning Officer. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to deny
the appellant the right to proceed directly in court where appropriate.
C. Challenge to validity. Except as provided in Subsection D below,
relating to variances, the Board shall have no power to pass upon the
validity of any provision of any ordinance or map adopted by the
Borough Council. Recognizing that challenges to the validity of any
ordinance or map may present issues of fact and interpretation which
may lie within the special competence of the Board and to facilitate
speedy disposition of such challenges by a court, the Board may hear all
challenges wherein the validity of the ordinance or map presents any
issue of fact or interpretation not hitherto properly determined at a
hearing before another competent agency or body and shall take
evidence and make a record thereon as provided in Subsection A above.
At the conclusion of the hearing, the Board shall decide all contested
questions of interpretation and make findings on all relevant issues of
fact, which shall become part of the record on appeal to court.
D. Variances. The Board shall hear requests for variances where it is
alleged that the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance inflict unnecessary
hardship upon the applicant. The Board shall prescribe the form of
application and require preliminary application to the Zoning Officer.
The Board may grant a variance, provided the following findings are
made where relevant in a given case:
(1) That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions,
including irregularity, narrowness or shallowness of lot size or
shape or exceptional topographical or other physical conditions
peculiar to the particular property and that the unnecessary
hardship is due to such conditions and not the circumstances or
conditions generally created by the provisions of this Zoning
Chapter in the neighborhood or district in which the property is
located.
(2) That, because of such physical circumstances or conditions, there
is no possibility that the property can be developed in strict
conformity with the provisions of this Zoning Chapter, and the
authorization of a variance is therefore necessary to enable the
reasonable use of the property.
(3) That such unnecessary hardship had not been created by the
appellant.
(4) That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential
character of the neighborhood or district in which the property is
located nor substantially or permanently impair the appropriate
use or development of adjacent property nor be detrimental to the
public welfare.
(5) That the variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum
variance which will afford relief and represent the least
modification possible of the regulation in issue. In granting any
§ 120-76 ZONING § 120-76
120:705
variance, the Board may attach such reasonable conditions and
safeguards as it may deem necessary to implement the purposes of
this Zoning Chapter.
E. Special exceptions. In this chapter, special exceptions may be granted
or denied by the Board pursuant to expressed standards and criteria.
The Board shall hear and decide requests for such special exceptions in
accordance with such standards and criteria. In granting a special
exception, the Board may attach such reasonable conditions and
safeguards, in addition to those expressed in this chapter, as it may
deem necessary to implement the purposes of this chapter. The Board
shall pursue the following procedure:
(1) The Board's decision to grant a permit for special exception use
shall be made only after public notice and hearing. Such permit
shall apply specifically to the application and plans submitted and
presented at said public hearing. Any subsequent amendments or
additions shall be subject to review and public hearing by the
Zoning Hearing Board as a special exception.
(2) No application for a permit shall be granted by the Zoning Hearing
Board for any special exception use until said Board has first
received and considered an advisory report thereon from the
Planning Commission with respect to the location to the needs and
growth pattern of the Borough of Steelton and, where appropriate,
with reference to the adequacy of the site area and the
arrangement of buildings, driveways, parking areas, off-street
truck loading spaces and other pertinent features of the site plan.
The Planning Commission shall have 30 days from the date of its
receipt of the application within which to file its report thereon. In
the event that said Commission shall fail to file its report within
such 30 days, such application shall be deemed to have been
approved by said Planning Commission. The Commission may have
representation at the public hearing held by the Zoning Hearing
Board on such application. After receipt of the report, the Zoning
Hearing Board shall hear the application in the same manner and
under the same procedure as it is empowered by law and ordinance
to hear cases and make exceptions to the provisions of this Zoning
Chapter. The Zoning Hearing Board may thereafter direct the
Zoning Officer to issue such permit if, in its judgment, any one of
such cases will not be detrimental to the health, safety and general
welfare of the Borough of Steelton and is deemed necessary for its
convenience.
(3) A special exception use for which a permit is granted by the Zoning
Hearing Board pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be
construed to be a conforming use.
F. Parties appellant before the Board. Appeals under Subsection B above,
and proceedings to challenge an ordinance under Subsection C above,
may be filed with the Board, in writing, by any officer or agency of the
§ 120-76 § 120-76
120:706
Borough of Steelton or any person aggrieved. Requests for variance
under Subsection D above, and special exception under Subsection E
above, may be filed with the Board by any landowner or any tenant with
the permission of such landowner.
(1) Time limitations. The time limitations for raising certain issues and
filing certain proceedings with the Board shall be the following:
(a) No issue of alleged defect in the process of enactment of any
ordinance or map or any amendment thereto shall be raised in
any proceeding filed with the Board later than 30 days from the
time such ordinance, map or amendment takes effect, unless
the person raising such issues alleges and proves that he failed
to receive adequate notice of the enactment or amendment. If
such person succeeded to his interest after the enactment of
the ordinances, adequate notice to his predecessor in interest
shall be deemed adequate notice to him.
(b) No person shall be allowed to file any proceeding with the
Board later than 30 days after any application for development,
preliminary or final, has been approved by an appropriate
Borough officer, agency or body if such proceeding is designed
to secure reversal or limit the approval in any manner, unless
such person alleges and proves that he failed to receive
adequate notice of such approval.
(c) If such person has succeeded to his interest after such
approval, adequate notice to his predecessor in interest shall
be deemed adequate notice to him.
(2) Stay of proceedings.
(a) Upon filing of any proceeding referred to in this section and
during its pendency before the Board, all development
pursuant to any challenged ordinance, order or approval of the
Zoning Officer or any agency or body and all official action
thereunder shall be stayed, unless the Zoning Officer or any
other appropriate agency or body certifies to the Board facts
indicating that such stay would cause imminent peril to life or
property, in which case, the development or official action shall
not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may
be granted by the Board or the court having jurisdiction of
zoning appeals on petition after notice to the Zoning Officer or
other appropriate agency or body.
(b) When an application for development, preliminary or final, has
been duly approved and proceedings designed to reverse or
limit the approval are filed with the Board by persons other
than the applicant, the applicant may petition the court having
jurisdiction of zoning appeals to order such persons to post
bond as a condition of continuing the proceedings before the
Board. The question of whether or not such petition should be
§ 120-76 ZONING § 120-76
120:707
§ 120-77. Permits.
granted and the amount of the bond shall be within the sound
discretion of the court.
A. Requirements of permits. A building permit, where the municipality
issues such permits, or zoning permit shall be required prior to the
erection, addition or alteration of any building or portion thereof; prior
to the use or change in use of a building or land; and prior to the change
or extension of a nonconforming use. It shall be unlawful for any person
to commence work for the erection or alteration of any building or for a
change in land use until a permit has been duly issued therefor. No such
building permit or zoning permit shall be required in case of normal
maintenance activities, minor repairs and alterations which do not
structurally change a building or structure.
B. Application for permits. All applications for permits shall be
accompanied by plans in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing the actual
shape and dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the exact size and
location of any buildings existing on the lot, the lines within which the
proposed building or structure shall be erected or altered, the existing
and intended use of each building or part of a building, the number of
families or dwelling units the building is designed to accommodate and
such information as may be necessary to determine compliance with
this chapter and all other ordinances. One copy of such plans shall be
returned to the owner when such plans shall be approved by the Zoning
Officer. All applications with accompanying plans and documents shall
become a public record after a permit is issued or denied.
C. Issuance of permits. No permit shall be issued until the Zoning Officer
has certified that the proposed building, addition or alteration complies
with all the provisions of this chapter, as well as with all the provisions
of an existing or hereafter enacted building code.127 A permit issued
hereunder shall become void 12 months after the issuance date.
D. Temporary permits. A temporary permit may be authorized by the
Zoning Hearing Board for a nonconforming structure or use which it
deems necessary to promote the proper development of the community,
provided that such nonconforming structure or use shall be completely
removed upon expiration of the permit without cost to the municipality.
Such permits shall be issued for a specified period of time not to exceed
one year, and may be renewed annually for an aggregate period not
exceeding three years.
E. Certificate of nonconformance.
(1) A certificate of nonconformance shall be issued by the Zoning
Officer to the owner of any property which at the time of the
127. Editor's Note: See Ch. 44, Building Construction; and Ch. 108, Uniform Construction
Codes.
§ 120-76 § 120-77
120:708
§ 120-78. Referral of special exception applications.
Applications for any special exception permitted by this chapter shall be
made to the Zoning Hearing Board through the Zoning Officer. The Zoning
Hearing Board shall refer the matter to the Planning Commission for report
thereon as to its effect on the comprehensive planning of the Borough of
Steelton pursuant to § 120-76E.
§ 120-79. Fees.
§ 120-80. Inspections.
It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer or his duly appointed
representative to make the following minimum number of inspections of
property for which a permit has been issued:
effective date of this chapter does not conform to the provisions
of this chapter, which certificate identifies the nonconforming uses
and nonconforming structures located on the owner's property;
and the issuance of such certificates shall be registered in the
records of the municipality as follows:
(a) Such certificates of nonconformance shall be issued within 90
days after the effective date of this chapter.
(b) The certificate of nonconformance shall set forth in detail all of
the nonconforming conditions of said property.
(c) A copy of the certificate of nonconformance shall be retained
by the Zoning Officer for the municipal registration.
(2) This certificate shall be for the purpose of ensuring the owner the
right to continue a nonconforming use in accordance with the
regulations of this chapter.
A. The Borough Council shall establish a schedule of fees, charges and
expenses, as well as a collection procedure for building permits,
certificates of occupancy, appeals, variances, amendments, bonds and
other matters pertaining to this chapter. The schedule of fees shall be
posted in the office of the Zoning Officer and may be altered or
amended only by the Borough Council.
B. Until all applicable fees, charges and expenses have been paid in full,
no action shall be taken on any application or appeal.
A. At the beginning of construction, a record shall be made indicating the
time and date of inspection and the finding of the Zoning Officer in
regard to conformance of the construction with plans submitted with
the application for the building. If the actual construction does not
conform to the application, a written notice of violation shall be issued
by the Zoning Officer, and such violation shall be discontinued. Upon
§ 120-77 ZONING § 120-80
120:709
§ 120-81. Certificate of use.
§ 120-82. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-20-1991 by Ord. No.
91-3, approved 5-20-1991]
proper correction of the violation and receipt of written notice from the
Zoning Officer, construction shall proceed.
B. At the completion of construction, a record shall be made indicating the
time and date of the inspection, the findings of the Zoning Officer in
regard to conformance to this chapter and the opinion of the Zoning
Officer in regard to the issuance of a certificate of use permit.
A. A "certificate of use" shall be a statement issued by the Zoning Officer
setting forth either that a building, structure or parcel of land complies
with the provisions of this chapter, or that a building or structure
lawfully may be employed for specified uses under the provisions of this
chapter, or both.
B. No vacant land shall be occupied or used and no structure or part of a
structure hereafter erected, structurally altered or changed in use shall
be occupied or used until a certificate of use shall have been regularly
issued therefor by the Zoning Officer.
C. A certificate of use, either for whole or part of a new building or for the
alteration of an existing building, shall be applied for coincident with
the application for a building permit, and shall be issued within 15 days
after the erection or alteration of such building or part shall have been
completed in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
D. A certificate of use for the use or occupancy of vacant land or for a
change in the use of land or for a change in the use of an existing
building shall be applied for and issued before any such land shall be
occupied or used or such land or building changed in use; and such
certificate shall be issued within 15 days after application has been
made, provided such proposed use is in conformity with the provisions
of this chapter.
E. A certificate of use for changing or extending a nonconforming use,
existing at the time of the passage of this chapter or of an amendment
thereto, shall be applied for and issued before any such nonconforming
use shall be changed or extended. Such certificate shall be issued
within 15 days after application has been made, provided such
proposed change or extension is in conformity with the provisions of
this chapter.
F. A record of all certificates of use shall be kept on file in the office of the
Zoning Officer, and a copy shall be furnished on request to any person
having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building or land affected.
A. Enforcement notice.
§ 120-80 § 120-82
120:710
(1) If it appears to the Borough that a violation of this chapter has
occurred, the Borough shall initiate enforcement proceedings by
sending an enforcement notice as provided in this section.
(2) The enforcement notice shall be sent to the owner of record of the
parcel on which the violation has occurred, to any person who has
filed a written request to receive enforcement notices regarding
that parcel and to any other person requested, in writing, by the
owner of record.
(3) An enforcement notice shall state at least the following;
(a) The name of the owner of record and any other person against
whom the Borough intends to take action.
(b) The location of the property in violation.
(c) The specific violation with a description of the requirements
which have not been met, citing in each instance the applicable
provisions of this chapter.
(d) The date before which the steps for compliance must be
commenced and the date before which the steps must be
completed.
(e) That the recipient of the notice has the right to appeal to the
Zoning Hearing Board within a period of 10 days.
(f) That failure to comply with the notice within the time specified,
unless extended by appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board,
constitutes a violation, with possible sanctions clearly
described.
B. Causes of action. In case any building, structure, landscaping or land is
or is proposed to be erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered,
converted, maintained or used in violation of this chapter, the Borough
Council or, with the approval of the Borough Council, an officer of the
Borough or any aggrieved owner or tenant of real property who shows
that his property or person will be substantially affected by the alleged
violation, in addition to other remedies, may institute any appropriate
action or proceeding to prevent, restrain, correct or abate such
building, structure, landscaping or land or to prevent in or about such
premises any act, conduct, business or use constituting a violation.
When any such action is instituted by a landowner or tenant, notice of
that action shall be served upon the Borough at least 30 days prior to
the time the action is begun by serving a copy of the complaint on the
Borough Council. No such action may be maintained until such notice
has been given.
C. Enforcement remedies.
(1) Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated
or permitted the violation of the provisions of this chapter shall,
§ 120-82 ZONING § 120-82
120:711
§ 120-83. Appeal procedure.
An appeal or application for a special exception or variance from the terms
of this chapter may be filed with the Zoning Officer and shall state:
upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding
commenced by the Borough, pay a judgment of $100 for the first
offense, $300 for the second offense and $500 for each subsequent
offense, plus all court costs, including all reasonable attorney fees
incurred by the Borough as a result thereof. No judgment shall
commence or be imposed, levied or payable until the date of the
determination of a violation by the District Justice. If the defendant
neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the Borough may
enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil
procedure. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute
a separate violation unless the District Justice, determining that
there has been a violation, further determines that there was a
good faith basis for the person, partnership or corporation violating
this chapter to have believed that there was no such violation, in
which event there shall be deemed to have been only one such
violation until the filth day following the date of the determination
of a violation by the District Justice, and thereafter, each day that a
violation continues shall constitute a separate violation. [Amended
10-18-1999 by Ord. No. 99-4, approved 10-18-1999]
(2) The Court of Common Pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of
stay, upon cause shown, tolling the per diem fine pending a final
adjudication of the violation and judgment.
(3) Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted
to grant to any person or entity other than the Borough the right to
commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this section.
(4) District Justices shall have initial jurisdiction over proceedings
brought under this section.
A. The name and address of the applicant.
B. The name and address of the owner of the real estate to be affected by
such proposed exception or variance.
C. A brief description and location of the real estate to be affected by such
proposed change.
D. A statement of the present zoning classification of the real estate in
question, the improvements thereon and the present use thereof.
E. A statement of the section of this chapter under which the variance or
exception requested may be allowed and reasons why it should be
granted.
§ 120-82 § 120-83
120:712
§ 120-84. Scope of chapter.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall be
held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of health, safety,
morals and general welfare. It is not intended to interfere with or abrogate
or annual other rules, regulations or ordinances, provided that where this
chapter imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings or premises
or upon the height of a building, or requires larger open spaces than
are imposed by such other rules, easements, covenants, restrictions,
regulations or ordinances, the provisions of this chapter shall control.
F. A reasonably accurate description of the present improvements and the
additions intended to be made under this application, indicating the
size of such proposed improvements, materials and general
construction thereof. In addition, there shall be attached a plot of the
real estate to be affected, as required to accompany applications for
building permits, indicating the location and size of the lot and size of
improvements now erected and proposed to be erected thereon. If the
improvement and additions are intended to take place in any floodplain
area, documentation shall be required to enable the Zoning Hearing
Board to give adequate consideration to the factors contained in
§ 120-38.
§ 120-83 ZONING § 120-84
120:713
APPENDIX
Chapter A131
CIVIL SERVICE RULES
§ 120-84 § 120-84
A131:714
ARTICLE I
Definitions
§ A131-1. Definitions and word usage.
A. Definitions. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and
phrases, wherever used in these rules and regulations, shall be
construed to have the meanings indicated herein:
APPLICANT — Any individual who applies in writing to the Commission
in response to a legally advertised notice of vacancy and/or examination
for any position in the Police Department.
APPOINTING AUTHORITY — The Council of the Borough of Steelton,
Dauphin County, Pennsylvania.
CERTIFICATION — The submission to the appointing authority
pursuant to its request of three names taken from the eligible list
developed by the Civil Service Commission.
CHAIRPERSON — The Chairperson of the Civil Service Commission of
the Borough of Steelton, Pennsylvania.
COMMISSION — The Civil Service Commission of the Borough of
Steelton, Pennsylvania.
ELIGIBLE — A person whose name is recorded on a current eligible list
or furlough list.
ELIGIBLE LIST — The list of names of persons who have passed all
examinations for a particular position in the Police Department.
EXAMINATION — The series of tests given to candidates to determine
their qualifications for a position in the Police Department.
FURLOUGH LIST — The list containing the names of persons
temporarily laid off from positions in the Police Department because of
a reduction in the number of officers.
POLICE OFFICER — An entry-level sworn full-time position in a Police
Department.
PROBATIONER — An officer in the Police Department who has been
appointed from an eligible list but who has not yet completed the worktest
period.
REDUCTION IN RANK — A change to a different position or rank which
results in a decrease in salary. However, a decrease in salary without a
change to a different position or rank shall not necessarily constitute a
"reduction in rank."
REMOVAL — The permanent separation of a police officer from the
Police Department.
SUSPENSION — The temporary separation of a police officer from the
Police Department.
§ A131-1 CIVIL SERVICE RULES § A131-1
A131:715
SECRETARY — The Secretary of the Civil Service Commission of the
Borough of Steelton, Pennsylvania.
B. Gender. The words "he," "his," "him" and "men" when used in these
rules and regulations represent both the masculine and feminine
genders.
§ A131-1 § A131-1
A131:716
ARTICLE II
The Commission
§ A131-2. Civil Service Commission.
§ A131-3. Offices incompatible with Civil Service Commissioner.
No Commissioner shall at the same time hold an elective or appointed office
under the United States government, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or
any political subdivision of the commonwealth, except that one member of
the Commission may be a member of the Council.
§ A131-4. Organization of Commission; quorum.
The Commission first appointed shall organize within 10 days of its
appointment and shall elect one of its members as its Chairperson, one as
Vice Chairperson and one as the Secretary. The Commission shall thereafter
meet and organize on the first Monday of February of each even-numbered
year. Two members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum, and no
action of the Commission shall be valid unless it shall have the concurrence
of at least two members.
§ A131-5. Duties of Chairperson.
The Chairperson or, in his or her absence, the Vice Chairperson shall
preside at all meetings and hearings of the Commission, decide all points of
order or procedure and perform any duties required by law or these rules
and regulations.
§ A131-6. Duties of Secretary.
The Secretary shall carry on at the direction of the Commission all official
correspondence of the Commission, send out all notices required by law
and these rules and regulations, keep a record of each examination or other
official action of the Commission and perform all other duties required by
law or these rules and regulations.
A. The Commission shall consist of three Commissioners who shall be
qualified electors of the Borough and shall be appointed by the Council
initially to serve for the terms of two, four and six years, and as terms
thereafter expire, shall be appointed for terms of six years.
B. Any vacancy occurring in the Commission for any reason whatsoever
shall be filled by the Council for the unexpired term within the period of
30 days after such vacancy occurs.
C. Each member of the Commission, before entering upon the discharge of
the duties of his office, shall have taken an oath or affirmation to
support the Constitution of the United States and of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania and to perform his official duties with fidelity. No Civil
Service Commissioner shall receive compensation.
§ A131-2 CIVIL SERVICE RULES § A131-7
A131:717
§ A131-7. Meetings.
Except for the biennial organization meeting, all meetings shall be held
either at the call of the Chairperson or at the call of two members of
the Commission. The Commission shall have the discretion to determine
whether meetings shall be open to the public when not specifically
regulated by law or these rules and regulations. The Secretary of the
Commission shall give each Commissioner 24 hours' notice in writing of
each and every meeting of the Commission.
§ A131-8. Clerical assistance and supplies.
The governing body shall furnish the Commission with such supplies and
clerical assistance as may be necessary for the Commission to fulfill its
duties. In addition, the Commission may retain counsel and other
consultants or experts, including physicians and psychiatrists, as are
necessary. The elected and appointed officials of the Borough shall assist
the Commission with all reasonable and appropriate efforts, including
compensation for any counsel or experts retained by the Commission.
§ A131-9. Amendment of Rules and Regulations.
§ A131-10. Minutes and records.
A. The Commission may amend, revise, void or replace these rules and
regulations for any reason by action of a majority of the Commission at
any properly convened meeting of the Commission. Before any changes
to these rules and regulations become effective, those changes must be
approved by the Borough Council of Steelton.
B. These Rules and Regulations, and any amendments thereto, shall be
made available to the public for distribution or inspection.
A. The Commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings and records of
examinations and other official action for a period of at least five years.
All recommendations of applicants for appointment to any position
within the Police Department received by the Commission shall be kept
and preserved for a period of five years.
B. Any and all records and written causes of removal filed with the
Commission shall be open to public inspection subject to reasonable
regulation. The Secretary shall keep minutes of its proceedings
showing the vote of each member upon each question. If the member is
absent or fails to vote, the Secretary shall indicate that fact in the
minutes.
C. Except as otherwise provided in this article, all of the records of the
Commission shall be open to the public and available for inspection
during normal business hours. A member of the Commission, or any
person who may, from time to time, be designated by the Commission,
§ A131-7 § A131-10
A131:718
§ A131-11. Investigations.
The Commission shall have the power to make investigations concerning all
matters relating to the administration and enforcement of these rules and
regulations. The Chairperson of the Commission is authorized to administer
oaths and affirmations.
§ A131-12. Subpoenas; penalty for failure to obey subpoenas.
shall be present at all times during any inspection of any record of the
Commission.
D. All reports of investigations and inquiries into the character and
reputation of applicants shall be kept in the strictest confidence and
shall not be open to public inspection.
E. All examination materials shall be confidential and shall not be open to
general public inspection. Any examined applicant may inspect his
examination papers, provided that:
(1) He or she makes a written request to the Commission within seven
calendar days from the date of mailing of the written notice of his
or her grade;
(2) He or she receives the written consent of the Commission to
inspect his or her examination papers; and
(3) He or she makes his or her inspection within five calendar days
from the date of the mailing of the consent of the Commission.
F. The Commission shall not consent to the request of any examined
applicant to inspect any written examination paper which may be used
in a subsequent written examination that may be scheduled within 90
calendar days following the date of receipt of the written request. If the
Commission consents to an inspection of any of the written examination
papers by any previously examined applicant, it shall state in its letter
of consent the specific examination papers that may be inspected.
Before any member of the Commission, or any person designated by the
Commission, permits inspection of examination papers, he shall require
the examined applicant to produce the letter indicating the consent of
the Commission, and he shall limit the inspection by the examined
applicant to only those examination papers indicated in the letter of
consent. No examined applicant shall be permitted to inspect any
examination papers other than his own, nor shall he be permitted to
make any written notes while he is inspecting any examination paper.
A. The Commission shall have the power to issue subpoenas over the
signature of the Chairperson to require the attendance of witnesses and
the production of records and papers pertaining to any investigation or
inquiry. The fees of such witnesses for attendance and travel shall be
the same as for witnesses appearing in the courts and shall be paid
from appropriations for the incidental expenses of the Commission.
§ A131-10 CIVIL SERVICE RULES § A131-12
A131:719
§ A131-13. Annual report.
The Commission shall make an annual report to the Borough Council
containing a brief summary of its work during the year and full accounting
for any expenditures of public moneys. The annual report shall be available
for public inspection.
§ A131-14. Order of business.
The order of business of all regular meetings of the Commission shall be as
follows:
B. All officers in public service and employees of the Borough shall attend
and testify when required to do so by the Commission.
C. If any person shall refuse or neglect to obey any subpoena issued by the
Commission, upon conviction of such refusal or neglect in a summary
proceeding, that person shall be sentenced to pay a fine not to exceed
$100 and, in default of the payment of such fine and cost, shall be
imprisoned not to exceed 30 days.
D. If any person shall refuse or neglect to obey any subpoena, the
Commission may apply by petition to the Court of Common Pleas of
Dauphin County for its subpoena, requiring attendance of such persons
before the Commission or the Court to testify and to produce any
records and papers necessary and, in default thereof, shall be held in
contempt of Court.
A. Roll call.
B. Approval of minutes of previous meeting.
C. Unfinished business.
D. Hearing of cases.
E. New business.
F. Communication and reports.
§ A131-12 § A131-14
A131:720
ARTICLE III
Applications and Qualifications
§ A131-15. Eligibility for examination.
In order to be eligible for participation in any examination for any position
with the Police Department, every applicant must submit a completed
application form to the Commission before the deadline stated by the
Commission for that specific examination. The application form is attached
as Appendix A-1128 and incorporated into these rules and regulations. The
application must be completed truthfully, and the applicant is subject to
the penalties of 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 4904 relating to unsworn falsification to
authorities.
§ A131-16. Discrimination.
The Borough is an equal opportunity employer. It is the Borough's and the
Commission's policy to grant equal employment opportunities to qualified
persons without regard to race, religion, color, national origin, gender,
marital status or non-job-related physical or mental handicap or disability.
The Borough and the Commission will provide equal opportunities in
employment and promotion.
§ A131-17. Availability of application forms.
Application forms shall be available to all interested persons in the office
of the Borough Secretary and from such other offices and officers that
the Commission, from time to time, may choose to designate. Application
forms may be mailed upon written or telephone request. However, the
Commission assumes no responsibility for missed filing deadlines due to a
delay in the mail.
§ A131-18. Age requirements.
All applicants must have reached their 21st birthday before the deadline
for submitting completed applications. Each applicant shall provide
satisfactory evidence of date of birth.
§ A131-19. General qualifications for all applicants.
Every applicant for any position in the Police Department shall posses a
diploma from an accredited high school or a graduate equivalency diploma.
In addition, every applicant must be a United States citizen, be physically
and mentally fit to perform the full duties of a police officer, be of good
moral character and, prior to appointment, possess a valid motor vehicle
operator's license issued by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
128. Editor's Note: Appendix A-1 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ A131-15 CIVIL SERVICE RULES § A131-20
A131:721
§ A131-20. Investigation of applicant.
An investigation of the character and reputation of the applicant shall
be made by the Commission and will include credit reports and reports
of investigations from recognized agencies. Credit reports alone are not
sufficient to disqualify an applicant.
§ A131-21. General qualifications for applicants for Corporal,
Sergeant and Lieutenant.
§ A131-22. Recording and filing applications.
Applications for positions in the Police Department shall be received at the
Borough Municipal Building only after an examination has been properly
advertised and before the deadline for receiving applications, which must
be set forth in the public advertisement. Applications will be received by the
A. In addition to meeting the qualifications in § A131-19 above, all
applicants for a promotional position, except Chief, shall have not been
suspended without pay at any time three years prior to the deadline for
submitting applications [Attachment A-1(a)].129 Any suspension to
which the applicant has timely appealed pursuant to a grievance
procedure or these rules and regulations shall be disregarded unless
the appeal is resolved prior to the creation of the eligibility list.
B. All applicants shall have continuous prior service with the Police
Department of Steelton Borough as follows:
(1) An applicant for the position of Corporal shall have at least three
years of service with the Department.
(2) An applicant for the position of Sergeant shall have at least five
years of service with the Department.
(3) An applicant for the position of Lieutenant shall have at least seven
years of service with the Department.
(4) An applicant shall have graduated from a state-recognized police
academy or school (or have been grandfathered from such
requirement) and must have achieved state certification or
recertification.
(5) An applicant shall have demonstrated an ability to carry out orders
from superiors.
(6) An applicant shall have demonstrated a working knowledge of
police science and administration as ascertained by an appropriate
promotional examination.
(7) An applicant will have demonstrated an ability to supervise the
work of subordinates, if any.
129. Editor's Note: Attachment A-1(a) is included at the end of this chapter.
§ A131-20 § A131-22
A131:722
municipal officer designated in the public advertisement or his designee.
That person shall record the receipt of all applications and provide each
applicant with notice of the time and place for the first portion of the
testing procedure, the written examination. A copy of the form for that
notice is attached as Appendix A-2130 and incorporated into these rules
and regulations. Any application containing material errors or omissions
may, at the discretion of the Commission, be returned to the applicant for
correction prior to the deadline for filing applications, after which no new
applications or amended applications will be accepted.
§ A131-23. Rejection of applicant.
The Commission may refuse to examine or, if examined, may refuse to
certify as eligible after examination any applicant who is found to lack any
of the minimum qualifications for examination prescribed in these rules and
regulations for the particular position for which the applicant has applied.
In addition, the Commission may refuse to examine or, if examined, may
refuse to certify any applicant who is physically or mentally unfit to perform
the full duties of the position to which he seeks employment or who is
addicted to the habitual use of intoxicating liquors or narcotic drugs or
who is guilty of any crime involving moral turpitude or of infamous or
notoriously disgraceful conduct or who has been dismissed from public
service for delinquency or misconduct in office or who is affiliated with any
group whose policies or activities are subversive to the form of government
set forth in the constitutions and laws of the United States and the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ A131-24. Filing applications.
Applications for positions in the Police Department may be received at
any time during normal business hours in the main office of the Steelton
Borough Municipal Building. The receipt of such applications shall be
subject to the following conditions:
§ A131-25. Hearing for disqualified applicants.
Any applicant or other person who believes that he is aggrieved by the
actions of the Commission in refusing to examine or to certify him as eligible
after examination may request a hearing before the Commission. Within 10
days after such request, the Commission shall designate a time and place
for the hearing, which shall be conducted pursuant to the procedures set
forth in the Local Agency Law, 2 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq. The applicant or
A. No application received after 4:00 p.m. prevailing time on any day that
is 14 calendar days prior to the date fixed for the written examination in
the public announcement shall be considered for such examination.
B. An application shall become invalid one year after the date upon which
it was received.
130. Editor's Note: Appendix A-2 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ A131-22 CIVIL SERVICE RULES § A131-25
A131:723
aggrieved party must take his request for a hearing in writing within 10
calendar days of the date when the party knew or should have known of the
Commission's action which is being challenged.
§ A131-26. Public notice.
The Commission shall conspicuously post in the Borough Municipal Building
notice of the time and place of every examination, together with the
information as to the type of position to be filled, the requirements for
that position, where applications may be obtained for the examination and
the deadline for filing those applications. In addition, at least two weeks
prior to each examination, publication of the notice shall occur in at least
one newspaper of general circulation or a newspaper circulating generally
in the Borough. A model notice for posting the publication is attached as
Appendix A-3131 and incorporated into these rules and regulations.
131. Editor's Note: Appendix A-3 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ A131-25 § A131-26
A131:724
ARTICLE IV
Examination and Grading Procedure
§ A131-27. General examination requirements for the position of
police officer.
§ A131-28. General examination requirements for the positions of
Corporal, Sergeant and Lieutenant.
§ A131-29. Administration of examinations.
A. The examination for police officer will consist of a written and an oral
examination, which will be graded on a one-hundred-point scale, with
the written examination representing 70% of the final score and the
oral examination representing 30% of the final score. These tests and
investigation will be graded on a pass/fail basis for every applicant.
After an applicant has been extended an offer of employment, final
appointment shall be contingent upon the applicant passing a physical
and psychological examination. In addition, each applicant will undergo
a physical fitness test, a polygraph test and a background investigation.
In the event that an applicant fails the initial polygraph test, he or she
shall be given a second polygraph examination with a new tester; if he
or she fails the second test, he or she may be given a third test with the
prior approval of the Commission.
B. Applicants for the position of patrolman who have successfully passed
the written and oral examination and have acquired a score of 70% or
more may receive 10 additional points added to their total score if he or
she is currently employed by the Borough as a part-time patrolman and
has been employed in that position for at least six months. The parttime
patrolman must have received a satisfactory or better score on the
most recent performance rating administered by the Chief of Police and
not have received the mandatory 10 points given to a veteran under
these rules in order to be qualified for the additional 10 points. [Added
3-16-1998 by Res. No. 98-R-9, approved 3-16-1998]
A. The examination for the positions of Corporal, Sergeant and Lieutenant
shall include a written and an oral examination, which will be graded on
a one-hundred-point scale, with the written examination representing
70% of the final score and the oral examination representing 30% of the
final score.
B. In addition, each applicant will undergo a physical fitness test which
will be graded on a pass/fail basis for every applicant. After an applicant
has been extended an offer of promotion, the final appointment to the
promotional position shall be contingent upon the applicant passing a
physical and psychological examination.
A. The Commission shall appoint a written examination administrator, an
oral examination administrator, a physical fitness examiner, a medical
§ A131-27 CIVIL SERVICE RULES § A131-29
A131:725
§ A131-30. Written examinations.
The written examination shall be graded on a one-hundred-point scale,
and an applicant must score 70% or higher in order to continue in the
application process. Applicants scoring less than 70% shall be rejected.
Within 30 days after the administration of the written examination, all
applicants shall be given written notice of their test results, and passing
applicants shall be scheduled for an oral examination appointment. A model
letter informing a passing applicant of his written score and date for an
oral examination is attached as Appendix A-4,133 and a model letter for a
failing applicant is attached as Appendix A-5,134 and both are incorporated
into these rules and regulations.
§ A131-31. Oral examinations.
Every applicant who scored 70% or higher in the written examination shall
be given an oral examination, which will be graded on a one-hundredpoint
scale, with a score of 70% or higher necessary for passing. The oral
examination shall involve questioning the applicant on how he would handle
situations relevant to police work. Within 30 days after the applicant's oral
examination, he shall be informed of his score in his oral examination and
total overall score, and a passing applicant shall be informed of the date
for the physical fitness testing. A model letter informing a passing applicant
examiner and a psychological examiner to conduct the appropriate
examinations required by these rules and regulations.
B. The Commission may designate the Department of Community Affairs,
Municipal Consulting Services Division, the Institute of Urban Police
and Administration of the University of Pittsburgh, Harrisburg Area
Community College, the State Civil Service Commission of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any other recognized examining
agency to act as examiner for the written examinations. The
Commission shall reserve the right to accept or reject, in whole or in
part, the recommendations of the regularly appointed examining
agency. The evaluation of the service or performance record of any
applicant shall be the responsibility of the Commission; provided,
however, that the Commission may designate, from time to time, such
persons qualified to evaluate performance or service records as are
considered necessary to assist in such examinations and evaluations.
C. Model resolutions of appointment for the appointment of each of these
examiners are attached as Appendixes B-1 through B-5, respectively,
and model notices of appointment of these examiners are attached as
Appendixes C-1 through C-4, respectively,132 and all are incorporated
into these rules and regulations.
132. Editor's Note: Appendixes B-1 through B-5 and C-1 through C-4 are included at the end of
this chapter.
133. Editor's Note: Appendix A-4 is included at the end of this chapter.
134. Editor's Note: Appendix A-5 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ A131-29 § A131-31
A131:726
of his oral score and the date for his physical fitness testing is attached as
Appendix A-6,135 and a model letter for a failing applicant is attached as
Appendix A-7,136 and both are incorporated into these rules and regulations.
§ A131-32. Veterans' preference points.
Pursuant to the Veterans' Preference Act,137 any applicant for the position
of patrol officer who qualifies as a "soldier" under this Act shall receive an
additional 10 points on top of his total score if the applicant has received
passing scores under §§ A131-27, A131-30 and A131-31.
§ A131-33. Physical agility testing. [Amended 8-17-1998 by Res. No.
98-R-30, approved 8-17-1998]
A. An applicant for the position of police officer must meet the following
requirements:
(1) Harvard step test. Applicant steps up and down, using both feet, on
a twenty-inch bench/chair for a rate of 30 steps per minute. The
event is five minutes in duration, after which the applicant is
allowed to sit and rest for one minute. The examiner then counts
the subject's heart rate (for 30 seconds) and multiplies the pulse
rate times two to determine whether the applicant meets the
required score. Score: Applicant's heart rate no greater than 120
beats per minute
(2) Dummy drag. Applicant starts behind a line on a level surface.
Applicant takes hold of a one-hundred-fifty-pound dummy and, on
command, drags the dummy 50 feet. Some part of the dummy must
stay in contact with the floor. Score: Applicant must drag dummy
50 feet in less than 20 seconds.
(3) Run and tremor test. Applicant runs 1/4 mile on a level surface then
immediately picks up duty-type shotgun. The barrel must be held
inside a three-inch loop for a minimum of 15 seconds. Score:
Applicant must complete in 120 seconds or less. The applicant
cannot touch the circle more than twice with the barrel.
(4) Illinois agility test. Applicant assumes a prone position, push-up
position, behind a line. On command the applicant jumps to his/her
feet and sprints 30 feet to a figure-eight course and continues the
sprint through the course. (See attached chart.) Score: Male, 17.9
seconds; female, 19.7 seconds.
(5) Six-foot wall surmount. The applicant will start 15 feet from a sixfoot
wall. He/she will climb the wall without assistance or
equipment. Applicant must climb completely over the wall.
135. Editor's Note: Appendix A-6 is included at the end of this chapter.
136. Editor's Note: Appendix A-7 is included at the end of this chapter.
137. Editor's Note: See 51 Pa.C.S.A. § 7101 et seq.
§ A131-31 CIVIL SERVICE RULES § A131-33
A131:727
§ A131-34. Background investigation.
Applicant may attempt the climb as many times as possible within
time limit. Score: Applicant must climb the wall within 12 seconds.
(6) Firearms handling. Applicant will pick up a double-action
nonfunctional revolver or pistol with his/her strong hand and hold it
at arms' length. The applicant will squeeze the trigger as rapidly
and as many times as possible within 30 seconds. The test is
repeated with the weak hand. Score: Applicant must pull the
trigger 15 times within the 30 seconds for each hand. [Amended
10-16-2000 by Res. No. R-2000-2, approved 10-16-2000]
B. Applicant must agree to execute any physical agility test waiver
document which is required by the Physical Fitness Examiner or
examining agency appointed by the Commission to perform the physical
fitness exam.
C. A model letter informing the applicant that he or she has passed the
physical agility test is attached as Appendix A-8138 and a model letter
informing an applicant that he or she has failed the physical agility test
is attached as Appendix A-9.139
A. The Commission shall request the Chief of Police or his designee to
conduct a background investigation on each applicant.
B. The background investigation shall include interviews with the
applicant's family, acquaintances, current and former employers,
current and former neighbors, references and current and former
teachers and school officials.
C. In addition, the applicant's credit history and record of criminal
convictions should be investigated. The applicant may be interviewed
directly when the information collected during the background
investigation requires clarification or explanation.
D. After the background investigation is completed, the Chief or his
designee shall make a written recommendation to the Commission on
whether the applicant is appropriate for consideration for appointment
as a police officer.
E. Appropriateness of the applicant shall be based on the criteria set forth
in § A131-21 of these rules and regulations. This recommendation shall
be in writing, and if the recommendation is to disqualify, then a detailed
written explanation of the reasons for disqualification must be included.
The Commission shall make the final determination on whether the
information collected during the background investigation warrants
rejection of the candidate.
138. Editor's Note: Said Appendix A-8 is located at the end of this chapter.
139. Editor's Note: Said Appendix A-9 is located at the end of this chapter.
§ A131-33 § A131-34
A131:728
F. Within 30 days after the Commission considers the recommendation of
the Chief of Police or his designee, the applicant will be informed of
whether he has passed the background investigation. A model letter
informing an applicant that a background investigation has been
successfully completed is attached as Appendix A-10,140 and a model
letter informing an applicant that he has failed the background
investigation is attached as Appendix A-11,141 and both are
incorporated into these rules and regulations.
140. Editor's Note: Appendix A-10 is included at the end of this chapter.
141. Editor's Note: Appendix A-11 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ A131-34 CIVIL SERVICE RULES § A131-34
A131:729

ARTICLE V
Certification of the List of Eligibles; Appointment
§ A131-35. Creation of eligibility list. [Amended 10-16-2000 by Res.
No. R-2000-2, approved 10-16-2000]
At the completion of the examination requirements set forth in Article
IV, written examination, oral examination, background investigation and
physical fitness test, the Commission shall rank all passing applicants on
a list, with the applicant receiving the highest score at the top of the list
and the applicant receiving the lowest passing score at the bottom of the
list. Applicants who qualify for veterans' preference points shall have those
points added to their passing score prior to being ranked on the eligibility
list. For promotional positions, fulfilling the performance requirement set
forth in § A131-21 is also required. In the case of tied scores, the tie will
be broken by giving preference (listing higher on the list) to the applicant
who submitted a final completed application first. If both tied applicants
submitted their complete applications on the same day, then the applicants
shall be ranked in alphabetical order by surname. The Commission may, at
its sole discretion, void an eligibility list at any time for any reason, but in
no case shall any eligible list remain in effect for a period of more than two
years from the date of its preparation.
§ A131-36. Filling of vacancies; removal of names from eligible list.
A. The appointing authority of the Borough may fill any vacancy in an
existing position in the Police Department which occurs as a result of
expansion of the police force, retirement, resignation, disability or
death by the reappointment or reinstatement of a former employee of
the Police Department who had been furloughed. Except for physical
and psychological examinations, no other testing shall be required for a
furloughed employee.
B. If no furlough list exists or if positions remain to be filled after all of the
officers on the furlough list were offered reemployment, for every
position except that of the Chief of Police the Commission shall certify
names from the eligible list. The number of available eligibles certified
from the eligible list shall exceed by two the number of vacancies to be
filled from such eligible list. If there are fewer than three available
eligibles on the eligible list, the Borough Council may nominate a
person to the Commission for noncompetitive examination, and he may
be appointed provisionally to fill such vacancy. It shall thereupon
become the duty of the Commission within three weeks to hold a
competitive examination and certify a list of eligible, and a regular
appointment shall then be made from the name or names submitted by
the Commission; provided, however, that nothing herein contained shall
prevent the appointment without examination of persons temporarily as
police officers in cases of riot or other emergency.
C. Removal of names from list.
§ A131-35 CIVIL SERVICE RULES § A131-36
A131:731
§ A131-37. Appointment of Chief of Police.
(1) In addition to the other reasons stated as grounds for removal in
these rules and regulations, the name of any person appearing on a
furlough list or an eligible list shall be removed by the Commission
if such person:
(a) Is appointed to a position in the Police Department;
(b) Declines an appointment to a permanent position in the Police
Department;
(c) Fails to make written reply to the Borough Council within
seven calendar days from the date of mailing of a notice of
certification; or
(d) Indicates availability for appointment and is appointed to fill a
vacancy but fails to report for duty at the time prescribed,
unless, in the opinion of the Borough Council, such person can
show good and sufficient reasons for failure to report.
(2) The name of any person on an eligible list also shall be removed by
the Commission if certified for appointment consideration three
times as the top name and is not appointed. Nothing in this section,
however, shall be construed as authorizing the removal of the name
of a person from a furlough list or eligible list who refuses or
accepts a position of a lower rank than that from which furloughed
or for which eligible on a Commission list.
D. The Commission shall certify for each existing vacancy from the eligible
list the names of three persons thereon who have received the highest
average. The Borough Council shall, thereupon, with sole reference to
the merits and fitness of the candidates and in accordance with
applicable laws, make an appointment from the three names certified
unless it makes objections to the Commission as to one or more persons
certified for any of the reasons set forth in § A131-23 of these rules and
regulations. Should such objections be sustained by the Commission,
the Commission shall thereupon strike the name of such person from
the eligible list and certify the next highest name for each name
stricken off. In the event a "soldier," as that term is defined under the
Veterans Preference Act, is on the eligibility list, either for initial
appointment or promotion, the soldier shall be appointed or promoted,
if the Council determines to fill the vacancy; if two or more soldiers
appear on the eligibility list, the Council may select among the soldiers
and shall appoint or promote one said soldier, if Council determines to
fill the vacancy. Upon appointment by the Borough Council from the
names appearing on the certified list, the successful candidate shall be
notified by the Borough Council of his/her appointment. The notice shall
be sent by certified mail and shall include the title and position and the
compensation to be paid and shall require a written acceptance within
seven days from the date of mailing.
§ A131-36 § A131-37
A131:732
§ A131-38. Physical and psychological examinations; probation.
A. In the case of a vacancy in the office of Chief of Police, the appointing
authority has full discretion in selecting the individual to fill the position
of Chief of Police.
B. If the appointing authority requests the Commission to subject that
person to a noncompetitive examination, and if that person successfully
passes the noncompetitive examination, then the Commission shall
notify the appointing authority of the results of the examination, and
that person may only be removed from the position of Chief of Police for
the reasons set forth in § A131-40.
A. After the appointing authority selects a candidate from the certified list
of three for appointment to the vacant position and makes an offer of
employment, that candidate shall submit to a physical examination and
a psychological examination by the appropriate medical experts. If the
candidate successfully passes the physical and psychological
examinations, then that employee shall be appointed to the vacant
position in the Police Department for which he had applied. The
appointment shall be contingent upon successfully passing both the
physical and psychological examinations. Failure to pass either
examination shall result in the candidate being rejected from
consideration. The rejected candidate may appeal this decision under
§ A131-25.
B. Model letters informing a candidate of passing the physical
examination, failing the physical examination, passing the
psychological exam and failing the psychological exam, respectively,
are attached as Appendixes A-13 to A-16142 and are incorporated into
these rules and regulations.
C. For newly hired police officers, the one-year probationary period shall
not commence until after the officer has completed training under Act
120. During the probationary period, a newly hired officer may only be
dismissed for cause for the reasons set forth in § A131-23. A promoted
officer, during his probationary period, may be returned to work to his
prior rank only for cause for the reasons set forth in § A131-23.
However, at or near the end of the twelve-month probationary period, if
the conduct of the probationer has not been satisfactory to the Borough
Council, the Council, at its regular meeting immediately preceding the
end of the probationary period or, if necessary, at a special meeting
convened for this purpose, shall announce its decision not to grant a
permanent appointment to the probationary officer, and the probationer
shall be notified in writing prior to the last day of the probationary
period that he will not receive a permanent appointment. At that time, a
newly hired officer's employment shall end, and a promoted officer shall
return to his previous rank. Any officer who is not informed in writing
that his performance has been unsatisfactory shall receive a permanent
142. Editor's Note: Appendixes A-13 through A-16 are included at the end of this chapter.
§ A131-37 CIVIL SERVICE RULES § A131-38
A131:733
§ A131-39. Provisional appointments.
Whenever there are urgent reasons for the filling of a vacancy in any
position in the Police Department and there are no names on the eligible
list for such appointment, the Borough Council may nominate a person to
the Commission for noncompetitive examination, and such nominee may
be certified by the Commission as qualified after such noncompetitive
examination, and he may be appointed provisionally to fill such vacancy. It
shall thereupon become the duty of the Commission within three weeks to
hold a competitive examination and certify a list of eligibles, and then a
regular appointment shall be made from the name or names submitted by
the Commission, provided that nothing within this section shall prevent the
appointment, without examination, of persons temporarily as police officers
in cases of riot or other emergency.
appointment to his position. Any probationer who is notified in writing
that he will not receive a permanent appointment has no rights of
appeal under these rules and regulations.
§ A131-38 § A131-39
A131:734
ARTICLE VI
Suspensions, Removals and Reductions in Rank
§ A131-40. Grounds for disciplinary action.
§ A131-41. Furloughs.
A. No person appointed to a position in the Police Department pursuant to
these rules and regulations may be suspended without pay or removed,
and no person promoted in rank pursuant to these rules and regulations
may be reduced in rank except for the following reasons:
(1) Physical or mental disability affecting the officer's ability to
continue in service, in which case the officer shall receive an
honorable discharge from service;
(2) Neglect or violation of any official duty;
(3) Violation of any law of this commonwealth which provides that such
violation constitutes a misdemeanor or felony;
(4) Inefficiency, neglect, intemperance, disobedience of orders or
conduct unbecoming an officer;
(5) Intoxication while on duty; or
(6) Engaging or participating in conducting of any political or election
campaign other than the officer's exercise of his own right of
suffrage.
B. No officer shall be removed for religious, racial or political reasons. A
statement of any charges made against any officer so employed shall be
furnished to the officer within five days after those charges have been
adopted by the Borough Council and filed with the Commission.
A. If, for reasons of economy or other reasons, it shall be deemed
necessary by the Borough to reduce the number of full-time police
officers in the Department, then the Borough shall apply the following
procedures:
(1) If there are any employees eligible for retirement or pension law,
then such reductions in numbers shall be made by retirement
starting with the oldest employee and following in order of age
respectively if the party to be retired exceeds the maximum age as
defined in the Act of October 27, 1955, P.L. 744, No. 222, known as
the "Pennsylvania Human Relations Act."143
(2) If the number of full-time police officers eligible for retirement is
insufficient to effect the necessary reductions in numbers or if
there are no persons eligible for retirement or if no retirement or
pension fund exists, then the reductions shall be effected by
143. Editor's Note: See 43 P.S. § 951 et seq.
§ A131-40 CIVIL SERVICE RULES § A131-41
A131:735
§ A131-42. Notice of suspension, removal or reduction in rank.
Whenever a police officer is suspended, removed or reduced in rank, the
specific charges warranting such actions shall be stated in writing by the
Borough Council of Steelton Borough. The charges shall be stated clearly
and in sufficient detail to enable the accused to understand the charges
made against him and to be able to answer them. As soon as practicable, the
statement of charges shall be filed in duplicate with the Commission, and,
within five calendar days of such filing, the original copy of the statement of
charges shall be delivered to the accused either by personal service or by
certified or registered mail.
§ A131-43. Hearings on suspensions, removals and reductions in
rank.
furloughing the person or persons, including probationers, last
appointed to the respective force.
B. Such removal shall be accomplished by furloughing in numerical order
commencing with the person last appointed until such reduction shall
have been accomplished. In the event that the appointing authority
decides to increase the Police Department, the furloughed officers shall
be reinstated in order of their seniority in the Department if the
furloughed officer accepts reinstatement, in writing, within 30 days of
receiving notice of the opening. These reduction in force provisions are
not applicable to the Chief of Police.
A. Any police officer suspended, removed or reduced in rank may file with
the Commission a written demand for a hearing; such written demand
shall be filed within 10 days from the date of filing of charges in writing
with the Commission. Any statement of written answers to the charges
made against the person accused shall be filed no later than the day
fixed for hearing. Within 10 days from the filing of charges in writing
with the Commission, unless continued by the Commission for cause,
the Commission shall grant a hearing to any accused person who
complies with the provisions of this section. Each such hearing shall be
open to the public unless the accused, when making his written demand
for a hearing, requests that such hearing be closed to the public.
B. Notice of the date, time and place for each hearing shall be given in the
following manner:
(1) Either by personal service or by certified or registered mail to each
of the principals involved in the case; and
(2) By mailing a notice to all other parties who have stated an interest
in the hearing; provided, however, that any failure to give the
notice required by this subsection shall not invalidate any
subsequent action taken by the Commission.
§ A131-41 § A131-43
A131:736
§ A131-44. Hearing procedure.
C. All testimony shall be given under oath. The Chairman, or in his
absence the Vice Chairman, shall administer all oaths.
D. The Chairman, or in his absence the Vice Chairman, may compel the
attendance of witnesses and the production of records and papers
pertaining to any hearing. However, upon the written request by the
accused or by the person making charges, the Chairman, or in his
absence the Vice Chairman, additionally shall order the attendance of
pertinent witnesses or the production of relevant documents, provided
that such a written request is filed with the Secretary within five
calendar days from the date appearing on the notice of hearing.
A. Each hearing shall be conducted in the following manner:
(1) The Chairman shall state the general purpose of the hearing.
(2) The Secretary, upon direction of the Chairman, shall read the
written charges against the accused together with the record of
action taken against such officer.
(3) The Secretary shall read any written reply of the accused.
(4) The Chairman shall afford each person making charges, or his or
her counsel, an opportunity to make further statement in support of
the charges and to produce any witness.
(5) The Chairman shall afford the accused, or his or her counsel, an
opportunity to question or cross-examine the person making
charges and to question or cross-examine any witness produced by
such person.
(6) The Chairman shall afford each person making charges an
opportunity to examine the person accused.
(7) The Chairman shall permit each person making charges, or his or
her counsel, to make a summation.
(8) The Chairman shall afford the accused, or his or her counsel, an
opportunity to produce any witness and to sum up the defense.
(9) The Commission shall be the judge of admissible evidence and
procedure and shall not be bound by technical rules of evidence.
(10) A stenographic transcript of proceedings shall be made and filed in
the Commission's archives, along with all other records pertinent
to the case. Such records shall be sealed and not open to public
inspection.
B. The Commission, at any time during the course of the hearing, may
question or cross-examine the person making charges, the accused and
any witness.
§ A131-43 CIVIL SERVICE RULES § A131-45
A131:737
§ A131-45. Decision of the Commission.
Within a reasonable time, including such time as is necessary to receive
and review a transcript of the testimony and evidence given at the hearing,
after the hearing, the Commission shall issue its decision in the form of a
written order approved by at least two members of the Commission. The
written order shall include all findings of fact. If, during the public hearing,
opposing facts are presented, the Commission shall include in its written
order a decision as to what it considers to be the correct facts. The findings
and decision of the Commission shall be certified to the person making
charges, to the accused officer and the Borough Council.
§ A131-45 § A131-45
A131:738
ARTICLE VII
Adoption
§ A131-46. Adoption of rules and regulations.
The foregoing rules and regulations, which are in accordance with powers
granted by the civil service section of the Borough Code, Article XI, §§ 1171
through 1195 (53 P.S. §§ 46171 through 46195), enacted by the General
Assembly of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and in accordance with
the authority granted by the municipal governing body of Steelton Borough,
Pennsylvania, are hereby adopted by the Civil Service Commission of
Steelton Borough, Pennsylvania, on June 6, 1994.
§ A131-46 CIVIL SERVICE RULES § A131-46
A131:739
Chapter A132
FIRE DEPARTMENT RULES AND REGULATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 11.
Open burning — See Ch. 48.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 58.
§ A132-1. General rules.
§ A132-2. Disciplinary procedures.
A. All standard operating procedures (SOP) posted by the Chief of the Fire
Department will be followed at all times. Each member will read and
sign each SOP as posted. Failure or refusal to sign an SOP will result in
disciplinary action.
B. No equipment of the Fire Department shall be taken out of the Borough
of Steelton without prior permission being given through the chain of
command; provided, however, that equipment will be utilized in
response to normal dispatch procedures in emergency situations and in
furtherance of mutual aid agreements.
C. All personnel who are members of the Steelton Volunteer Fire
Department, the Steelton Volunteer Fire Department/Ambulance
Division (EMS) and the Steelton Fire Police shall be governed by these
rules and regulations.
D. Housekeeping rules for the Steelton Volunteer Fire Department
pertaining to the Fire Department Building located at 185 North Front
Street, Steelton, Pennsylvania, as promulgated and adopted by the
Steelton Volunteer Fire Department and ratified by the Borough
Council of the Borough of Steelton are to be adhered to by all persons
utilizing the Fire Department Building. (See Res. No. 93-R-4.144)
E. All of the Steelton Volunteer Fire Department and the Steelton
Volunteer Fire Department/Ambulance Division (EMS) housed within
the Borough of Steelton are authorized to act within the Borough of
Steelton to provide, through their volunteer members, those authorized
activities of the Fire Department and the related ambulance association
provided for by statute, ordinance and/or these rules and regulations.
(See Res. No. 92-R-17.145)
A. Any violation of the rules contained herein will be handled in the
following manner:
144. Editor's Note: Resolution No. 93-R-4 is on file in the office of the Borough Secretary.
145. Editor's Note: Resolution No. 92-R-17 is on file in the office of the Borough Secretary.
§ A131-46 § A132-2
A132:740
§ A132-3. Radio procedures.
§ A132-4. Response procedures.
(1) First offense. Letter of warning from the Chief of the Fire
Department; the Fire Chief will provide a copy of the letter to
Borough Council.
(2) Second offense. Subsequent to a review of the circumstances
surrounding the violation by the Fire Committee of the Borough
Council and the Fire Chief, the Fire Chief may issue a fifteen- to
thirty-day suspension; written notice of the suspension will be
provided to the violator with a copy of the suspension letter being
forwarded to Council.
(3) Third or subsequent offense. The Borough Council will conduct an
investigation and determine whether a violation has occurred and
the circumstances surrounding said violation; Council may at its
discretion suspend the violator for a minimum period of one year;
any person suspended under this provision must petition Council
for reinstatement, which petition will be reviewed and enacted
upon by Council in its discretion.
B. The progressive discipline procedure established in Subsection A(1)
through (3) shall apply to those violations which do not constitute
serious offenses, i.e., neglect or violation of any official duty; violation of
any law, provided that such violation constitutes a misdemeanor or
felony; inefficiency; neglect; intemperance; immorality; disobedience of
orders or intoxication while on duty.
C. Alcohol and drug use. The use of alcohol and drugs while on duty is
expressly prohibited. Such use is immediate grounds for dismissal. The
Borough may test, at its option, for the presence of drugs and alcohol as
a precondition to returning from a leave of absence, following an
accident or injury on the job or when the Borough has a reasonable
suspicion that an employee is using or impaired by drugs or alcohol.
Drug or alcohol testing will be done with the knowledge of the
employee, at a credible facility, ensuring confidentiality of test results
and in conformity with applicable laws.
A. Only trained and certified persons will operate any radios utilized by
the Department, ambulance corps or fire police; certification to operate
radios will be made by the Chief of the Fire Department or, in the case
of Fire Police, the Chief of Police.
B. No profanity will be used in any radio transmission for any reason.
C. All transmissions will be kept to a minimum and kept to the point of the
matter involved.
A. Only equipment designated and authorized under the Dauphin County
Box System will be taken to respond to incidents.
§ A132-2 FIRE DEPARTMENT RULES AND § A132-4
A132:741
§ A132-5. Driver regulations.
B. All box cards established with Dauphin County will be strictly followed.
A. Driver qualifications. In order to apply and be accepted as a driver of
Borough fire equipment, such applicant:
(1) Must be 18 years of age or older.
(2) Must complete an application form, including the production of a
copy of a Pennsylvania driver's license enabling him or her to
operate the type of vehicle which they will be qualified to operate,
and the production of a valid birth certificate.
(3) Must be an active member of the Steelton Volunteer Fire
Department for at least six months prior to application.
(4) Must complete such training as is established by the Chief of the
Fire Department; evidence of the items in Subsection A(1) through
(3) above must be provided to the Chief before any training can
begin.
B. New driver approval. After a qualified applicant for driver has
completed, to the Fire Chief's satisfaction, the training regimen
established by the Chief, the Chief will submit the driver's name to
Borough Council for approval of the applicant as a new driver. Borough
Council shall condition its offer of approval on the provision by the
applicant of such medical information which may be required by the
Borough and which is relevant to the applicant's ability to perform the
duties of a vehicle driver for the Department. Upon appropriate
submission of such information, the applicant shall be certified as a
driver.
C. All drivers of Borough Fire Department or ambulance vehicles shall
comply with the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Physical
Guidelines (ICC Physical). The Pennsylvania State Vehicle Code146 and
all related traffic regulations will be followed at all times in the
operation of Department vehicles and equipment.
D. Only approved and certified drivers will operate Department vehicles
and equipment.
E. Drivers will stay with their vehicle or piece of equipment which they are
operating at all incidents unless otherwise directed by the Chief or
Assistant Chief at the scene.
F. All drivers will complete an EVOC course within one year of being
certified and approved as a driver (all current drivers will complete an
EVOC course within one year of being so directed by the Chief); failure
to complete the EVOC course will result in removal of driver status.
146. Editor's Note: See Title 75.
§ A132-4 § A132-6
A132:742
§ A132-6. Emergency medical services (EMS).
§ A132-7. Special fire police.
§ A132-8. Conventions, training and contests.
All requests for utilization of Borough equipment and attendance of Fire
Department or Steelton Volunteer Fire Department personnel at
conventions, training sessions, pumping contests and similar events will be
submitted to Borough Council for prior approval.
§ A132-9. Mutual aid.
Mutual aid assistance will be given to those municipalities with whom
the Borough of Steelton has a municipal aid agreement relating to the
provision of such fire or emergency assistance. In no event will mutual aid
be supplied which has the result of leaving the Borough without sufficient
protection against fires or other emergencies. In accordance with mutual
aid agreements, the Chief of the Fire Department or his designee shall
determine whether or not mutual aid assistance will be given upon request.
A. All EMS persons riding in a Department ambulance must have a current
CPR card, first aid card or card evidencing certification for medical skill
greater than a first aid card in order to be active on the ambulance.
B. Any EMS person currently enrolled in a course to receive the
certifications set forth in Subsection A above may ride in an ambulance
as long as someone else in the ambulance has current cards as specified
in Subsection A above.
C. Before training to become an ambulance driver can begin, an individual
must have one current card specified in Subsection A above.
D. Ambulance officers will be appointed by the Chief of the Fire
Department as necessary.
A. Special fire police must be members of the Steelton Volunteer Fire
Department by which they are nominated to be special fire police. The
nomination must be confirmed by the President of Borough Council.
Fire police are sworn in by the President of Borough Council.
B. All special fire police are under the jurisdiction of the Chief of Police
while at any type of incident which they are authorized to attend.
C. Special fire police, as an organization, may appoint their own officers.
§ A132-6 FIRE DEPARTMENT RULES AND § A132-10
A132:743
§ A132-10. Chart of organization.
Chapter A133
AMBULANCE CORPS RULES AND REGULATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 11. Fire Department rules and regulations — See
Ch. A132.
§ A133-1. Ambulance officers.
The purpose, function and responsibility of the ambulance officers shall be:
A. Captain.
(1) Responsible for the general distribution, collection and submission
of the various forms, reports and monthly call sheets to the Fire
Chief's office.
(2) General management and supervision of the Ambulance Corps.
(3) Arbitrate all problems and situations that are brought to his
attention by the Lieutenants of the two ambulance stations. If
further consultation is required, the Fire Chief's office will be
contacted.
§ A132-10 § A133-1
A133:744
§ A133-2. General rules and guidelines.
(4) Act as liaison between the Fire Chief's office and the Ambulance
Corps.
B. Lieutenants.
(1) Responsible for the general upkeep, maintenance and appearance
of the ambulance of his station.
(2) Overall supervision and direction of the ambulance and its crew at
his station.
C. Foreman.
(1) Responsible for the patient-related supplies, equipment and the
inventory.
(2) Assist the Lieutenant in the general maintenance of the ambulance.
D. Training Officer.
(1) Responsible for the accurate recordkeeping of the various
qualifications of the ambulance crewmen. He or she will notify each
crew member when the various qualifications of that individual will
expire.
(2) Set up all training for ambulance personnel in regards to CPR, Red
Cross or any other renewal that is necessary.
(3) Interview all new ambulance personnel; audit and record the
training level of the individual.
(4) Responsible for the setting up of all training sessions on a local
level and the posting thereof in the respective stations.
(5) All communications from the Training Officer must have the
endorsement of the Ambulance Corps and the Fire Chief's office
before said communications are posted and/or distributed, except
the notices of training sessions or directives to the general
Ambulance Corps.
A. All requests for equipment, supplies, out-of-town training with vehicles
and any suggestions to changes in the above-listed rules and
regulations will and must be forwarded to the Captain. He will in turn
set his endorsement to the request and forward same to the Fire Chief's
office. Any requests made directly to Borough Council will be referred
back to the Ambulance Captain through the Fire Chief's office and the
Fire Committee.
B. Any suspension of ambulance personnel will be handled through the
directives. Rules and regulations in regards to discipline and final
decision and letter of communication to the accused individual will be
handled by the Borough Council and Borough Secretary.
§ A133-1 AMBULANCE CORPS RULES AND § A133-2
A133:745
DISPOSITION LIST
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2005-6 6-20-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 110
2005-7 7-5-2005 Inspection licenses
amendment
Ch. 69
C. Any disagreements between the two ambulance stations will be brought
to the attention of the Captain, who in turn will consult the Fire Chief's
office, if necessary.
§ A133-2 § DL-1
DL:746