Part I, Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 2-14-1977 by Ord. No. 970]
§ 1-1. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to Section 1014.1 of the Third Class City Code (53 P.S. § 36014.1),
the codification of a complete body of ordinances for the City of Sunbury,
County of Northumberland, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as revised,
codified and consolidated into titles, chapters and sections by General Code
Publishers Corp. and consisting of Chapters 1 through 175, together with
an Appendix, is hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as a single
ordinance of the City of Sunbury which shall be known and is hereby
designated as the "Code of the City of Sunbury," hereinafter referred to as
the "Code."
§ 1-2. Effect of Code on previous provisions.
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as
those of ordinances in force immediately prior to the enactment of this
ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such ordinances and not as
new enactments, and the effectiveness of such provisions shall date from
the date of adoption of the prior ordinance. All such provisions are hereby
continued in full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their
adoption by the Council of the City of Sunbury, and it is the intention of
said Council that each such provision contained within the Code is hereby
reenacted and reaffirmed as it appears in said Code. Only such provisions of
former ordinances as are omitted from this Code shall be deemed repealed
or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-3 below.
§ 1-3. Repeal of ordinances not contained in Code.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature,
adopted by the City of Sunbury and in force on the date of the adoption
of this Code, and not contained in the Code, are hereby repealed as of the
effective date given in § 1-16 below, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 1-4. Ordinances saved from repeal; matters not affected by repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-3 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to August 9, 1976 (Ord. No. 928).
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the City prior to the effective date of this Code or
any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:3
§ 1-5. Inclusion of new legislation prior to adoption of Code.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted subsequent
to the date given in § 1-4A and/or prior to the date of adoption of this
ordinance are hereby deemed to be a part of the Code and shall, upon being
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
Code in violation of any legislative provision of the City or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending,
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this Code
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the City.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the City.
F. Any ordinance, or part of an ordinance, providing for laying out,
opening, altering, widening, relocating, straightening, establishing
grade, changing name, improvement, acceptance or vacation of any
right-of-way, easement, street, road, highway, sidewalks, park or other
public place or property.
G. Any ordinance requiring the construction or reconstruction of
sidewalks, curbs or gutters.
H. Any ordinance or resolution appropriating money or transferring funds,
promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the
issuance and delivery of any bond of the City, or other instruments or
evidence of the City's indebtedness.
I. Any ordinance adopting an annual budget or establishing an annual tax
rate.
J. Any ordinance authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property, or any lawful contract, obligation or agreement.
K. Any ordinance annexing land to the City.
L. Any ordinance establishing water, sewer or other special purpose
districts and designating the boundaries thereof, or providing for a
system of sewers or water supply lines.
M. Any ordinance providing for the salaries and compensation of officers
and employees of the City, or establishing personnel policies for City
employees.
N. The levy or imposition of special assessment or charges.
O. The dedication of property.
P. Any ordinance amending the Zoning Map which shows the boundaries
of zones created by the Zoning Ordinance adopted 7-10-1967 by Ord.
No. 801.
§ 1-4 SUNBURY CODE § 1-5
1:4
printed, be included therein. Attested copies of all such legislation shall be
temporarily placed in the Code until printed supplements are included.
§ 1-6. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
In compiling and preparing the ordinances of the City for adoption and
revision as part of the Code, certain grammatical changes and other minor
nonsubstantive changes were made in one or more of said ordinances. It is
the intention of the Council that all such changes be adopted as part of the
Code as if the ordinances so changed had been previously formally amended
to read as such. Certain changes of a substantive nature were adopted
by separate ordinances during the process of codification but prior to the
adoption of this ordinance. Such changes and revisions are cited within the
historical statements of individual chapters by the phrase, " . . . amended (or
added) at time of adoption of Code . . .," and are a part of the Code adopted
hereby.1
§ 1-7. Interpretation of provisions.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of the Code, they shall be held
to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health,
safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where the provisions of
the Code impose greater restrictions or requirements than those of any
statute, other ordinance or regulation, the provisions of the Code shall
control. Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance or regulation
impose greater restrictions or requirements, the provisions of such statute,
other ordinance or regulation shall control.
§ 1-8. Titles and headings; editor's notes.
§ 1-9. Copies of Code on file.
A copy of the Code in a post-bound volume shall be filed with the ordinance
book in the office of the City Clerk and shall remain there for use and
A. Chapter and article titles, headings and titles of sections and other
divisions in the Code, or in supplements made to the Code, are inserted
in the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code, and are not part of the
ordinances.
B. Editor's notes indicating sources of sections, giving other information
or referring to the statutes or to other parts of the Code are inserted in
the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
ordinance.
1. Editor's Note: A list of sections of the Code that were added or amended pursuant to § 1-6,
including the ordinance number and adoption date of the ordinance which effected the
change, is on file in the office of the City Clerk. This information has been inserted in the
Code where applicable. A complete copy of each ordinance is on file in the office of the
City Clerk.
§ 1-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-9
1:5
examination by the public. Upon adoption, such copy shall be certified to by
the City Clerk, as provided by law, and such certified copy shall remain on
file in the office of the City Clerk, available to persons desiring to examine
the same during all times while the said Code is in effect.
§ 1-10. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code,
when passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the
Council to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into such
Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and intended to
include such changes. Whenever such additions, deletions, amendments or
supplements to the Code shall be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed
and, as provided hereunder, inserted in the post-bound book containing the
said Code, as amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-11. Code books to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the City Clerk, or someone authorized and directed
by him or her, to keep up-to-date the certified copies of the book containing
the Code required to be filed in the office of the City Clerk for the use of the
public. All changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted by the Council
subsequent to the effective date of this codification which the Council
shall adopt specifically as part of the Code, shall, when finally adopted, be
included therein by reference until such changes or new ordinances are
printed as supplements to said Code book, at which time such supplements
shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-12. Sale of Code book; supplements provided.
Copies of the book containing the Code may be purchased from the City
Clerk upon the payment of a fee to be set by resolution of the Council, which
may also arrange for procedures for the periodic supplementation thereof.
§ 1-13. Publication; filing.
The City Clerk, pursuant to law, shall cause to be published in the manner
required a notice of the introduction and of the adoption of the Code in
a newspaper of general circulation in the City. Sufficient copies of the
Code shall be maintained in the office of the City Clerk for inspection by
the public at all times during regular office hours. The enactment and
application of this ordinance, coupled with the publication of the notices
of introduction and adoption, as required by law, and the availability of
copies of the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and
considered to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for
all purposes.
§ 1-14. Severability of provisions.
Each section of the Code and of this ordinance, and every part of each
section, is an independent section or part of a section, and the holding of
§ 1-9 SUNBURY CODE § 1-14
1:6
any section, or part thereof, to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for
any cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of
any other section or part thereof.
§ 1-15. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, or to alter or tamper with the Code, or any part or portion
thereof, in any manner whatsoever, which will cause the law of the City to
be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section of this ordinance
shall be subject, upon conviction, to a fine of not more than $300, and
costs of prosecution, and in default of payment of such fine and costs, to
imprisonment for not more than 30 days.
§ 1-16. Effective date.
All provisions of the Code shall be in force and effect on and after February
25, 1977.
§ 1-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-16
1:7

ARTICLE II
Ordinances Enacted During Codification
[During the process of codification, certain complete new
ordinances were approved by the Mayor and Council for inclusion
in the Code of the City of Sunbury. Such new ordinances are noted
in the histories of individual chapters as " . . . Adopted during
codification; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II." In accordance
with recognized codification procedures, these new ordinances were
adopted separately by the Mayor and Council. A complete
enumeration of all chapters in the Code involved in such enactment
is included in this article, along with specific dates of adoption.]
Chapter (or Article)
Ordinance
Number Adoption Date
Ch. 28, Art. VII, Deputy Health
Officer
932 2-14-1977
Ch. 33, Planning Commission 933 2-14-1977
Ch. 99, Handbills and Littering 934 2-14-1977
Ch. 124, Peddling and Soliciting 935 2-14-1977
Ch. 135, Sales, Special 936 2-14-1977
Ch. 151, Art. II, Earned Income
Tax
937 4-11-1977
Ch. 157, Transient Merchants 938 2-14-1977
Ch. 166, Vehicles, Inoperable 939 2-14-1977
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-16
1:9
Chapter 3
ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 11.
Housing Authority — See Ch. 15.
Municipal Authority — See Ch. 24.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 28.
Planning Committee — See Ch. 33.
Police Force — See Ch. 35.
Shade Tree Commission — See Ch. 44.
§ 1-16 SUNBURY CODE § 1-16
1:10
ARTICLE I
Executive Departments
[Adopted 1-10-1966 by Ord. No. 783; amended in its entirety
2-14-2000]
§ 3-1. Distribution of executive and administrative powers.
The executive and administrative powers, authority and duties of the City
of Sunbury are distributed into and among the five executive departments
established by the Third Class City Code (Act of June 23, 1931, P.L. 932, Art.
XI, Sec. 1101; Act of June 28, 1951, P.L. 662, Section 11, 53 P.S. § 36101),
as hereinafter provided.
§ 3-2. Department of Public Affairs.
§ 3-3. Department of Accounts and Finance.
A. The Mayor shall serve as Director of the Department of Public Affairs.
The Director of the Department of Public Affairs shall:
(1) Be the chief executive officer and representative of the City.
(2) Have supervision over the City Police Force and personnel
employed for the Police Force.2
(3) Sign all contracts, ordinances and resolutions on behalf of the City.
B. The City Solicitor, City Clerk, all Police Force personnel and all other
officers and employees not assigned to another department are
assigned to the Department of Public Affairs.
A. The Councilman selected as Director of Accounts and Finance shall be
in charge of the Department of Accounts and Finance and shall:
(1) Have charge of and supervision over all accounts and financial
records of the City and all officers, boards or departments required
to make accounts, records or reports.
(2) Inspect, or cause to be inspected, all records or accounts required
to be kept in offices or departments of City government.
(3) Cause proper accounts, records and reports to be kept and made by
the officers and departments of City government.
(4) Cause to be audited by the City Controller, in compliance with the
law the accounts of every officer or employee who does or may
receive or distribute money.
(5) Have charge of the purchase, care and distribution of all supplies
and materials for the City.
2. Editor's Note: See Ch. 35, Police Force.
§ 3-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-3
1:11
§ 3-4. Department of Public Safety.
The Councilman selected as Director of Public Safety shall be in charge of
the Department of Public Safety. The Director of the Department of Public
Safety shall have charge of:
§ 3-5. Department of Streets and Public Improvements.
The Councilman selected as Director of Streets and Public Improvements
shall be in charge of the Department of Streets and Public Improvements.
The Director of said Department shall take charge of and supervise:
(6) Have charge and supervision over all printing done for the City and
cause to be prepared and published all statements and reports
required by law or ordinance or resolution of Council.
(7) Examine or cause to be examined and report to the Council upon all
bills, accounts, payrolls and claims before they are acted upon or
allowed.
(8) Report to Council any failure to make reports to or pay money due
the City with such recommendation as he may deem proper.
B. The City Assessor is assigned to the Department of Accounts and
Finances and shall be under the supervision and direction of the
Director of Accounts and Finance.
A. The fire alarm system and all apparatus related thereto, but the
caretaker or superintendent of the same shall be appointed by majority
vote of City Council.
B. Disposal of dead animals found upon public streets or alleys or on
public property.
C. Street and public lighting.
D. Fire departments.3
E. The curb market.4
F. Electrical signs and other signs, except as they should be within the
scope of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Sunbury.5
G. General health conditions, problems, nuisances and hazards, except
that the City Council assembled shall be deemed the Board of Health
and as such it shall designate by majority vote the person to be
appointed to the office of Health Officer or his assistants.
3. Editor's Note: See Ch. 11, Fire Department.
4. Editor's Note: See Ch. 109, Markets, Curbstone.
5. Editor's Note: See Ch. 175, Zoning.
§ 3-3 SUNBURY CODE § 3-5
1:12
§ 3-6. Department of Parks and Public Property.
A. All public garbage disposal areas and public works, including, but not
limited to, the erections of public buildings.
B. The flood control protection systems of the City, including the pumping
stations and all equipment therein, and all flood levees erected in
conjunction with said flood protection system.
C. The cleaning of streets.
D. The erection, making and reconstruction of all streets, improvements,
sidewalks, surface drains, bridges, viaducts and other improvements
relating to streets and their maintenance and repair.
E. The approval of estimates of the City Engineer of the cost of work as it
progresses.
F. The acceptance of work done or improvements made when completed
according to contract.
G. The enforcement of City ordinances relating to billboards.
A. The Councilman selected as Director of Parks and Public Property shall
be in charge of the Department of Parks and Public Property. The
Director of Parks and Public Property shall have charge of and
supervision over:
(1) The care and maintenance of City Hall and the furniture and all
equipment therein.
(2) The municipal cemetery.
(3) The public comfort station and all other buildings not otherwise
assigned, the fixtures and property therein.
(4) The janitors and other attendants necessary or required to clean,
repair and take charge of and supervise the improvements,
maintenance and care of all grounds surrounding the respective
buildings designated in charge of the department.
(5) All public parks now established or hereafter created and the
bathing in public waters.
B. The Director of Parks and Public Property shall:
(1) Estimate the physical worth of all public property under his charge
and report the same to the Department of Accounts and Finance.
(2) Approve the estimates of the City Engineer, which may be made
from time to time, of the cost of such work as the same progresses
and accept any work done or improvements made when completed,
according to contract, and perform such other duties as may be
provided by ordinance or resolution from time to time.
§ 3-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-7
1:13
§ 3-7. Relationship of departments to City Council.
A. All department heads are the agents of Council only, and all their acts
shall be subject to review and to the approval or revocation by Council.
B. Every department head shall, from time to time, as required by law or
ordinance, or when requested by Council, report to the Council, in
writing, respecting the affairs of his department.
§ 3-7 SUNBURY CODE § 3-7
1:14
ARTICLE II
Department of Purchasing
[Adopted 1-10-1966 by Ord. No. 786]
§ 3-8. Findings of fact, declaration of policy.
The City of Sunbury does not presently have a coordinated, businesslike
system of purchasing supplies and materials; purchases of supplies and
materials by the City are made by each department without any central
coordination or method of ensuring that needless purchases are not made;
and the taxpayers' dollars in the City Budget cannot be fully protected
or used to maximum efficiency without an orderly, businesslike system of
purchasing supplies and materials; therefore, it is declared to be the policy
of the City of Sunbury to create a Purchasing Department and to require
that all City purchases be effected through said Department.
§ 3-9. Department created; Director of Purchasing.
There is hereby created a Department of Purchasing in the City of Sunbury.
The Department shall be conducted by a Director of Purchasing, which
position shall be filled by the Councilman who is the Director of Accounts
and Finance. The Director of Accounts and Finance shall receive no
compensation in addition to his salary as Councilman for his service as
Director of Purchasing.
§ 3-10. Purchasing responsibilities of Director and department
heads.
A. The Director of Purchasing shall have supervision over the purchase
and distribution of all supplies and materials purchased by the City of
Sunbury.
B. Each department head shall provide the Director of Purchasing with a
copy of the inventory of personal property and supplies of the City
within his department, which inventory he is required to maintain
perpetually by the Third Class City Code, 53 P.S. § 36104. Each
department head shall notify the Director of Purchasing of changes in
the inventory as they occur.
C. All purchases of supplies and materials by the City of Sunbury shall be
made by the Director of Purchasing or such persons as he may
authorize to make said purchases. Department heads requiring supplies
or material shall submit their request to the Director of Purchasing,
who shall fill such requests whenever possible with supplies and
materials already owned by the City.
D. In carrying out his responsibilities, the Director of Purchasing shall
operate the Department of Purchasing in accordance with such rules
and regulations as may be adopted by Council from time to time. The
rules and regulations adopted by Council may include the manner in
which quotation shall be secured on the supplies purchased.
§ 3-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-10
1:15

ARTICLE III
Supervision of Personnel
[Adopted 11-13-1972 by Ord. No. 884; amended 7-28-1996]
§ 3-11. Responsibility of departmental Directors for their
personnel.
The Director of each executive department of the City of Sunbury shall have
general supervision and overall responsibility for the work assignment of
employees within the department of the Director. Council shall prescribe,
by ordinance, the number, duties, and compensation of the officers and
employees of the City. Additionally, Council shall have the sole authority to
appoint and dismiss all City officers and employees.
§ 3-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-11
1:17
Chapter 11
FIRE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Public Safety — See Ch. 3, Art.
I.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 88.
§ 11-1. Formation of Volunteer Fire Department.
The several fire companies of the City, to wit: Good Intent Fire Company,
incorporated July 2, 1841; Sunbury Steam Fire Company No. 1,
incorporated December 3, 1870; Washington Steam Fire Company,
incorporated January 16, 1874; Rescue Hose Company No. 1, incorporated
December 18, 1888; Americus Hose Company, incorporated November 9,
1893; Friendship Hose Company, incorporated January 25, 1896; East
Sunbury Hose Company No. 1, incorporated March 10, 1896; and the Good
Will Hose Company, incorporated November 20, 1899, be and are hereby
formed into an association to be known as the "Volunteer Fire Department
of the City of Sunbury, Pennsylvania."
§ 11-2. Board of Representatives: creation, membership; powers.
A Board of Representatives is hereby created. The said Board is hereby
vested with the power to enact laws, rules and regulations for the
government of the Volunteer Fire Department and the Fire Police herein
authorized, and to compel obedience to the same; also to receive moneys
and to disburse the same for the purposes of the Volunteer Fire Department.
Each member company of the Department shall be entitled to three
representatives, who shall be elected or appointed at stated periods and for
such terms as the regulations of the Department may provide.
§ 11-3. Board of Representatives to elect necessary officers.
It shall be the duty of the Board to elect from its members all officers
necessary for the government of the Board of Representatives.
§ 11-4. Officers of Department; qualifications for office.
The officers of the Department shall be a Chief Engineer, First, Second and
Third Assistant Engineers and such other officers as the regulations may
provide. No person shall be eligible to office in the Department who has
not been a resident voter in the City of Sunbury and an active member in
one of the Department companies for three years immediately preceding
his election or appointment. This provision shall not apply to the
representatives or officers of the Board. All officers, representatives and
Board officers must at all times be in good standing in their respective
companies.
§ 3-11 SUNBURY CODE § 11-5
11:18
§ 11-5. Nonmember companies not to use City funds or property.
No company now or hereafter organized in the City of Sunbury for the
protection of life or property from fire shall receive any appropriation
from said City unless such company is a member of and conforms to the
regulations of the Department; and no company not a member of the
Department shall be permitted to use any of the property of said City.
§ 11-6. Authority of Engineers during fire alarms; duty of Fire
Police.
The Chief and Assistant Engineers, or officers in charge, shall in case of fire
alarms have full control and may occupy the ground or space necessary for
the operation of the Fire Department and apparatus. The Fire Police shall
furnish help for the Department and, if necessary, the Chief or Assistant
Engineers may call upon the Mayor or his legal representative for the help
of the City Police.
§ 11-7. Regulations applicable to government of Department.
The Fire Department shall be governed by the City ordinance creating it
and rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, provided that all such
rules and regulations shall, before becoming operative, be approved by the
City Council and the Mayor.
§ 11-8. Record of fires and alarms; required reports.
It shall be the duty of the Chief Engineer to enter in detail, in a book
provided by the City for the purpose and in custody of the Department, open
at all times to inspections by members of the City Council, a minute record
of all fires and alarms of fires. The Chief Engineer shall make a monthly
report, to the Superintendent of the Fire Department upon blanks provided
for that purpose, of all fires and alarms of fires, together with remarks,
suggestions or recommendations. He, at the end of the year, shall submit to
the Superintendent of the Fire Department a report upon the condition of all
property and equipment, and such other information and recommendations
as he may deem best for the interest of the City and the Department.
§ 11-9. Restrictions on taking apparatus from City.
No company shall take its apparatus beyond the City limits, except upon
authority of the Chief or his assistants. In case of out-of-town alarms, the
Chief and his assistants shall direct which companies, if any, shall respond
to the call. In event of the Chief or his assistants not being available, the
company receiving the request shall answer the call, but at the earliest
possible moment shall notify the Chief and his assistants of its action. The
Chief and his assistants shall designate what apparatus shall be taken from
the City limits for parade purposes.
§ 11-5 FIRE DEPARTMENT § 11-10
11:19
§ 11-10. Chief and Assistant Engineers: ratification of election and
oath.
The Chief and Assistant Engineers, before entering upon their duties, shall
have their election ratified by a majority vote of the City Council. These
officers shall, immediately after ratification of their election by the City
Council, subscribe to an oath, prescribed by the Department and
administered by the Mayor, for the faithful performance of their several
duties.
§ 11-11. Tampering with or damaging Department property:
information of fact; reward for apprehension.
It shall be the duty of the Chief and Assistant Engineers, or any of them, to
make information of fact against any person or persons tampering with or
damaging any property belonging to or in custody of the Department or any
member thereof. A reward of $100 is authorized for any person securing the
apprehension and conviction of any person tampering in any way with the
fire alarm system.
§ 11-12. Punishment for disobedience by member; appeal;
responsibility of company.
The Chief Engineer is hereby empowered to fine, suspend or expel any
member of any company for disobedience of orders of officers in charge
of the Department at fires. The individual so punished may appeal to the
Board of Representatives within 30 days of the imposition of the penalty.
He may further appeal to the Mayor and the City Council. The appeal
from the Board shall be taken within 10 days of the decision and shall
contain a sworn statement of facts. The City Council is hereby empowered
to make a searching investigation and its decision shall be final. The Chief
Engineer, Secretary of the Board and City Clerk shall immediately notify
the company to which the offender belongs of the judgment and all appeals
therefrom. If the company to which the offender belongs fails to carry out
the judgment unappealed from the Chief, Board or City Council within 30
days of notification, the Chief shall notify the Superintendent of the Fire
Department, whose duty it shall be to lay the same before the City Council;
and the City Council shall at the next regular meeting cite the offending
company to show cause why its appropriation from the City should not be
suspended or refused.
§ 11-13. Appeal by company from action by Department.
Any company or member of the Department, feeling itself aggrieved by any
action of the Department or its officers, may upon oath complain to the
Mayor and the City Council, which, acting as a Committee, shall investigate
such complaint and render such relief as the circumstances may warrant.
§ 11-10 SUNBURY CODE § 11-14
11:20
§ 11-14. Traffic and parking during alarm of fire.
In case of alarm of fire, the fire apparatus, Superintendent of the Fire
Department, Fire Chief and his assistants shall have the right-of-way over
and upon the streets, lanes and alleys of the City of Sunbury, and all other
traffic shall, immediately upon the sounding of an alarm, proceed to the
right side of the street upon which they are moving and stop until all fire
apparatus has passed. Individual members of the Fire Department may then
proceed to the scene of the fire with due caution, but must not park their
cars nearer than two blocks to the fire.
§ 11-15. Fire Police.
The Fire Police shall consist of three members in good standing from each
company, elected or appointed as each company may determine, and who
when duly qualified shall serve until their successors are duly qualified.
The Fire Police shall have full police powers during fires and shall meet
in City Council chambers as rules and regulations direct, and there elect
by ballot from among their number a Captain and three Lieutenants, to be
approved by a majority vote of City Council. The officers of the Fire Police
shall be sworn into office and commissioned by the Mayor. The Mayor shall
also swear in and commission the other members of the Fire Police upon
approval of the City Council. The Fire Police shall be under the control and
direction of the Chief or Assistant in charge at the fire.
§ 11-16. Maintenance provision in budget.
The Superintendent of the Fire Department shall provide, in the annual
budget of the City Council, a sum sufficient for maintenance of the Fire
Department.
Chapter 15
HOUSING AUTHORITY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Municipal Authority (parks, sewers and
water) — See Ch. 24.
§ 15-1. Intent to organize Authority.
The Council hereby signifies its intention and desire to organize an
Authority under the provisions of the Housing Authority Law.
§ 11-14 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 15-2
15:21
§ 15-2. Articles of Incorporation.
The Mayor and the City Clerk are hereby authorized and directed to
execute, on behalf of the City of Sunbury, Articles of Incorporation for said
Authority, in substantially the following form:
ARTICLES OF INCORPORATION
TO THE SECRETARY OF THE COMMONWEALTH, COMMONWEALTH OF
PENNSYLVANIA.
In compliance with the requirements of the Housing Authorities Law, 1937,
May 28, P.L. 955 (35 P.S. § 1541), the City of Sunbury, Northumberland
County, Pennsylvania, desiring to incorporate an Authority thereunder,
does hereby certify:
1. The name of the Authority is the Sunbury Housing Authority.
2. Said Authority is formed under the provisions of the Housing
Authorities Law, 1937, May 28, P.L. 955 (35 P.S. § 1541).
3. The name of the incorporating municipality is City of Sunbury,
Northumberland County, Pennsylvania.
4. The names and addresses of its municipal authorities are as
follows:6
5. The names, addresses and terms of office of the first members of
the Board of the Municipal Authority to be formed hereby are as
follows:7
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the undersigned have executed these Articles on
behalf of the City of Sunbury and have caused to be affixed the seal thereof,
this day of , 196.
Mayor
Attest:
City Clerk
COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA:
SS.
COUNTY OF NORTHUMBERLAND:
On this day of , 1965, before me, the undersigned,
personally came the above-named Lester P. Shissler and Joseph F. Kreitzer,
whose official positions in the City of Sunbury are respectively Mayor and
City Clerk and who in due form of law acknowledged the foregoing to be
the act and deed of the City of Sunbury for the purposes therein specified.
6. Editor's Note: The names and addresses of the municipal authorities at the time of the
enactment of the ordinance upon which this chapter is based are contained in the original
ordinance on file in the office of the City Clerk.
7. Editor's Note: The names, addresses and terms of office of the first Board of the Municipal
Authority are contained in the original ordinance on file in the office of the City Clerk.
§ 15-2 SUNBURY CODE § 15-2
15:22
Notary Public
My commission expires:
§ 15-3. Publication of substance of provisions.
The proper officers of the City are hereby directed to cause this chapter
to be published as required by law for the publication of ordinances, but
setting forth only briefly the substance of the proposed Articles of
Incorporation.
§ 15-4. Publication of notice of proposed filing of Articles.
The proper officers of the City are hereby directed to cause a notice of the
proposed filing of the above Articles of Incorporation to be published once
in the Sunbury Daily Item and once in the Northumberland Legal Journal.
§ 15-5. Filing of Articles with commonwealth; effecting of
incorporation.
The Mayor and City Clerk are directed to file said Articles of Incorporation,
together with the necessary proof of publication, with the Secretary of
the Commonwealth, and to do all other acts and things necessary or
appropriate to effect the incorporation of the Sunbury Housing Authority.
§ 15-6. Appointment of first Board of Authority.
The following-named persons be and they hereby are appointed as the
first members of the Board of the Authority, whose terms of office shall
commence on the date of appointment and shall be computed from
September 1, 1965.8
Chapter 17
INSURANCE
8. Editor's Note: The names, addresses and terms of office of the first Board of the Municipal
Authority are contained in the original ordinance on file in the office of the City Clerk.
§ 15-2 INSURANCE § 15-6
17:23

ARTICLE I
Fire Insurance Proceeds
[Adopted 2-12-2001]
§ 17-1. Insurance proceeds after property damage.
The City of Sunbury hereby includes the remedies set forth in 1992 P.L. 678,
No. 98, concerning insurance proceeds. A copy of the Pennsylvania statute
is available for public inspection in the office of the City Clerk.
§ 17-1 INSURANCE § 17-1
17:25
Chapter 18
INTERGOVERNMENTAL AGREEMENTS
§ 17-1 SUNBURY CODE § 17-1
18:26
ARTICLE I
Schuylkill Region Insurance Cooperative
[Adopted 2-13-2006 by Ord. No. 1246]
§ 18-1. Incorporation of preamble.9
The caption and preamble of this article set forth above are incorporated
herein by reference.
§ 18-2. Approval of Agreement.
This political subdivision hereby approves entering into the Agreement, a
copy of which is attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference (and
which shall be filed with the minutes of the meeting at which this article
was enacted), with the intent and effect that this political subdivision shall
be bound by the Agreement.
§ 18-3. Execution and delivery of Agreement.
The Chairman or Vice Chairman of the governing body, acting alone or
together with the Secretary or Assistant Secretary, are hereby authorized
and directed on behalf of the political subdivision (i) to execute and deliver
the Agreement, and (ii) to execute and deliver such additional instruments,
and to take such further actions, as may be necessary or appropriate to
carry forth the Agreement and the transactions to be effected under the
Agreement, including payment to the SRIC of such amounts as are due by
the political subdivision pursuant to the Agreement.
§ 18-4. Approval of actions taken in pursuit of establishment of
SRIC.
All actions of any officer, agent or other representative of this political
subdivision heretofore taken in the pursuit of the establishment of the SRIC
and/or the political subdivision's participation therein, are hereby ratified
and approved in all respects.
9. Editor's Note: The preamble of Ord. No. 1246 read as follows: Preamble. A. A number of
political subdivisions within Schuylkill and Northumberland Counties, Pennsylvania, have
investigated whether it would be mutually beneficial to cooperate with each other in
obtaining employee benefit insurance. B. A plan has been presented to establish the
Schuylkill Region Insurance Cooperative (the "SRIC") for the purpose of collectively
purchasing employee benefits insurance. C. The SRIC will be established pursuant to an
intergovernmental cooperation agreement entitled the "Schuylkill Region Insurance
Cooperative Agreement" (the "Agreement"). D. Pursuant to the Pennsylvania
Intergovernmental Cooperation Act, 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 481 et seq., a municipality may enter
into an intergovernmental cooperation agreement upon the passage of an ordinance by its
governing body. NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ENACTED AND ORDAINED by the City (the
"Governing Body") of Sunbury, Northumberland County, Pennsylvania (the "Political
Subdivision"), as follows:
§ 18-1 INTERGOVERNMENTAL AGREEMENTS § 18-5
18:27
§ 18-5. Governing body authorized to carry out purposes of
Agreement.
The governing body of the political subdivision is hereby authorized to take
such other action as may be necessary or appropriate to carry out the
purposes of this article and of the Agreement.
§ 18-6. Findings and determinations.
As required by the Pennsylvania Intergovernmental Cooperation Act,10 the
following matters are specifically found and determined:
§ 18-7. Severability.
The provisions of this article are severable, and if any section, sentence,
clause or part or provision hereof shall be held to be illegal, invalid or
unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision of the
court shall not affect the remaining sections, clauses, parts or provisions of
this article. It is hereby declared to be the intent of the political subdivision
that such article would have been enacted if such illegal, invalid or
A. The conditions of the Agreement are set forth in the Agreement;
B. This political subdivision shall participate in the SRIC for an initial term
of three years. All renewal terms shall be as further set forth therein;
C. The purpose and objectives of the Agreement are as set forth in the
preamble of this article and in the Agreement;
D. The manner and extent of financing the Agreement are that:
(1) No borrowing will be required by the political subdivision;
(2) Funds to implement the political subdivision's obligations under
the Agreement same shall come from normal and usual budgeted
amounts for such matters; and
(3) Other provisions governing the manner and extent of the financing
of the SRIC shall be as set forth in the Agreement;
E. The SRIC shall be managed by its Board of Directors pursuant to the
terms of the Agreement;
F. All property, real or personal, of the SRIC shall be acquired, managed,
licensed or disposed of by the SRIC in accordance with the terms of the
Agreement; and
G. The SRIC created by the Agreement shall be empowered to enter into
contracts for policies of group insurance and employee benefits
pursuant to the terms of the Agreement.
10.Editor's Note: See 53 Pa. C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
§ 18-5 SUNBURY CODE § 18-7
18:28
unconstitutional section, sentence, clause, part or provision had not been
included herein.
§ 18-8. Construal of provisions.
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to affect any suit or
proceeding in any court, or any rights acquired or liability incurred, or any
cause of action existing prior to the enactment of this article.
§ 18-7 INTERGOVERNMENTAL AGREEMENTS § 18-8
18:29

ARTICLE II
Pennsylvania Municipal Health Insurance Cooperative
[Adopted 2-13-2006 by Ord. No. 1247]
§ 18-9. Incorporation of preamble.11
The caption and preamble of this article set forth above are incorporated
herein by reference.
§ 18-10. Approval of Agreement.
This political subdivision hereby approves entering into the Agreement, a
copy of which is attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference (and
which shall be filed with the minutes of the meeting at which this article
was enacted), with the intent and effect that this political subdivision shall
be bound by the Agreement.
§ 18-11. Execution and delivery of Agreement.
The Chairman or Vice Chairman of the governing body, acting alone or
together with the Secretary or Assistant Secretary, are hereby authorized
and directed on behalf of the political subdivision (i) to execute and deliver
the Agreement, and (ii) to execute and deliver such additional instruments,
and to take such further actions, as may be necessary or appropriate to
carry forth the Agreement and the transactions to be effected under the
Agreement, including payment to the PMHIC of such amounts as are due by
the political subdivision pursuant to the Agreement.
§ 18-12. Approval of actions taken in pursuit of establishment of
PMHIC.
All actions of any officer, agent or other representative of this political
subdivision heretofore taken in the pursuit of the establishment of the
PMHIC and/or the political subdivision's participation therein, are hereby
ratified and approved in all respects.
11.Editor's Note: The preamble of Ord. No. 1247 read as follows: Preamble. A. A number of
political subdivisions within central Pennsylvania have investigated whether it would be
mutually beneficial to cooperate with each other in obtaining employee benefit insurance.
B. A plan has been presented to establish the Pennsylvania Municipal Health Insurance
Cooperative (the "PMHIC") for the purpose of collectively purchasing employee benefits
insurance. C. The PMHIC will be established pursuant to an intergovernmental
cooperation agreement entitled the Pennsylvania Municipal Health Insurance Cooperative
Agreement ("the Agreement"). D. Pursuant to the Pennsylvania Intergovernmental
Cooperation Act, 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 481 et seq., a municipality may enter into an
intergovernmental cooperation agreement upon the passage of an ordinance by its
governing body. NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ENACTED AND ORDAINED by the Council (the
"Governing Body") of City of Sunbury, Northumberland County, Pennsylvania (the
"Political Subdivision"), as follows:
§ 18-9 INTERGOVERNMENTAL AGREEMENTS § 18-13
18:31
§ 18-13. Governing body authorized to carry out purposes of
Agreement.
The governing body of the political subdivision is hereby authorized to take
such other action as may be necessary or appropriate to carry out the
purposes of this article and of the Agreement.
§ 18-14. Findings and determinations.
As required by the Pennsylvania Intergovernmental Cooperation Act,12 the
following matters are specifically found and determined:
§ 18-15. Severability.
The provisions of this article are severable, and if any section, sentence,
clause or part or provision hereof shall be held to be illegal, invalid or
unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision of the
court shall not affect the remaining sections, clauses, parts or provisions of
this article. It is hereby declared to be the intent of the political subdivision
A. The conditions of the Agreement are set forth the Agreement.
B. This political subdivision shall participate in the PMHIC for an initial
term of three years from the date that they first elected to purchase
benefits through PMHIC. Thereafter, termination of the Agreement
shall be as further set forth therein.
C. The purpose and objectives of the Agreement are as set forth in the
preamble of this article and in the Agreement.
D. The manner and extent of financing the Agreement are that:
(1) No borrowing will be required by the political subdivision;
(2) Funds to implement the political subdivision's obligations under
the Agreement same shall come from normal and usual budgeted
amounts for such matters; and
(3) Other provisions governing the manner and extent of the financing
of the PMHIC shall be as set forth in the Agreement.
E. The PMHIC shall be managed by its Board of Directors pursuant to the
terms of the Agreement.
F. All property, real or personal, of the PMHIC shall be acquired,
managed, licensed or disposed of by the PMHIC in accordance with the
terms of the Agreement.
G. The PMHIC created by the Agreement shall be empowered to enter into
contracts for policies of group insurance and employee benefits
pursuant to the terms of the Agreement.
12.Editor's Note: See 53 Pa. C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
§ 18-13 SUNBURY CODE § 18-15
18:32
that such article would have been enacted if such illegal, invalid or
unconstitutional section, sentence, clause, part or provision had not been
included herein.
§ 18-16. Construal of provisions.
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to affect any suit or
proceeding in any court, or any rights acquired or liability incurred, or any
cause of action existing prior to the enactment of this article.
§ 18-15 INTERGOVERNMENTAL AGREEMENTS § 18-16
18:33
Chapter 21
MEETINGS, COUNCIL
§ 21-1. Time and place of regular meeting. [Amended 5-19-1980 by
Ord. No. 1008]
The regular meeting of the City Council shall be held on the second Monday
of every month in the Council Chambers of City Hall.
Chapter 24
MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Housing Authority — See Ch. 15. Sewers — See Ch. 139.
§ 24-1. Intent to organize Authority.
The City Council hereby signifies its intention and desire to organize an
Authority under the provisions of the Municipality Authorities Act of 1945.13
§ 24-2. Articles of Incorporation. [Amended 8-12-1955 by Ord. No.
577A; 2-14-1977 by Ord. No. 941]
The Mayor and the City Clerk are hereby authorized and directed to
execute, on behalf of the City of Sunbury, Articles of Incorporation for said
Authority, in substantially the following form:
ARTICLES OF INCORPORATION
TO THE SECRETARY OF THE COMMONWEALTH, COMMONWEALTH OF
PENNSYLVANIA:
In compliance with the requirements of the Act of May 2, 1945 (Act
No. 164), known as "Municipality Authorities Act of 1945,"14 the City of
Sunbury, Northumberland County, Pennsylvania, desiring to incorporate an
Authority thereunder, does hereby certify:
1. The name of the Authority is "The Municipal Authority of the
City of Sunbury, County of Northumberland, Pennsylvania."
2. The said Authority is formed under the provisions of the Act of
May 2, 1945 (Act No. 164), P.L. 382. The term of existence of the
Authority shall extend for 50 years from the date of approval of
these Articles of Amendment.
13.Editor's Note: Said Act (53 P.S. §§ 301 to 322, inclusive), was repealed 6-19-2001 by P.L.
287, No. 22. See now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
14.Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
§ 18-16 SUNBURY CODE § 24-2
21:34
3. No other Authority organized under said Act of May 2, 1945,
(Act No. 164), or under the Act approved the 28th day of June,
1935 (Pamphlet Laws 463), is in existence in or for the
incorporating municipality, the City of Sunbury.
4. The name of the incorporating municipality is "City of Sunbury,
County of Northumberland, Pennsylvania."
5. The names and addresses of its municipal authorities are as
follows:15
Members of City Council:16
6. There shall be seven members of the Board of Authority, each of
whom shall serve terms of office of five years; the terms of three
members shall expire in years ending in the numbers one and
six and the term of one member shall expire in every other year.
7. The ordinance authorizing the creation of said Authority,
certified from the records of the City of Sunbury, together with
advertisement of notice of filing these Articles of Incorporation,
are submitted herewith.
8. The projects to be undertaken by the Authority shall be for
the purpose of acquiring, holding, constructing, improving,
maintaining and operating, owning or leasing, in the capacity
of either lessor or lessee, of parks, recreation grounds and
facilities, sewers, sewer systems, or parts thereof, sewage
treatment works, including works for treating and disposing of
industrial waste, waterworks, water supply works and water
distribution systems in the City of Sunbury and such other area
as the Authority may be authorized to serve.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the undersigned have executed these Articles
of Incorporation on behalf of the City of Sunbury, and have caused to be
affixed hereto the seal of said City this day of , 1947.
Mayor
City Clerk
Attest:
City Clerk
COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA:
SS.
COUNTY OF NORTHUMBERLAND:
15.Editor's Note: The names of the municipal authorities are contained in the original
ordinance on file in the office of the City Clerk.
16.Editor's Note: The names of the members of Council at the time of the enactment of the
ordinance upon which this chapter is based are contained in the original ordinance on file
in the office of the City Clerk.
§ 24-2 MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY § 24-2
24:35
On this day of , 1947, before me, the undersigned, personally came
the above-named JOSEPH B. NESBIT and HELEN THOMPSON METZGER,
whose official positions in the City of Sunbury are respectively Mayor and
City Clerk, and who, in due form of law, acknowledged the foregoing to be
the act and deed of the City of Sunbury for the purposes therein specified.
Notary Public
§ 24-3. Publication of notice of provision.
The proper officers of the City are hereby directed to cause a notice of this
chapter to be published one time in the Northumberland Legal Journal and
one time in a newspaper published and of general circulation in the County
of Northumberland, as directed by the Act of May 2, 1945 (Act No. 164).17
§ 24-4. Filing of Articles with commonwealth; effecting of
incorporation.
The Mayor and the City Clerk are directed to file said Articles of
Incorporation, together with the necessary proofs of publication, with the
Secretary of the Commonwealth, and to do all other acts and things
necessary or appropriate to effect the incorporation of the Municipal
Authority of the City of Sunbury, County of Northumberland, Pennsylvania.
§ 24-5. Purpose of project.
The project which shall be undertaken by the said Authority is for the
purpose of acquiring, holding, constructing, improving, maintaining and
operating, owning or leasing, in the capacity of either lessor or lessee,
sewers, sewer systems or parts thereof and sewage treatment works for the
City of Sunbury and for such other territory as it may be authorized to serve.
Chapter 28
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 3.
Fire Department — See Ch. 11.
Police Force — See Ch. 35.
17.Editor's Note: 53 P.S. §§ 301 to 322, inclusive, was repealed 6-19-2001 by P.L. 287, No. 22.
See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
§ 24-2 SUNBURY CODE § 24-5
24:36
ARTICLE I
City Solicitor
[Adopted 1-17-1922 by Ord. No. 3]
§ 28-1. Bond.
The City Solicitor, before entering upon the duties of his office, shall give
bond in the sum of $1,000, with two or more sureties to be approved by
Council, conditioned for the faithful performance of his official duties, as the
same are or may be defined by law or ordinance.
§ 28-2. Compensation. [Amended 2-14-1977 by Ord. No. 942]
The Solicitor shall receive, as his compensation, an annual salary, the
amount of which shall be established from time to time by Council.
§ 28-1 MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY § 28-2
24:37

ARTICLE II
City Controller
[Adopted 1-17-1922 by Ord. No. 4]
§ 28-3. Bond.
The City Controller, before entering upon the duties of his office, shall give
bond in the sum of $1,000, with two or more sureties to be approved by
Council, conditioned for the faithful performance of his official duties, as the
same are or may be defined by law or ordinance.
§ 28-4. Compensation. [Amended 2-14-1977 by Ord. No. 943]
The City Controller shall receive, as his compensation, an annual salary, the
amount of which shall be established from time to time by Council.
§ 28-3 MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY § 28-4
24:39

ARTICLE III
City Engineer
[Adopted 1-17-1922 by Ord. No. 5]
§ 28-5. Duties. [Amended 2-10-1941 by Ord. No. 407; 4-17-1944 by
Ord. No. 433]
The City Engineer shall perform the duties prescribed by law and ordinance
and such other duties as Council may prescribe from time to time with
reference to construction, reconstruction, maintenance and repair of all
streets, roads, pavements, sewers, bridges, culverts and other engineering
work. He shall prepare plans, specifications and estimates for all such work
undertaken by such City and shall, whenever required, furnish Council, the
committees thereof, the Mayor, public boards or heads of departments with
reports, information or estimates on any City engineering work or questions
submitted by any of them in their official capacity.
§ 28-6. Bond.
The City Engineer shall give bond, with sureties to be approved of by the
Council, in the sum of $1,000, conditioned for the faithful performance of
his duties, as the same are or may be defined by law or ordinance.
§ 28-7. Compensation. [Amended 2-10-1941 by Ord. No. 407;
4-17-1944 by Ord. No. 433; 2-14-1977 by Ord. No. 944]
The City Engineer shall receive, as his compensation, an annual salary, the
amount of which shall be established from time to time by Council.
§ 28-5 MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY § 28-7
24:41

ARTICLE IV
City Physician
[Adopted 12-1-1925 by Ord. No. 122]
§ 28-8. Position created; appointment; duties. [Amended 2-14-1977
by Ord. No. 945]
The position of City Physician, in the Department of Health, shall be and is
hereby created. The City Physician shall be appointed by Council and shall
have the duty of making and executing all certificates and other papers
required by law to be certified by a physician connected with the City
government.18
18.Editor's Note: Section 2 of the original ordinance upon which this article is based, which
authorized the Mayor to appoint the City Physician and provided a salary for such officer,
was repealed 2-14-1977 by Ord. No. 945. The City Physician is now paid for services
rendered by the use of a voucher system.
§ 28-8 MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY § 28-8
24:43

ARTICLE V
Health Officer
[Adopted 2-10-1958 by Ord. No. 615]
§ 28-9. Duties.
The Health Officer shall perform all of the duties prescribed by Acts of
Assembly of the commonwealth, as well as all ordinances of the City, and
such other duties as shall be imposed upon him by resolution of Council
from time to time.
§ 28-10. Qualifications.
The Health Officer shall be a person with some experience or training in
public health work, in accordance with rules and regulations of the Advisory
Health Board of the State Department of Health, and who shall not enter
upon his duties until he has been certified for the office of Health Officer by
the State Department of Health.
§ 28-11. Compensation. [Amended 2-14-1977 by Ord. No. 946]
The City Health Officer shall receive, as his compensation, an annual salary,
the amount of which shall be established from time to time by Council.
§ 28-9 MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY § 28-11
24:45

ARTICLE VI
City Treasurer
[Adopted 3-8-1965 by Ord. No. 762]
§ 28-12. Duties. [Amended 2-14-1977 by Ord. No. 947]
The duly elected and qualified Treasurer of the City of Sunbury shall be the
treasurer and collector for all City taxes and may serve as collector for the
taxes as shall be permitted by law.
§ 28-13. Bond. [Amended 2-14-1977 by Ord. No. 947]
The City Treasurer shall give bond, with sureties to be approved by the
Council, in the sum of $363,210, conditioned for the faithful performance of
his duties as the same are or may be defined by law or ordinance.
§ 28-14. Salary. [Amended 2-14-1977 by Ord. No. 947]
The salary of the City Treasurer shall be as set forth in the annual budget
ordinance.
§ 28-12 MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY § 28-14
24:47

ARTICLE VII
Deputy Health Officer
[Adopted During Codification 2-14-1977 by Ord. No. 932 (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II)]
§ 28-15. Establishment of office.
The office of Deputy Health Officer is hereby established in and for the City
of Sunbury.
§ 28-16. Qualifications.
The Deputy Health Officer shall be a person having some experience or
training in public health work, in accordance with rules and regulations of
the Advisory Health Board of the Pennsylvania Department of Health, and
shall not enter upon his duties until he has been certified for the office of
Health Officer by the Pennsylvania Department of Health.
§ 28-17. Duties.
The Deputy Health Officer shall perform all of the duties prescribed by Acts
of Assembly of the commonwealth and all applicable ordinances of the City,
as may be delegated from time to time by the Health Officer, and such other
duties as shall be imposed upon him by resolution of the City Council from
time to time.
§ 28-18. Salary.
The salary or compensation of the Deputy Health Officer shall be as may be
established from time to time by the City Council.
§ 28-15 MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY § 28-18
24:49

ARTICLE VIII
City Administrator
[Adopted 4-24-2006 by Ord. No. 1249]
§ 28-19. Hiring; salary. [Amended 10-8-2018]
The City Administrator shall be an at-will employee of the City hired by a
majority vote of City Council at a public meeting. Salary shall be established
at the time of hiring with adjustments in salary through the annual budget
process and/or City Administrator employment agreement.
§ 28-20. Termination of employment.
The City Administrator may be terminated from the employment of the City
at any time through a majority vote of City Council.
§ 28-21. Qualifications.
The City Council shall determine the necessary qualifications of the City
Administrator.
§ 28-22. Job reporting and responsibilities. [Amended 10-8-2018]
The City Administrator shall be responsible to City Council with direct
reporting to, and supervision by, City Council. Job responsibilities shall be
communicated to the City Administrator by Sunbury City Council.
§ 28-23. Powers and Duties. [Amended 10-8-2018]
The City Administrator shall have the powers and duties relating to the
general management of City business and shall have the responsibility of
performing the following nonexclusive list of specific powers and duties:
A. Be the Chief Administrative Officer of the City, responsible to the City
Council for the proper and efficient administration of the affairs of the
City.
B. Direct and supervise the administration of all departments and
functions of the City, except as otherwise provided by law.
C. Except as otherwise provided by the Third Class City Code19 and any
other applicable laws, appoint City employees on the basis of merit
system principles and suspend, remove or otherwise discipline
employees, in accordance with the following:
(1) The City Administrator may make recommendations to City Council
concerning appointments or removals at the department-head
level.
19.Editor's Note: See 11 Pa.C.S.A. § 10101 et seq.
§ 28-19 MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY § 28-23
24:51
(2) Prior to action regarding appointments or removals at the
department-head level, the City Administrator shall confer with
City Council.
(3) City Council shall confirm appointments or removals at the
department-head level.
(4) The City Administrator may make recommendations to City Council
concerning the appointment, suspension, removal, promotion,
demotion and transfer of all nonuniform, noncivil employees to
accomplish efficiency in accordance with laws pertaining thereto.
D. Negotiate contracts for the City, subject to the approval of City Council,
make recommendations concerning the nature and location of
municipal improvements, and execute municipal improvements as
determined by City Council.
E. Ensure that all terms and conditions imposed in favor of the City or its
residents in any law, franchise or contract are faithfully kept and
performed, and upon knowledge of any violation, informing City
Council of such violation.
F. Attend all meetings of City Council and participate in discussions with
Council. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to permit the City
Administrator to vote with City Council.
G. Recommend the adoption of measures to City Council as the City
Administrator may deem necessary or expedient, keeping council
advised of the financial condition of the City and making reports to City
Council as requested by City Council.
H. Investigate, at any time, the affairs of any nonunion, noncivil, City
employee that is under the City Administrator's jurisdiction.
I. Prepare and participate with City Council, City Treasurer, with
submitting the annual City budget for review and approval by Council.
The recommended budget and an enabling ordinance shall be
submitted to City Council for its review not later than the last stated
meeting in November of each year. The City Administrator may include
an explanatory comment or statement of the recommended budget. The
recommended budget shall be in a form as required by law for City
budgets and shall contain information explaining the various items of
expenditure and revenue as may be required by City Council.
J. Perform such other duties as may be designated by the City Council.
K. Any of the duties listed in this article are not intended to supersede the
Third Class City Code, Civil Service Statute, or any collective
bargaining agreement.20
20.Editor’s Note: Former § 28-24, Development of human resources policy, which immediately
followed, was repealed 10-8-2018.
§ 28-23 SUNBURY CODE § 28-24
24:52
§ 28-24. Development of human resources policy.
The City Administrator shall have the responsibility of developing a human
resources policy which promotes positive working conditions in the City.
These policies shall include, but not be limited to, preventive measures
which prohibit discriminatory conduct so that the City is in full compliance
with federal, state and local laws.
§ 28-24 MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY § 28-24
24:53
Chapter 33
PLANNING COMMITTEE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 148. Zoning — See Ch. 175.
§ 33-1. Establishment.
Pursuant to the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act of July 31,
1968, P.L. 805, Art. I, § 101 et seq., as amended,21 there is hereby created
and established a Planning Committee comprised of all members of the
Council of the City of Sunbury.
§ 33-2. Powers and duties.
The Planning Committee shall have all of the powers and duties conferred
by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
Chapter 35
POLICE FORCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Public Affairs — See Ch. 3, Art.
I.
Police Pension Fund — See Ch. 37.
§ 35-1. Number of members. [Amended 1-11-2016]
The Police Force of the City of Sunbury shall consist of 15 members, as
hereinafter designated, or as many as may from time to time comprise such
membership.
§ 35-2. Positions within Force. [Amended 9-9-1974 by Ord. No. 903;
4-14-1980 by Ord. No. 1007; 11-26-1984 by Ord. No. 1061;
9-14-1987 by Ord. No. 1086; 1-16-1989 by Ord. No. 1111;
3-24-2003; 2-13-2017]
The Council of the City of Sunbury shall have the authority to designate
and fill such positions within the Police Force as it may deem advisable
from time to time in the following ranks: Chief, Captain, Sergeant, Corporal,
and the remaining members to be patrolmen after serving as probationary
21.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 28-24 SUNBURY CODE § 35-2
33:54
officers. Any position above Sergeant shall be considered to be a
management employee outside of the bargaining unit.
§ 35-3. Salaries; contribution to Police Pension Fund.
The annual salaries for members of the Police Force shall be fixed from
time to time by Council, said salaries to be paid semimonthly and subject to
the contribution therefrom of such percentage thereof to the Police Pension
Fund as may now or hereafter be fixed by the law of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania and/or ordinance of the City of Sunbury.
§ 35-4. Method of making appointments to Force. [Amended
7-12-1976 by Ord. No. 927]
Appointment to the Police Force of the City of Sunbury shall be made in
accordance with the civil service provisions of the Acts of Assembly of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and/or ordinance of this City relating
thereto, now in force or hereafter to be enacted. Each new appointee shall
undergo a probationary period of one year.
§ 35-5. Supervision of Force. [Amended 2-14-1977 by Ord. No. 948]
The supervision of the Police Force shall be the function of the Department
of Public Affairs, whose director, the Mayor, shall exercise constant
supervision and control over the Police Force.
§ 35-6. Promulgation of rules and regulations.
The Council of the City of Sunbury shall, from time to time as the occasion
may warrant, prescribe all necessary rules and regulations for the
organization and government of the Police Force.
Chapter 37
POLICE PENSION FUND
Chapter 39
RECORDS
§ 35-2 RECORDS § 35-6
39:55

ARTICLE I
Public Access
[Adopted 6-9-2003]
§ 39-1. Statement of policy.
All documents deemed public records shall be available for inspection,
retrieval and duplication at the M & T Bank/City of Sunbury Governmental
Building information desk. This facility is located at 440 Market Street.
Established hours shall be 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., with the exception of
weekends and recognized holidays.
§ 39-2. Request in writing.
Requests for records shall be in writing on a form provided by the City of
Sunbury. All requests shall be directed to the City of Sunbury Information
Director at 440 Market Street. The request shall include the requester's
name, address and other relevant information including a concise
description of all records being requested.
§ 39-3. Fees.
Paper copies shall be $0.50 per side. If documents are mailed, per request,
all costs of postage shall be assessed. Faxes shall be charged $0.50 per side
transmitted. Scanned and electronically transmitted copies shall be charged
$0.50 per side scanned. Certified documents with the municipal seal are
available for a $0.50 fee. Prepayment by a requester is required if fees are
estimated to exceed $100.
§ 39-4. Response to request.
The City of Sunbury will make a good-faith effort to determine if the record
requested is a public document and will respond promptly, circumstances
permitting. A response will be provided within five business days of a
request in accordance with the provisions of Act 200 of 2002. Every effort
shall be made to provide a written response within the designated five
business days, including the decision that a request is denied. If no response
is provided within the prescribed time limit, a request shall be deemed
denied.
§ 39-5. Appeals.
A. Upon any action of denial, a requester may file exceptions with the
Mayor of the City of Sunbury. The requester must file exceptions within
15 days of the mailing date of the City's response or within 15 days of a
deemed denial. A final determination hearing shall be conducted within
30 days of the mailing date of any exceptions. If it is deemed that a
denial was appropriate, a written explanation will be provided to the
requester.
§ 39-1 RECORDS § 39-5
39:57
B. A requester may appeal any City denial by a petition for review with the
county court of common pleas or with the local magisterial district. This
appeal must be filed within 30 days of the City's written denial.
§ 39-5 SUNBURY CODE § 39-5
39:58
Chapter 40
RETIREMENT SYSTEM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Pension Fund — See Ch. 37. Social security — See Ch. 47.
§ 40-1. Participation in Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System.
The City of Sunbury (the City), being a member municipality of the
Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System (the System), hereby elects
to amend its Municipal Pension Plan administered by the System in
accordance with Article IV of the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement Law,
53 P.S. § 881.101 et seq. (Retirement Law), and does hereby agree to be
bound by all the requirements and provisions of the Retirement Law and
the Municipal Pension Plan Funding Standard and Recovery Act, 53 P.S.
§ 895.101 et seq., and to assume all obligations, financial and otherwise,
placed upon member municipalities.
§ 40-2. Administration.
As part of this chapter, the City agrees that the System shall administer
and provide the benefits set forth in the amended Municipal Pension Plan
Contract entered into between the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement
Board and the City effective April 1, 2015 (the contract).
§ 40-3. Acceptance of contract.
The passage and adoption of this chapter by the City is an official
acceptance of the contract and the financial obligations resulting from the
administration of the contract.
§ 40-4. Payment.
Payment for any obligation established by the adoption of this chapter and
the contract shall be made by the City in accordance with the Retirement
Law and the Municipal Pension Plan Funding Standard and Recovery Act.
The City hereby assumes all liability for any unfundedness created due to
the benefit structure set forth in the contract.
§ 40-5. Authorization of plan; effective date.
The City intends this chapter to be the complete authorization of the
contract, and it shall become effective and specifically repeal Ordinance
Number 1215 either immediately or on April 1, 2015, which is the effective
date of the contract, whichever is later.
§ 39-5 RECORDS § 40-6
39:59
§ 40-6. Copies on file.
A duly certified copy of this chapter and an executed contract shall be filed
with the System.
Chapter 44
SHADE TREE COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Parks and Public
Property — See Ch. 3, Art. I.
Municipal Authority — See Ch. 24.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 148.
Trees — See Ch. 159.
§ 44-1. Commission created.
A Shade Tree Commission is hereby created in and for the City of Sunbury,
in accordance with Act of 1951, June 28, P.L. 662, Sec. 38 (53 P.S. § 38801).
§ 44-2. Membership; appointment; compensation; terms of office.
In accordance with the provisions of the aforesaid Act of Assembly, the
Commission shall be composed of three residents of the City, appointed by
the Mayor, and they shall serve without compensation. One Commissioner
shall serve for a term of three years, one for a term of four years and one for
a term of five years. On the expiration of the term of any Commissioner, a
successor shall be appointed by the Mayor to serve for a term of five years.
Any vacancy in the office of Commissioner shall be filled by the Mayor for
the unexpired term.
§ 44-3. Powers and duties.
The Shade Tree Commission hereby created shall have all the powers
and be subject to all the duties conferred by the Third Class City Code.
It shall have the authority to make, publish and enforce regulations for
the care and protection of shade trees of the City. No such regulation or
penalty prescribed for the violation thereof shall be in force until it has
been approved by the Council of the City of Sunbury, and until it has been
published at least twice in accordance with the requirements of the Third
Class City Code.
§ 44-4. Assessment of penalties; collection. [Amended 9-9-1991 by
Ord. No. 1153]
The Shade Tree Commission, with the approval of the Mayor, shall enforce
the regulations and laws of the City of Sunbury set forth in this chapter.
Any person who violates any of the provisions set forth in this chapter or
§ 40-6 SUNBURY CODE § 44-4
44:60
in a Shade Tree Commission regulation may be fined up to $200 for any
violation.
§ 44-5. Appeals. [Added 6-11-1990 by Ord. No. 1124; amended
9-9-1991 by Ord. No. 1153]
The decision of a Shade Tree Commission member may be appealed by
filing a written notice of appeal with the City Clerk within 30 days from
the date of the Shade Tree Commission member's decision. The Shade
Tree Commission shall schedule a Commission meeting within 30 days
of the date of filing the notice of appeal, at which time the reasons for
appeal shall be heard. A decision shall be rendered by the Shade Tree
Commission within 30 days. The decision of the Shade Tree Commission
may be appealed to the City Council within 30 days from the date of the
decision of the Shade Tree Commission.
§ 44-6. Tree maintenance. [Added 9-9-1991 by Ord. No. 1153]
The property owner in the City of Sunbury shall be required to maintain,
trim or remove a tree so that minimum clearance is available along a public
street. As a matter of public safety, the Shade Tree Commission member
may identify if a safety hazard is created by a tree. The determination of
these tree maintenance provisions by a Shade Tree Commission member
may be appealed as set forth in § 44-5.
§ 44-7. Application. [Added 9-9-1991 by Ord. No. 1153]
§ 44-8. List of acceptable species. [Added 9-9-1991 by Ord. No.
1153]
The Shade Tree Commission shall prepare a list of acceptable species of
trees which shall be amended from time to time in the discretion of the
Shade Tree Commission.
§ 44-9. Damage to trees. [Added 9-9-1991 by Ord. No. 1153]
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any individual to injure a tree by
breaking limbs, climbing with spurs, removing any trees or placing wires,
A. Any individual who wishes to apply for a permit as required under this
chapter shall submit an application, in writing, to the City Clerk. The
application for the permit shall specify the particular kind of work the
applicant plans to perform, and it shall state the exact location and the
species of any tree in question. The applicant shall pay a fee of $10 with
the application.
B. The City Clerk shall submit the application to a member of the Shade
Tree Commission within 72 hours of the time the application is
submitted. The Shade Tree Commission shall act upon the application
within 30 days after receiving the application.
§ 44-4 SHADE TREE COMMISSION § 44-9
44:61
cables, signs or ropes on the trees. A permit must first be obtained before
removing any tree.
Chapter 47
SOCIAL SECURITY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 28. Police Pension Fund — See Ch. 37.
§ 47-1. Legislative finding.
It is the considered opinion of this body that the extension of the social
security system to employees and officers of the City of Sunbury will be
of great benefit, not only to the employees of the City by providing that
said employees and officers may participate in the provisions of the Old Age
and Survivors Insurance System, but by enabling it to attract and retain
in employment the best of personnel and thus increase the efficiency of its
government.
§ 47-2. Extension of coverage to City officers and employees.
The 1951 Session of the General Assembly of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, in regular session, enacted a statute, known as Act No. 491,22
which is the enabling Act provided for in Section 218 of Public Law 734,
81st Congress,23 which designated the Secretary of Labor and Industry of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to act as the State Agency to implement
the coverage of employees and officers under the said Old Age and
Survivors Insurance System. The City of Sunbury is hereby authorized to
execute and deliver to the State Agency a plan, or plans, and agreement,
required under Section 6 of said enabling Act and the Social Security Act,
to extend coverage to employees and officers of the City of Sunbury and do
all other necessary things to effectuate coverage of employees and officers
under the Old Age and Survivors Insurance System.
§ 47-3. Payroll deductions and matching payments.
The Clerk is hereby authorized to establish a system of payroll deductions
to be matched by payments by the City of Sunbury to be made into the
Contribution Fund of the Social Security Act through the office of the State
Agency, and to make charges of this tax to the fund, or funds, from which
wage or salary payments are issued to employees of the City of Sunbury.
Such payments are to be made in accordance with the provisions of the law
and regulations promulgated by the State Agency and the Federal Security
22.Editor's Note: See 65 P.S. § 201 et seq.
23.Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C. § 413.
§ 44-9 SUNBURY CODE § 47-3
47:62
Administrator. Such payments which are delinquent shall bear interest at
the rate of 1/2 of 1% per month until such time as payments are made.
§ 47-4. Appropriation of matching payment; participation
commencement date.
Appropriation is hereby made from the proper fund, or funds, of the City
of Sunbury, in the necessary amount to pay into the contribution fund, as
provided in Section 4 of the enabling Act, and in accordance with the plan,
or plans, and agreement. Authority is given to the Mayor and the Clerk of
the City of Sunbury to enter into an agreement with the State Agency, which
agreement shall be in accordance with Act No. 491 and with Paragraph 218
of the Social Security Act. Such plan and agreement shall provide that the
participation of this City of Sunbury shall commence as of the first day of
January 1951.
Chapter 49
VACANT PROPERTY REVIEW COMMITTEE
§ 49-1. Creation; organization.
The City of Sunbury creates a Vacant Property Review Committee which
shall include one member of the City Council of the City of Sunbury, a
representative of the Redevelopment Authority of the City of Sunbury, a
representative of the City Planning Commission and a representative to be
designated by the Mayor from the executive branch of the City government.
§ 49-2. Powers and duties.
Said Committee, after its appointment, shall undertake the powers and
duties as provided for in said Act 94-1978 as aforesaid.24
Part II, General Legislation
Chapter 53
AIR POLLUTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dumping — See Ch. 79.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 88.
Handbills and littering — See Ch. 99.
24.Editor's Note: The preamble to this ordinance referred to said Act 94-1978 as passed by
the Pennsylvania General Assembly on 6-23-1978., See 35 P.S. § 1712.1.
§ 47-3 VACANT PROPERTY REVIEW COMMITTEE § 49-2
49:63

ARTICLE I
General Regulations
[Adopted 10-12-1970 by Ord. No. 846]
§ 53-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FURNACE — Any enclosed device specifically designed for the burning of
any material for the production of heat.
GARBAGE — All putrescible animal and vegetable matter resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
INCINERATOR — Any device specifically designed for the destruction of
refuse, sewage sludge or any other combustible material by burning.
OPEN FIRE — A fire in which any material is burned in the open or in a
receptacle other than a furnace or incinerator.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, association, syndicate, company,
firm, trust, corporation, department, bureau, agency or other entity
recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
REFUSE — Garbage, rubbish and trade waste.
RUBBISH — Solids not considered to be highly flammable or explosive,
including, but not limited to, rags, old clothes, leather, rubber, carpets,
wood, excelsior, paper, ashes, tree branches, tree leaves, yard trimmings,
furniture, tin cans, glass, crockery, masonry and other similar materials.
SALVAGE OPERATION — Any business, trade or industry engaged in whole
or in part in salvaging or reclaiming any product or material, including, but
not limited to, metals, chemicals, shipping containers or drums.
TRADE WASTE — All solid or liquid material or rubbish resulting from
construction, building operations or the prosecution of any business, trade
or industry, including, but not limited to, plastic products, cartons, paint,
grease, oil and other petroleum products, chemicals, cinders and other
forms of solid or liquid waste materials.
§ 53-2. Enforcement.
The Chief of Police, Fire Chief, Health Officer, Safety Officer or any other
duly authorized agent of the City of Sunbury shall have the power and duty
to enforce the provisions of this article.
§ 53-3. Prohibited acts; exceptions.
A. No person shall:
(1) Ignite or feed an open fire for the destruction of refuse or in the
conduct of a salvage operation in any public or private place
outside of any building in the City of Sunbury.
§ 53-1 VACANT PROPERTY REVIEW COMMITTEE § 53-3
49:65
§ 53-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-14-1977 by Ord. No.
949]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof by any District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
less than $25 nor more than $100, together with the costs, for the first
violation and not less than $50 nor more than $200, together with the costs,
for the second and subsequent violations. Each day a violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense. In default in the payment of any fine, the
defendant shall be sentenced to jail for a period not exceeding 30 days.
(2) Cause, suffer, allow or permit the maintenance of any open fire for
the destruction of refuse or in the conduct of a salvage operation on
any property under his control outside of any building in the City of
Sunbury.
(3) Attempt to burn or cause, suffer, allow or permit any attempt to
burn or any burning of any refuse, with the exception of any dry
paper and stove wood, in any stove, space heater or furnace.
[Added 10-11-1982 by Ord. No. 1042]
B. Exceptions.
(1) Open fires may be set in the performance of an official duty of any
public officer if the fire is necessary for:
(a) The prevention of a fire hazard which cannot be abated by
other means.
(b) The protection of public health.25
25.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(2), which stated that open fires could be set with the
approval of the authorized enforcement agent of this article, and which immediately
followed this subsection, was repealed 7-9-2012.
§ 53-3 SUNBURY CODE § 53-4
49:66
ARTICLE II
Outdoor Woodburning Furnaces
[Adopted 7-28-2008]
§ 53-5. Purpose.
It is generally recognized that the types of fuel used and the scale and
duration of burning by outdoor woodburning furnaces creates noxious and
hazardous smoke, soot, fumes, odors and air pollution, can be detrimental
to citizens' health, and can deprive neighboring residents of the enjoyment
of their property or premises. Therefore, with the adoption of this article,
it is the intention of the City of Sunbury council members to establish
and impose restrictions upon the construction and operation of outdoor
woodburning furnaces within the limits of the City for the purpose of
securing and promoting the public health, comfort, convenience, safety,
welfare and prosperity of the City and its inhabitants.
§ 53-6. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
OUTDOOR WOODBURNING FURNACE — An accessory structure designed
and intended, through the burning of wood, for the purpose of heating the
principal structure of any other site, building, or structure on the premises.
VIOLATOR or ANY PERSON WHO VIOLATES ANY PROVISION OF THIS
ARTICLE — Any person who owns or occupies the property at the time the
outdoor woodburning furnace had been installed and/or operated.
§ 53-7. Construction and operation prohibited.
The construction, installation and operation of outdoor woodburning
furnaces, also known as "solid-fuel heating devices" or "external heating
devices," are hereby prohibited within the City of Sunbury.
§ 53-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall be guilty of
a violation and shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not more than
$300 or to imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or both such fine and
imprisonment. Each week's continued violation shall constitute a separate
and distinct offense.
§ 53-9. Nonconforming uses.
A. Except as hereinafter provided, the lawful use of any outdoor
woodburning furnace existing at the time of the adoption of this article
may be continued although such use does not conform with the
provisions of this article.
§ 53-5 VACANT PROPERTY REVIEW COMMITTEE § 53-9
49:67
B. No outdoor woodburning furnaces existing at the time of the adoption
of this article shall thereafter be extended or enlarged.
C. Any existing outdoor woodburning furnace which is abandoned or
discontinued for a period of seven consecutive months shall not be
permitted to be reestablished as a nonconforming use, and must be
immediately removed by the property owner from the subject premises.
(1) If any property owner fails to remove the outdoor woodburning
furnace by the end of said seven-consecutive-month period, the
City of Sunbury Code Enforcement Officer shall give written notice
by certified mail or personal service to the owner of the property
upon which the outdoor woodburning furnace is located. Such
notice shall provide that said owner shall remove the outdoor
woodburning furnace within 15 days of the date the notice is either
postmarked or personally served upon the owner.
(2) Should the outdoor woodburning furnace not be removed within
the time specified, the Code Enforcement Officer shall take
reasonable steps to effect its removal.
(3) The costs incurred by the City to effect said removal (including any
attorney's fees incurred by the City to effect the removal), plus an
amount equal to 50% of said costs of removal, shall be charged to
the owner of said premises. Said expense shall be paid by the
owner of the property so affected within 30 days from the date said
costs are presented to the owner. If said expense is not paid within
said thirty-day time frame, then said expense shall be charged to
the property so affected by including such expense in the next
annual City tax levy against the property.
D. No existing outdoor woodburning furnace which has been damaged by
any reason to the extent of more than 75% of its assessed value for City
of Sunbury tax purposes shall be repaired or rebuilt.
§ 53-9 SUNBURY CODE § 53-9
49:68
ARTICLE III
Open Burning
[Adopted 9-9-2013]
§ 53-9.1. Purpose.
§ 53-10. Definitions.
For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply:
CHIMINEA, OUTDOOR FIREPLACE, OUTDOOR FIRE PIT — As defined
by the manufacturers, approved containers for open burning. An approved
outdoor fireplace includes those commercially manufactured devices
specifically designed, intended and advertised for the purpose of
recreational fires, such as chimineas, outdoor fireplaces and those areas
specifically designed by a landscape professional and built within the
confines of a deck that are constructed of stone, concrete blocks or other
noncombustible materials.
FIREWOOD — Trunks and branches of trees and bushes, but does not
include leaves, needles, vines or brush.
NUISANCE — Excessive odor, emission, or event that prevents the
reasonable use and enjoyment of one's property.
OPEN BURNING — An outdoor fire where wood or any combustible
materials are burned for cooking or entertainment. Open burning is allowed
provided the regulations set forth herein are met and are for the purpose of
cooking and entertainment.
TREATED LUMBER — Dry wood which has been milled and dried and
has been treated or combined with any petroleum product, glue, chemical,
preservative, adhesive, stain, paint, or other substance.
UNTREATED LUMBER — Dry wood which has been milled and dried but
which has not been treated or combined with any petroleum product, glue,
chemical, preservative, adhesive, stain, paint or other substance.
A. The Council of the City of Sunbury find that open burning and burning
of combustible materials in a residential setting may pose a serious
hazard to the public health, safety, general welfare and the quality of
life of the residents of Sunbury. The public has a right to and should be
ensured of an environment free from noxious fumes and the threat of
fire. It is the policy of the City of Sunbury to prevent the danger of fire
from open burning which is a detriment to the public health, comfort,
safety, welfare and quality of life.
B. The necessity in the public interest for the provisions, prohibitions and
controls hereinafter contained and enacted is declared for the purpose
of securing and promoting the public health, comfort, safety and
general welfare and quality of life of the residents of the City of
Sunbury.
§ 53-9.1 VACANT PROPERTY REVIEW COMMITTEE § 53-11
49:69
§ 53-11. Open burning regulations.
§ 53-12. Enforcement.
A. Open burning in approved containers shall be allowed subject to the
regulations contained herein. Tenants in rental properties must have
landlord's approval prior to any burning for cooking and entertainment
purposes.
B. Fires shall be limited to a maximum three-foot diameter and two-foot
height, and must be contained in a noncombustible chiminea, outdoor
fireplace, fire pit or other method.
C. All openings in the container or fire pit must be covered with wire mesh
or other screening materials that will prevent the passage of sparks or
embers.
D. Fires must be kept at least 10 feet from any structure or combustible
exterior wall or any combustible material.
E. Fires must be constantly attended. A water source or other provisions
for extinguishing the fire shall be immediately accessible at all times
when there is a fire in the outdoor fireplace.
F. No such fire or container used for open burning may be used on any
porch, deck, balcony or any other portion of a building; within any room
or space; under any building overhang.
G. The burning of yard waste, leaves, brush, vines, evergreen needles,
branches smaller than three inches in diameter, treated lumber,
garbage, paper products or anything other than firewood as set forth
herein is prohibited.
H. All open fires as set forth herein shall be extinguished no later than
11:00 p.m.
I. The Police Department, five duly commissioned Fire Chiefs or Code
Enforcement Officers may order any open fire, or use of a chiminea,
outdoor fireplace or fire pit which creates a nuisance, to be
extinguished immediately.
J. By duly enacted resolution, the City of Sunbury, Northumberland
County or Commonwealth of Pennsylvania may, from time to time
during periods of drought or other dry conditions, issue a fire warning
and prohibit all burning within the City.
A. This section shall be administered by the Police Department, five duly
commissioned Fire Chiefs and the Code Enforcement Officers.
B. Any person, firm or corporation, violating any of the provisions of this
section, shall be liable to a fine not exceeding the sum of $300, or to
imprisonment not exceeding 30 days, or both.
§ 53-11 SUNBURY CODE § 53-12
49:70
Chapter 58
ANIMALS AND FOWL
§ 53-12 VACANT PROPERTY REVIEW COMMITTEE § 53-12
49:71

ARTICLE I
Prohibited Animals and Fowl
[Adopted 5-24-1960 by Ord. No. 656]
§ 58-1. Animals and fowl prohibited.
No person, firm or corporation shall keep any fowl, hogs, pigeons, cattle,
goats or sheep within the City limits of the City of Sunbury.
§ 58-2. Permission required for keeping horses.
No person, firm or corporation shall keep any horse or horses at any place
within the City limits of the City of Sunbury, except with special permission
from the City Council acting as a Board of Health, and such permission shall
be granted only upon the conditions and rules as made and provided by
said Board of Health for the best interest of the safety, health and welfare
of the residents of the City. Any permission granted by the said Board of
Health under this section may stipulate the maximum number of horses that
may be kept upon the premises thereunder and may be revoked at any time
when any of the conditions and rules as made and provided by said Board
of Health are not complied with.
§ 58-3. Removal of violation. [Amended 2-14-1977 by Ord. No. 950]
Any animal kept in violation of this chapter, as well as any building or
structure housing the same, shall be removed from the City in such a
manner as will not violate any federal, state or municipal law, ordinance or
regulation.
§ 58-4. Abatement of violation upon failure to remove. [Added
2-14-1977 by Ord. No. 950]
In case any animal kept in violation of this chapter, or any building or
structure housing the same, is not removed from the City as is required by
§ 58-3, the Board or Health Officer shall have authority to abate such use or
condition in such a manner as is provided by the Third Class City Code for
the abatement of public nuisances.26
§ 58-5. Violations and penalties. [Added 2-14-1977 by Ord. No. 950;
amended 6-14-1982 by Ord. No. 1039]
Any person who shall violate any provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not less than $25 nor more
than $300 and costs of such proceedings or, upon default of payment of
such fines and costs, by imprisonment in the county jail for a term of not
more than 30 days. The continuation of such violation for each successive
day shall constitute a separate offense, and the person or persons allowing
26.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 37320 et seq.
§ 58-1 VACANT PROPERTY REVIEW COMMITTEE § 58-5
49:73
or permitting the continuation of the violation may be punished as provided
above for each separate offense.
§ 58-6. Keeping of snakes restricted; enforcement. [Added
9-11-1989 by Ord. No. 1116]
§ 58-7. (Reserved)
§ 58-8. (Reserved)
§ 58-9. (Reserved)
A. No person, firm or corporation shall keep snakes in the City, with the
exception of in their personal residences, unless the snake is properly
contained in a cage. Said restriction on snakes is based upon a concern
for the safety, health and welfare of the residents of the City.
B. This section shall be enforced through §§ 58-3, 58-4 and 58-5 of the
Code of the City of Sunbury.
§ 58-5 SUNBURY CODE § 58-9
49:74
ARTICLE II
Dogs
[Adopted 6-14-1982 by Ord. No. 1039]
§ 58-10. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AT LARGE — Off the premises of the owner and/or custodian and
unaccompanied by the owner and/or custodian or a member of his or her
immediate family or a person authorized by the owner.
OWNER AND/OR CUSTODIAN — Every person, firm, corporation or other
entity who owns or has a right of property in any dog or who keeps or
harbors any dog or has it in his, her or its care or who permits any dog to
be or remain upon any premises occupied by him, her or it.
§ 58-11. Running at large prohibited; violations and penalties.
No owner and/or custodian of any dog shall allow it to run at large in the
City of Sunbury. Any owner and/or custodian who violates this § 58-11 shall
upon conviction be fined not less than $25 nor more than $300.
§ 58-12. Removal of fecal matter; violations and penalties.
A. The owner and/or custodian of any dog which deposits fecal matter on
property other than that of the owner and/or custodian shall clean up
said matter immediately and dispose of it by depositing it in his, her or
its garbage or other appropriate facility in such a manner so as not to
cause an odor or hazard to the health of any person.
B. The owner and/or custodian of any dog which deposits fecal matter on
the property of said owner and/or custodian shall remove said matter
and dispose of it by depositing it in his, her or its garbage or other
appropriate facility in such a manner so as not to cause an odor or a
hazard to the health of any person, in order to prevent the accumulation
thereof from becoming a health hazard and/or a public nuisance.
C. Any owner and/or custodian who violates this § 58-12 shall upon
conviction be fined not less than $25 nor more than $300 for the first
offense and not less than $100 nor more than $300 for each subsequent
offense.
§ 58-10 VACANT PROPERTY REVIEW COMMITTEE § 58-12
49:75

ARTICLE III
Community Cats
[Adopted 2-11-2019 by Ord. No. 656]
§ 58-13. Management of cat population; permitted acts.
A. Definitions. For purposes of this article, the following terms shall have
the following meanings:
COMMUNITY CAT — A free-roaming cat who may be cared for by one
or more residents of the immediate area who is/are known or unknown;
a community cat may or may not be feral.
COMMUNITY CAT CAREGIVER — A person who, in accordance with
and pursuant to a policy of trap-neuter-return, provides care, including,
food, shelter or medical care to a community cat, while not being
considered the owner, harborer, controller, or keeper of a community
cat.
EAR TIPPING — The removal of the distal one-quarter of a community
cat's left ear, which is approximately 3/8-inch, or 1 cm, in an adult and
proportionally smaller in a kitten. This procedure is performed under
sterile conditions while the cat is under anesthesia, in compliance with
any applicable federal or state law, and under the supervision of a
licensed veterinarian. Ear tips are designed to identify a community cat
as being sterilized and lawfully vaccinated for rabies.
TRAP-NEUTER-RETURN — The process of humanely trapping,
sterilizing, vaccinating for rabies, ear tipping, and returning community
cats to their original location.
B. Permitted acts. The following actions shall be permitted in City of
Sunbury, Pennsylvania as part of trap-neuter-return:
(1) Trapping, for the sole purpose of sterilizing, vaccinating for rabies,
and ear tipping community cats, in compliance with any applicable
federal or state law, and under the supervision of a licensed
veterinarian, where applicable.
(2) An ear-tipped cat received by local shelters will be returned to the
location where trapped unless veterinary care is required. A
trapped ear-tipped cat will be released on site unless veterinary
care is required.
(3) Community cat caregivers are empowered to reclaim impounded
community cats without proof of ownership solely for the purpose
of carrying out trap-neuter-return and/or returning ear-tipped
community cats to their original locations.
(4) A person who returns a community cat to its original location while
conducting trap-neuter-return is not deemed to have abandoned
the cat.
§ 58-13 VACANT PROPERTY REVIEW COMMITTEE § 58-13
49:77
(5) Trap-neuter-return shall be the preferred disposition for
impounded community cats. Animal control and the local shelter
are authorized and encouraged to conduct trap-neuter-return or to
direct impounded community cats to a trap-neuter-return program.
§ 58-13 SUNBURY CODE § 58-13
49:78
Chapter 64
BICYCLES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 163.
§ 64-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BICYCLE — Every device propelled by human power upon which any person
may ride, having two tandem wheels either of which is 20 inches or more in
diameter.
§ 64-2. License required.
No person who resides in the City of Sunbury shall ride or propel a bicycle
on any street or public alley unless such bicycle shall have been licensed
and a license shall have been attached thereto as provided herein.
§ 64-3. License application; fee.
Every owner of a bicycle, or the parent or guardian of a minor owner
thereof, shall make application to the Police Force for a bicycle license, such
application to be made on a form provided by the City. A license fee of $0.50
shall be paid to the Police Force before such license shall be granted.
§ 64-4. Form of license and registration card; method of display.
The City of Sunbury shall provide a license, together with registration
cards, which license and cards shall have numbers stamped thereon in
numerical order, beginning with number one, and indicating the name of the
City. Such license shall be suitable for attachment to the rear mudguard of
the frame of the bicycle for which issued, in such a position as to be plainly
visible, Such license shall be attached to the bicycle by a member of the
Police Force at the time of issuing the license, and shall remain attached to
the bicycle for which it is issued. The Police Force shall also keep a record of
such registration. Upon issuance of a license and attachment of the license
to the bicycle, the Police Force shall also furnish to the owner of such
bicycle the corresponding registration card. The operator of a bicycle shall
display his registration card or produce satisfactory proof that the owner
has such registration card, upon the demand of any officer of the Sunbury
Police Force.
§ 58-13 BICYCLES § 64-5
64:79
§ 64-5. Inspection; refusal to license.
The Police Force shall inspect each bicycle before licensing the same, and
shall refuse a license for any bicycle which it deems to be in an unsafe
condition.
§ 64-6. Renewal of lost, destroyed or defaced license.
Upon the loss, destruction or defacement of any bicycle license, the same
may be renewed upon application to the Police Force and payment of the
same fee as upon an original application.
§ 64-7. Report of ownership transfer; surrender of registration and
license.
It shall be the duty of every person who sells or transfers ownership of any
bicycle within the City of Sunbury to report such sale to the Police Force.
If such bicycle had been licensed and registered, such person shall, at the
same time, return to the Police Force the registration card and license.
Such person shall furnish the Police Force with the name and address of
the person to whom such bicycle was sold or transferred. Such report and
return of the registration card and license tag shall be made by the person
selling or transferring within three days of the date of the said sale or
transfer.
§ 64-8. Duty to apply for license upon acquisition of bicycle.
It shall be the duty of any person who purchases or otherwise acquires a
bicycle immediately to apply for a registration card and license.
§ 64-9. Report of nonoperating status; surrender of registration
card and license.
It shall be the duty of every person who dismantles, reduces to junk or
takes out of operation any bicycle, whether the same be registered or
not registered, to report the same to the Police Force and to turn in the
registration card and license if such bicycle was registered.
§ 64-10. Removal, destruction or alteration of frame number,
registration card or license prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person willfully or maliciously to remove,
destroy, mutilate or alter the number on any bicycle frame; and it shall be
unlawful for any person to remove, destroy, mutilate or alter any license or
registration card during the time when such license or registration card is
valid, except as provided in §§ 64-7 and 64-9 hereof; provided, however, that
if any bicycle does not have a serial number stamped on the frame thereof,
or if such number is illegible, the Police Force shall stamp an identification
number on the frame of such bicycle.
§ 64-5 SUNBURY CODE § 64-11
64:80
§ 64-11. Duplicate license or registration card.
In case of loss, defacement or destruction of any license and/or registration
card, a duplicate license and/or card shall be issued to the registered owner
of such bicycle, upon payment of a fee of $0.50 for each license or card
required, provided such owner gives satisfactory proof of such ownership
and loss, defacement or destruction of such card and/or license, by affidavit
or otherwise, to the Police Force.
§ 64-12. Evidence of operation without proper registration.
If any bicycle shall be found on any street or alley in the City without a
license as above set forth, with a mutilated serial number or with no serial
number stamped on the frame of the bicycle, it shall be prima facie evidence
that such bicycle is being operated without proper registration.
§ 64-13. Operation in violation of motor vehicle regulations
prohibited. [Amended 2-9-1998]
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a bicycle upon any sidewalks,
as well as streets or alleys, in violation of laws, rules and regulations
applicable to motor vehicles.
§ 64-14. Operational regulations.
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any bicycle, when upon any street or
public alley or any public path set apart for the exclusive use of bicycles, to
ride with both hands off the handlebars, to ride other than upon or astride
A. In addition to the foregoing, it shall be unlawful to ride a bicycle or use
a skateboard on the sidewalks, municipal parking lots or Cameron Park
in the downtown business district of the City. The downtown business
district shall include Arch Street, Market Street and Chestnut Street
running from Front Street to Tenth Street.
B. Any individual violating § 64-13 of the Code shall be subject to the
penalties in the order set forth below:
(1) A first offense shall result in the confiscation of the bicycle or
skateboard for a period of 30 days.
(2) A second offense shall result in the permanent confiscation of the
bicycle or skateboard.
(3) A third offense shall result in the imposition of fine defined at a
minimum amount of $25 and a maximum amount of $300, along
with permanent confiscation of the bicycle or skateboard.
(4) If a minor is involved with any of the offenses then the parent or
guardian shall be served with written notice of the penalty. An item
of property shall only be returned to a minor with a parent or
guardian present.
§ 64-11 BICYCLES § 64-14
64:81
the permanent and regular seat attached thereto or to carry any other
person upon such bicycle other than upon a firmly attached and regular
seat thereon, nor shall any person ride upon a bicycle other than as above
provided.
§ 64-15. Equipment with signaling device required.
No person shall operate a bicycle upon any street or public alley, or upon
any public path set apart for the exclusive use of bicycles, unless such
bicycle is equipped with a bell or other device capable of giving a signal
audible for at least 100 feet, except that no bicycle shall be equipped with,
nor shall any person use upon a bicycle, any siren or whistle.
§ 64-16. Interference with pedestrians unlawful.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a bicycle upon any street or
public alley in such a manner as to interfere with any pedestrian who is
exercising due care thereon.
§ 64-17. Riding abreast or left of another bicycle restricted.
It shall be unlawful for any person operating a bicycle upon any street or
public alley in the City of Sunbury to propel such bicycle abreast or to
the left of any other person so propelling a bicycle, except in passing such
bicycle.
§ 64-18. Right-of-way for pedestrians and vehicles.
The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway or building
shall, upon approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area extending across
any alleyway, yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching on said
sidewalk or sidewalk area and, upon entering the roadway, shall yield the
right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on said roadway.
§ 64-19. Parking restrictions.
No person shall park a bicycle upon a street or public alley other than upon
the roadway against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the
bicycle, or against a building or at the curb in such manner as to afford the
least obstruction to pedestrian traffic.
§ 64-20. Use of lights between dawn and dusk required.
No person shall operate a bicycle in the City of Sunbury between the hours
from dusk to dawn without a proper light on the front and rear of the bicycle
and unless such lights are turned on.
§ 64-21. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-14-1977 by Ord. No.
951]
§ 64-14 SUNBURY CODE § 64-21
64:82
Chapter 68
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Electrical standards — See Ch. 82.
Mechanical standards — See Ch. 110.
Plumbing — See Ch. 127.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 148.
Zoning — See Ch. 175.
§ 68-1. Intent and purpose.
It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to adopt a modern Building
Code, which will prescribe minimum effective standards and minimum life
safety requirements for the construction, alteration, repair and occupancy
of buildings and structures in the City of Sunbury and to provide informed
and professional administration, plan review and inspection of the
provisions so adopted. By observing the standards so prescribed, all persons
involved in building plan review and inspection and in building design,
construction, repair and maintenance shall contribute to the enhancement
of life and protection of property.
§ 68-2. Adoption of standards; election to administer and enforce
the Uniform Construction Code. [Amended 3-24-2003; 12-27-2004
by Ord. No. 1239; 12-22-2014]
A. Any person apprehended in violation of any provision of this chapter on
the first offense shall be issued a written warning by the police officer
making the apprehension. A record of such warning shall be made and
kept by the Police Force.
B. Any adult apprehended in violation of any provision of this chapter on a
second or subsequent offense shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject
to a fine of not more than $300 and costs of prosecution.
C. Any juvenile apprehended in violation of any provision of this chapter
on a second or subsequent offense may, in the discretion of the Chief of
Police, be disposed of as is provided by the Juvenile Act.27
D. In addition, any person convicted of a second or subsequent violation of
any provision of this chapter may have his license revoked or suspended
by the Chief of Police. Such person shall be given an opportunity to be
heard by the City Council before such suspension or revocation shall
take effect.
27.Editor's Note: See 42 Pa.C.S.A. § 6301 et seq.
§ 64-21 BICYCLES § 68-2
64:83
§ 68-3. Modifications.
The following sections of the BOCA National Building Code, Eleventh
Edition, 1990, as adopted, are amended, deleted or altered as follows:
A. In accordance with the authority granted the City of Sunbury by the
Third Class City Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania (53 P.S.
§ 35101 et seq.), there is hereby adopted by the Council of the City of
Sunbury, for the purposes set forth in § 68-1, that certain codes, known
as the 2009 International Residential Code, 2009 International Building
Code, 2009 International Green Conservation Code, 2009 International
Energy Conservation Code, 2009 International Fuel Gas Code, 2009
International Existing Building Code and 2009 International Swimming
Pool and Spa Code, as promulgated by the International Code Council,
Inc., except such provisions which may be in conflict with the laws of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or the regulations issued by an
agency, board or commission of the commonwealth by virtue of such
laws and which provide a more stringent standard. The provisions of
the 2009 International Residential Code, 2009 International Building
Code, 2009 International Green Conservation Code, 2009 International
Energy Conservation Code, 2009 International Fuel Gas Code, 2009
International Existing Building Code and 2009 International Swimming
Pool and Spa Code, as supplemented , are set forth in those three copies
which are presently on file in the office of the City Clerk and are hereby
adopted as fully as if set forth at length herein. From the date on which
this chapter shall take effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling
within the limits of the City of Sunbury, except as modified by this
chapter and any subsequent amendments thereto and as changes set
forth by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. The City of Sunbury hereby elects to administer and enforce the
provisions of the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code, contained in
34 Pa. Code Chapters 401 through 405, as amended from time to time
by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
C. The City of Sunbury hereby elects to adopt, administer and enforce the
provisions of the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, otherwise
referred to as "Act 45" and found at 35 P.S. § 7210.101 et seq., as
amended from time to time by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
A. Title. In Section 100.1, the reference "(name of jurisdiction)" shall
mean the City of Sunbury.
B. Section 103.4, entitled "Rehabilitation," is amended by inserting
"August 11, 1975," at "(date to be inserted by the jurisdiction)."
C. Section 105.4, entitled "Demolition security," is added to read:
§ 68-2 SUNBURY CODE § 68-3
64:84
105.4 Demolition security. Any individual desiring to secure a
demolition permit shall first provide proof of liability insurance and
deposit a bond, conditioned with sufficient security, naming the City of
Sunbury as the obligee in the amounts required by the following table:
Gross Floor Area
(square feet) Bond Liability Insurance
Up to 200, not to
exceed 1 story or 12
feet in height
None $25,000 single limit
coverage
201 to 2,000 $2,000 $100,000 single limit
coverage
2,001 to 3,000 $3,000 $100,000 property
damage and $250,000
personal injury required
for all structures greater
than 2,001 square feet
3,000 + For each 1,000
square feet or
portion thereof in
floor area over
3,000 square feet
there shall be an
increase of $1,000
in bond
Demolition bond: No liability and or demolition bond required if
owner is removing by hand and is not using any type of machine.
[Added 7-14-1997]
D. Section 111.5 is amended by inserting as a second sentence: "The Code
Official may refer such plans and specifications to the Plan Review
Service of Building Officials and Code Administrators International or
National Code Consultants, Inc., or other approved plan review
agencies as may be necessary to ascertain their safety of design and
compliance with this code, the Plumbing Code, the Mechanical Code
and the Electrical Code.28 The cost for this review shall be borne by the
applicant."
E. Section 114.3.1, entitled "Fee schedule," is amended to read:
[Amended 1-28-2002]
28.Editor's Note: See Ch. 127, Plumbing; Ch. 110, Mechanical Standards; and Ch. 82,
Electrical Standards, respectively.
§ 68-3 BICYCLES § 68-3
64:85
Declared Cost Permit Fee
$0 to $250 $01
$251 to $6,000 $50
Over $6,000 $0.006 per $1,000
1NOTE: No permit fee applies, but a permit application still must be
obtained.
Example:
$9,000 = cost of job
$9,000 - $6,000 = $3,000
$3,000 x 0.006 = $18
$18 + $50 = $68
Total cost = $68
Permits for the Sunbury Fire Department with a declared cost of $0 to
$250 have no fee. After $250 a flat $30 shall be charged.
Plan review fee: [Added 7-24-2000]
Two to five pages: $25.
Five pages or more: $50.
The fee schedule may be amended from time to time by resolution of
the Council of the City of Sunbury.
F. Section 117.4, entitled "Violation penalties," is deleted.
G. Section 118.2, entitled "Unlawful continuance," is amended to read:
118.2 Unlawful continuance: Any person who shall authorize or
continue any work in or about a building or structure after having
been served with a stop-work order, except such work as that person is
directed by the Code Official to perform to remove a violation or unsafe
condition, shall be subject to a fine of not less than $100 nor more than
$300 or imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days, or both, at the
discretion of the court, and the results of such work shall be ordered
removed by the Code Official. Each day that the work continues or
each day that the result of such work remains shall be considered a
separate violation and subject to the fine or imprisonment, or both, as
herein indicated.
H. Section 123.3, entitled "Compensation of Board of Survey," is amended
to read:
123.3 Compensation of Board of Survey: The third member of the
Board shall receive a fee of $200, to be paid by the appellant.
I. Section 124.1.1, entitled "Appeals Board," is added to read:
§ 68-3 SUNBURY CODE § 68-3
64:86
124.1.1 Appeals Board: Any person having interest in the decision or
action of the Code Official may, on a form prescribed by the Sunbury
Building and Housing Code Board of Appeals, in specific writing and
addressed to the Secretary of the Board, appeal the decision or action.
A fee of $50 shall accompany the appeal and shall not be refundable.
The rules of the Board shall apply.
J. Section 124.2, entitled "Membership of Board," is amended to read:
124.2 Membership of Board: All appeals shall be made to the
Sunbury Building and Housing Code Board of Appeals, which shall
consist of three residents of the City of Sunbury or individuals with
business interests in the City possessing qualification sufficient to
render informed decisions on technical construction issues and who
are appointed by the Council of the City of Sunbury. Each member shall
serve for three years or until a successor is approved.
K. Section 124.2.1, entitled "Qualifications," is deleted.
L. Section 124.2.2, entitled "Alternate members," is deleted.
M. Section 124.2.6, entitled "Compensation of members," is amended to
read:
124.2.6 Compensation of members: Members shall serve in the
public interest and without remuneration.
N. Section 124.5, entitled "Postponed hearing," is amended to read:
124.5 Postponed hearing: When two members are not present to
hear an appeal, the Code Official, the appellant or the appellant's
representative shall have the right to request a postponement of the
hearing.
O. Section 124.6, entitled "Board decision," is amended to read:
124.6 Board decision: The Board shall modify or reverse the decision
of the Code Official by a majority vote of those members present for
testimony; otherwise, the decision shall stand affirmed.
P. Section 201.0, entitled "General Definitions," is amended to add the
following:
Code Official: The Code Administrator of the City of Sunbury or a duly
authorized representative.
Q. Section 201.0, entitled "General Definitions," is amended by
substituting the following definition:
§ 68-3 BICYCLES § 68-3
64:87
§ 68-4. Violations and penalties.
Except as specified in § 68-3G, any person who shall violate any provision of
this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not less
than $100 nor more than $300 or imprisonment for a term of not to exceed
30 days, or both, at the discretion of the court. Each day that a violation
continues after due notice has been served, in accordance with the terms
and provisions hereof, shall be deemed a separate offense.
§ 68-5. Construal of provisions.
Nothing in this chapter or the code adopted herein shall be construed to
affect any legal proceeding, rights acquired, liabilities incurred or any cause
or causes of action acquired or existing under Ordinance No. 1097 prior to
its repeal; nor shall any just or legal right or remedy previously existing be
lost, impaired or affected by this chapter.
§ 68-6. Licensing of contractors, remodelers, excavators or
erectors; insurance. [Added 9-12-1994 by Ord. No. 1193]
Person: Includes a corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization and any other group acting as a unit, as well as
individuals. It shall also include an executor, administrator, trustee,
receiver or other representative appointed according to law. Whenever
the word "person" is used in any section of this code prescribing
a penalty or fine, as to partnerships or associations, the word shall
include the partners or members thereof, and as to corporations, shall
include the officers, agents or members thereof who are responsible
for any violation of such section.
R. Section 2906.0, entitled "Bonds and liability insurance," is deleted.
S. R310.1 Emergency escape, egress, and rescue for existing
structures: Every new sleeping room created shall have at least one
operable emergency escape, egress window, or exterior door, or a door
leading to a direct egress, escape window or door. [Added 7-14-2003]
A. All business entities or individuals performing services as building
contractors, remodelers, excavators or erectors shall have a valid
license issued by the Code Office which shall have proof of insurance as
a requirement. The insurance policy maintained by the applicant for the
license shall provide for a minimum of $300,000 payable for each claim
or occurrence under the policy.
B. The license shall become effective on October 1, 1994, and be
renewable on an annual basis thereafter. The license shall become null
and void if the insurance policy expires during the one-year term.
C. The cost of the license shall be $100 per year, to be renewed every year
in January. [Amended 1-28-2002; 12-27-2004]
§ 68-3 SUNBURY CODE § 68-6
64:88
§ 68-7. Failure to obtain license or permit. [Added 1-28-2002]
D. The license must be presented at the time of requesting a building
permit. Further, the Code Office reserves the right to request a visual
inspection of the license at the time of an inspection of a building site.
Individuals performing services at their own home shall be exempted
from the licensing requirement. If a proposed project has an estimated
cost of less than $100,000, then the license, along with a minimum
insurance policy of $300,000, shall be sufficient to meet the insurance
requirements for a building permit. Any project with a cost in excess of
$100,000 shall require a review of the insurance requirements on a
case-by-case basis by the Code Administrator to determine the required
amount of insurance beyond the minimum insurance policy of
$300,000.
E. The falsification of a license or the failure to have a valid license shall
result in the imposition of a fine which shall not exceed $300 or the
maximum limit required by law.
A. Failure to obtain a building permit.
(1) All licensed contractors are required to sign an agreement
acknowledging they are aware permits are a requirement in the
City of Sunbury. Failure to obtain a license, sign the agreement and
obtain permits for work can and will result in citations punishable
by a fine ranging between $100 and $300 for each violation.
[Amended 1-28-2002, effective 12-31-2003]
(2) Second time: A stop-work order will be issued and a fine with
restitution (of declared cost). Fine ranges from $100 to $300.
(3) Third time and over three: a stop-work order will be issued and a
fine (requesting maximum amount) with restitution (of declared
cost).
(4) Each time after will result in following Subsection A(3).
(5) A stop-work order will stay in effect until the fine and permit is
obtained.
B. Failure to obtain a contractor's license.
(1) All licensed contractors are required to sign an agreement
acknowledging they are aware permits are a requirement in the
City of Sunbury. Failure to obtain a license, sign the agreement and
obtain permits for work can and will result in citations punishable
by a fine ranging between $100 and $300 for each violation.
[Amended 1-28-2002, effective 12-31-2003]
(2) Second time: A stop-work order will be issued to each contractor
and/or owner of the business and a fine with restitution (of cost of
contractor's license).
§ 68-6 BICYCLES § 68-7
64:89
Chapter 79
DUMPING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Air pollution — See Ch. 53.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 88.
Handbills and littering — See Ch. 99.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 130.
§ 79-1. Dumping restrictions; prohibited activity deemed a
nuisance. [Amended 2-14-1977 by Ord. No. 952]
No person or persons shall be allowed to throw or dump any rubbish, trash
or garbage anywhere within the limits of the City of Sunbury other than
the disposal area established by the City of Sunbury, and such activity or
conduct shall constitute a public nuisance.
§ 79-2. Dumping of ashes and clean fill permitted.
Ashes and clean fill only may be dumped on any lot or property within the
City, with the consent of the property owner. For the purpose of this chapter,
"clean fill" shall be defined as any nondecayable matter.
§ 79-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-11-1980 by Ord. No.
1017]
Any person or persons found guilty of committing any of the offenses under
this chapter shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $300, and in
default of the payment thereof shall undergo imprisonment for not less than
15 days nor more than 90 days.
Chapter 82
ELECTRICAL STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 68. Mechanical standards — See Ch. 110.
(3) Third time: A stop-work order will be issued and a maximum fine
with restitution (of cost of the license).
(4) Each time after will result in following Subsection B(3).
(5) A stop-work order will stay in effect until fine and license is
obtained.
§ 68-7 SUNBURY CODE § 82-1
79:90
§ 82-1. Intent and purpose.
It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to adopt a modern Electrical
Code, which will prescribe minimum effective standards for the installation,
repair and maintenance of all electrical service and distribution wiring and
all electrical equipment in the City of Sunbury and to provide informed
and technically proficient plan review and inspection of the provisions so
adopted. By observing the standards so prescribed, all parties involved in
electrical plan review and inspection and in electrical systems or equipment
design, installation, repair or maintenance shall contribute to the
enhancement of life and the protection of property.
§ 82-2. Adoption of standards; copies on file. [Amended 3-24-2003;
12-22-2014]
In accordance with the authority granted the City of Sunbury by the Third
Class City Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania (53 P.S. § 35101
et seq.), there is hereby adopted by the Council of the City of Sunbury,
for the purposes set forth in § 82-1, that certain code, known as the 2008
National Electrical Code, except such provisions which may be in conflict
with the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or the regulations
issued by an agency, board or commission of the commonwealth by virtue
of such laws and which provide a more stringent standard and which are
required to be observed by the City of Sunbury. The provisions of the 2008
National Electrical Code, as supplemented, are set forth in those three
copies which are presently on file in the office of the City Clerk and are
hereby adopted as fully as if set forth at length herein. From the date
on which this chapter shall take effect, the provisions thereof shall be
controlling within the limits of the City of Sunbury, except as modified by
this chapter and any subsequent amendments thereto and as changes set
forth by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 82-3. Title.
The code identified in § 82-1 as hereinafter modified, shall be known as the
"Electrical Code of the City of Sunbury."
§ 82-4. Modifications.
The following sections of the National Electrical Code, 1990 Edition, as
adopted, are amended, deleted or altered as follows:
A. Section 90-1.1, entitled "Code Official," is added to read:
90-1.1. Code Official. The Code Official shall be the Code
Administrator of Sunbury Code Administration or a duly authorized
representative.
B. Section 90-1.2, entitled "Rule-Making Authority," is added to read:
§ 82-1 DUMPING § 82-4
79:91
90-1.2. Rule-Making Authority. The Code Official shall make such
rules and regulations in the furtherance of the purposes of the
Electrical Code and this chapter and not inconsistent with the specific
provisions thereof as may be necessary to ensure electrical safety.
C. Section 90-1.3, entitled "Permit Required," is added to read:
90-1.3. Permit Required.
(a) No person shall perform or authorize the performance of
electrical work without first obtaining a permit from the Code
Official. The applicant for a permit shall make such application
on forms provided by the Code Official, and such application
shall include the following: the nature of the electrical work to
be performed; the location at which the electrical work will be
performed; the name and address of the owner of the premises
upon which the electrical work will be performed; the name and
address of the person who will perform the electrical work; and
plans, specifications and any other pertinent information which
the Code Official deems necessary.
(b) The fee shall be as is prescribed by the independent inspection
agency. [Amended 1-28-2002]
(c) Filing fee: $25. [Added 12-27-2004]
D. Section 90-1.4, entitled "Inspections," is added to read:
90-1.4. Inspections.
(a) The Code Official shall make or cause to be made inspections
to determine the conditions of buildings, structures or premises
or work being performed thereon to ensure that such buildings,
structures, premises or work comply with the provisions of this
chapter. The Code Official is authorized to enter any building,
structure or premises or to inspect any electrical work being
performed thereon at any reasonable time. The owner, operator
or occupant of any such building, structure or premises, or the
person in charge of any electrical work being performed, shall
give the Code Official access thereto and to all parts thereof at
all reasonable times for the purposes of such inspection.
(1) When inspections are authorized to be performed by an
approved independent inspection agency, it shall report to
the Code Official, in a form prescribed by him, the results
of its findings.
(2) The fee for such inspection shall be as prescribed by the
independent inspection agency. [Added 1-28-2002]
E. Section 90-1.5, entitled "Search Warrants," is added to read:
§ 82-4 SUNBURY CODE § 82-4
79:92
90-1.5. Search Warrants. If any owner, operator or occupant of any
building, structure or premises or the person in charge of any work
being performed thereon refuses, impedes, inhibits, interferes with,
restricts or obstructs the entry and free access to any part of the
building, structure or premises, where an inspection authorized by this
chapter is sought, the Code Official may seek to have issued to him
a search warrant by a competent issuing authority for the purpose
of compelling such owner, operator or occupant or the person in
charge of the work to permit the Code Official to inspect the building,
structure or premises for the purpose of determining whether any
provision of this chapter is being violated. This authority shall not be
extended to include authorized independent inspection agencies.
F. Section 90-1.6, entitled "Appeals," is added to read:
90-1.6. Appeals. Any person who is aggrieved with a ruling, decision
or action of the Code Official in regard to the administration or
enforcement of any of the provisions of this chapter may appeal the
ruling, decision or action to the City of Sunbury Building and Housing
Code Board of Appeals, as authorized by the Building Code. Any
individual having interest in the decision of the Code Official may
appeal, in specific writing, on a form prescribed by the Building and
Housing Code Board of Appeals and addressed to the Secretary of
the Board. A fee of $50 shall accompany the appeal and shall not be
refundable. The rules of that Board shall apply.
G. Section 90-1.7, entitled "Permit revocation," is added to read:
90-1.7. Permit Revocation. The Code Official may revoke any permit
granted under this chapter when the work performed is in violation of
this chapter; the work performed is not in compliance with approved
final drawings; the work is being done in an unsafe or dangerous
manner; any condition of the permit is violated; or work is not actively
pursued within six months from the date of issuance.
H. Section 90-1.8, entitled "Stop-Work Order," is added to read:
90-1.8. Stop-Work Order. Upon notice from the Code Official that
the electrical work on any building, structure or premises is being
performed contrary to the provisions of this chapter or in an unsafe or
dangerous manner, such work shall stop immediately. The stop-work
order shall be in writing and shall be given the owner of the building,
structure or premises involved, or the owner's agent, and to the person
doing the work and shall state the conditions under which the work
may be resumed.
I. Section 90-1.9, entitled "Unlawful Continuance," is added to read:
§ 82-4 DUMPING § 82-4
79:93
§ 82-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not less than $100 nor more than
$300 or imprisonment for a term of not to exceed 30 days, or both, at the
discretion of the court. Each day that a violation continues after due notice
has been served, in accordance with the terms and provisions hereof, shall
be deemed a separate offense.
§ 82-6. Construal of provisions.
Nothing in this chapter or the code adopted herein shall be construed to
affect any legal proceeding, rights acquired, liabilities incurred or any cause
or causes of action acquired or existing under Ordinance No. 1098 prior to
its repeal; nor shall any just or legal right or remedy previously existing be
lost, impaired or affected by this chapter.
Chapter 86
FIRE DEPARTMENT COST RECOVERY
§ 86-1. Intent and purpose.
It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to adopt a Sunbury Fire
Department Cost Recovery/Reimbursement Code, to authorize the Sunbury
Fire Department to seek recovery/reimbursement of costs, as allowed under
the applicable law, relative to the use of specialized equipment and
materials (including, but not limited to, emergency rescue tools, hazardous
material abatement tools and/or materials, and fire suppression tools and/
or materials) on all emergency scenes, both within the City of Sunbury and
in outlying response areas as contracted by various municipalities.
§ 86-2. Adoption of standards; copies on file.
In accordance with the authority granted the City of Sunbury by the Third
Class City Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania (53 P.S. § 35101
et seq.29), there is hereby adopted by the Council of the City of Sunbury,
for the purposes set forth in § 86-1, that certain code, to be known as
90-1.9. Unlawful Continuance. Any person who shall authorize or
continue any electrical work upon a premises or in or about a building
or structure after having been served with a stop-work order, except
such work as that person is directed by the Code Official to perform
to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable for a fine
not less than $100 nor more than $300 or imprisonment for a term
not to exceed 90 days, or both, at the discretion of the court, and the
results of such work shall be ordered removed by the Code Official.
Each day that the work continues or each day that the result of such
work remains shall be considered a separate violation and subject to
the fine or imprisonment, or both, as herein indicated.
§ 82-4 SUNBURY CODE § 86-2
79:94
the "Sunbury Fire Department Cost Recovery/Reimbursement Code." The
provisions of the aforementioned Code, as supplemented, are set forth in
those three copies which are presently on file in the office of the City Clerk
and are hereby adopted as fully as if set forth at length herein. From the
date on which this chapter shall take effect, the provisions thereof shall be
controlling relative to the Sunbury Fire Department, except as modified by
this chapter and any subsequent amendments thereto.
§ 86-3. Recovery of costs.
§ 86-4. Requirement to pay for costs.
The Sunbury Fire Department shall not be obligated to pursue collection
efforts against any insurance company, individual, or business if the
Sunbury Fire Department, and said efforts may be applied on a case by case
basis determined by the reasonable determination of the probable success,
including financial success, of said collection efforts.
A. The Sunbury Fire Department shall hereby be authorized to seek and
recover reasonable costs for the use (relative to hazardous material,
environmental, fire safety, and/or rescue incidents and operations,
including, but not limited to, vehicular accidents and fires) of its
apparatus; emergency rescue tools; equipment and materials;
hazardous materials abatement tools, equipment and materials; fire
suppression tools, equipment, and materials.
B. A rate schedule of reasonable costs for the aforementioned tools,
equipment, and/or materials shall be set forth by the Sunbury Fire
Department and reviewed/updated periodically and shall only be
applied to the recovery/reimbursement of costs arising out of incidents
that occur subsequent to the setting of the rate schedule. A copy of the
rate schedule shall at all times be available and on file at the code office
for review.
C. The reasonable costs, as outlined above, may be recovered from any
identified insurance carrier, or if there is no insurance coverage relative
to said costs, or landowner, be it an individual or business, directly by
the Sunbury Fire Department, or through a third-party billing service
contracted by the Sunbury Fire Department on their behalf to collect
said costs. In addition to the reasonable costs to be recovered by and
through the above-referenced rate schedule, the Sunbury Fire
Department or third-party billing service shall be authorized to collect
reasonable interest, legal, collection, and/or administrative fees, in
addition to costs.
29.Editor's Note: 53 P.S. §§ 35101 to 35109 was repealed 11-24-2015 by P.L. 242, No. 67,
§ 2(2). See 11 Pa.C.S.A. § 10101 et seq.
§ 86-2 DUMPING § 86-5
79:95
§ 86-5. Emergency services not to be refused.
There shall be no refusal or delay in emergency services from the Sunbury
Fire Department, or its personnel, due to the lack of insurance coverage or
the inability to pay for cost recovery.
Chapter 88
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 11.
Air pollution — See Ch. 53.
Building construction — See Ch. 68.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 82.
§ 88-1. Intent and purpose.
It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to adopt a modern Fire
Prevention Code, which will prescribe minimum effective standards,
requirements and controls to safeguard life, property and the public welfare
from the hazards of fire and explosion on all premises and in all structures
in the City of Sunbury and to provide informed and professional
administration and inspection of the provisions so adopted. By observing
the standards so prescribed, all persons involved in the inspection and
maintenance of existing structures and using or residing within them shall
contribute to the enhancement of life and the protection of property.
§ 88-2. Adoption of standards; copies on file. [Amended 3-24-2003;
12-22-2014]
In accordance with the authority granted the City of Sunbury by the Third
Class City Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania (53 P.S. § 35101
et seq.), there is hereby adopted by the Council of the City of Sunbury,
for the purposes set forth in § 88-1, that certain code, known as the 2009
International Fire Code, as promulgated by the International Code Council,
Inc., except such provisions which may be in conflict with the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or the regulations issued by an agency,
board or commission of the commonwealth by virtue of such laws and which
provide a more stringent standard and which are required to be observed
by the City of Sunbury. The provisions of the 2009 International Fire Code,
as supplemented, are set forth in those three copies which are presently
on file in the office of the City Clerk and are hereby adopted as fully as if
set forth at length herein. From the date on which this chapter shall take
effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the
City of Sunbury, except as modified by this chapter and any subsequent
amendments thereto and as changes set forth by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
§ 86-5 SUNBURY CODE § 88-3
79:96
§ 88-3. Modifications.
The following sections of the BOCA National Fire Prevention Code, Eighth
Edition, 1990, as adopted, are amended, deleted or altered as indicated:
A. Title. In Section F-100.1, the reference "(name of jurisdiction)" shall
mean the City of Sunbury.
B. Section F-106.7, entitled "Payment of fees," is amended to read:
F-106.7 Payment of fees: A permit shall not be issued until the
designated fees have been paid. The fee for any required permit shall
be $10. The fee schedule may be amended from time to time by
resolution of the Council of the City of Sunbury.
C. Section F-111.3, entitled "Penalty for violations," is deleted.
D. Section F-112.2, entitled "Membership of board," is amended to read:
F-112.2 Appeals Board: All appeals shall be made to the Sunbury
Building and Housing Code Board of Appeals as authorized by the
Building Code.30 Any person having interest in the decision or action of
the Code Official may appeal, in specific writing, on a form prescribed
by the City of Sunbury Building and Housing Code Board of Appeals
and addressed to the Secretary of that Board. A fee of $50 shall
accompany the appeal and shall not be refundable. The rules of the
Board shall apply.
E. Section F-112.2.1, entitled "Qualifications," is deleted.
F. Section F-112.2.2, entitled "Alternate members," is deleted.
G. Section F-112.2.6, entitled "Compensation of members," is amended to
read:
F-112.2.6 Compensation of members: Members shall serve in the
public interest and without remuneration.
H. Section F-112.5, entitled "Postponed hearing," is amended to read:
F-112.5 Postponed hearing: When two members are not present
to hear an appeal, the Code Official, the appellant or the appellant's
representative shall have the right to request a postponement of the
hearing.
I. Section F-112.6, entitled "Board decision," is amended to read:
F-112.6 Board decision: The Board shall modify or reverse the
decision of the Code Official by a majority vote of those members
present for testimony; otherwise, the decision shall stand affirmed.
30.Editor's Note: See Ch. 68, Building Construction.
§ 88-3 DUMPING § 88-3
79:97
§ 88-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not less than $100 nor more than
$300 or imprisonment for a term of not to exceed 30 days, or both, at the
discretion of the court. Each day that a violation continues after due notice
has been served, in accordance with the terms of and provisions hereof,
shall be deemed a separate offense.
§ 88-5. Construal of provisions.
Nothing in this chapter or the code adopted herein shall be construed to
affect any legal proceeding, rights acquired, liabilities incurred or any cause
or causes of action acquired or existing under Ordinance No. 1100 prior to
its repeal; nor shall any just or legal right or remedy previously existing be
lost, impaired or affected by this chapter.
Chapter 91
FLOOD CONTROL PROPERTY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peace and good order — See Ch. 121.
§ 91-1. Injury or defacement prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to do any act of injury,
tampering with, impairment, vandalism, destruction or defacement of
municipal flood protection works, including the levees, walls, buildings
J. Section F-201.0, entitled "General Definitions," is amended to contain
the following:
Code Official: The Code Official of City of Sunbury Code
Administration or a duly authorized representative.
K. Section F-201.0, entitled "General Definitions," is amended to contain
the following:
Person: Includes a corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization and any other group acting as a unit, as well as
individuals. It shall also include an executor, administrator, trustee,
receiver or other representative appointed according to law. Whenever
the word "person" is used in any section of this code prescribing
a penalty or fine, as to partnerships or associations, the word shall
include the partners or members thereof, and as to corporations, shall
include the officers, agents or members thereof who are responsible
for any violation of such section.
§ 88-3 SUNBURY CODE § 91-1
91:98
and any and all property relating thereto, and it is specifically delineated
that the posting of bills, as well as lettering of signs or messages, shall
be considered within the meaning of the general terms prohibited by this
section.
§ 91-2. Theft of flood control equipment prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to commit an act of theft of
any type of flood control equipment from, in, on or about the municipal flood
protection works and any and all property relating thereto.
§ 91-3. Trespass and private crossings prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to trespass in, over, upon or
through any and all flood control property, and it is specifically delineated
that no persons shall erect or cause to be erected any private crossings
or crosswalks over and upon the concrete wall and levees which bound all
parts or portions of said flood control protection works.
§ 91-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-14-1977 by Ord. No.
953]
Any person or persons violating any of the provisions or sections of this
chapter and any person who aids, abets or assists therein shall, upon
conviction thereof before the properly constituted authority, be subject to
the payment of a fine of not less than $25 and not more than $200, and
further pay the costs of prosecution, as well as any and all costs incurred
in the repair or replacement of any and all damages, defacement or theft
of portions of said municipal flood control property or works, and in default
of the payment thereof, shall undergo imprisonment in the Northumberland
County Prison for not less than five days, or both.
Chapter 92
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 68.
Flood control property — See Ch. 91.
Sewers — See Ch. 139.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 143.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 148.
Zoning — See Ch. 175.
§ 91-1 FLOOD CONTROL PROPERTY § 91-4
91:99

ARTICLE I
Statutory Authorization
§ 92-1. Authorization.
The Legislature of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania has, by the passage
of the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act of 1978,31 delegated the
responsibility to local governmental units to adopt floodplain management
regulations to promote public health, safety, and the general welfare of its
citizenry. Therefore, the Council of the City of Sunbury does hereby order
as follows.
31.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 92-1 FLOOD CONTROL PROPERTY § 92-1
91:101

ARTICLE II
General Provisions
§ 92-2. Intent.
The intent of this chapter is to:
§ 92-3. Permit from Administrator required.
It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, business or corporation
to undertake, or cause to be undertaken, any construction or development
anywhere within the City of Sunbury unless a permit has been obtained
from the Floodplain Administrator.
§ 92-4. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter supersedes any other conflicting provisions which may be
in effect in identified floodplain areas. However, any other ordinance
provisions shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that those
provisions are more restrictive. If there is any conflict between any of the
provisions of this chapter, the more restrictive shall apply.
§ 92-5. Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this
chapter shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such a decision
shall not affect the remaining portions of the chapter, which shall remain in
full force and effect, and for this purpose the provisions of this chapter are
hereby declared to be severable.
§ 92-6. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
A. Promote the general health, welfare, and safety of the community.
B. Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in order
to prevent or minimize flood damage in the future.
C. Minimize danger to public health by protecting water supply and
natural drainage.
D. Reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its governmental
units, and its residents by preventing excessive development in areas
subject to flooding.
E. Comply with federal and state floodplain management requirements.
A. The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this chapter
is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on
accepted engineering methods of study. Larger floods may occur or
flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such as
ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This chapter does not
imply that areas outside any identified floodplain areas, or that land
§ 92-2 FLOOD CONTROL PROPERTY § 92-6
91:103
uses permitted within such areas, will be free from flooding or flood
damages.
B. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the City of Sunbury
or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result
from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully
made thereunder.
§ 92-6 SUNBURY CODE § 92-6
91:104
ARTICLE III
Administration
§ 92-7. Designation of Floodplain Administrator.
§ 92-8. Permits required.
A permit shall be required before any construction or development is
undertaken within any area of the City of Sunbury.
§ 92-9. Duties and responsibilities of Floodplain Administrator.
A. The Zoning Officer is hereby appointed to administer and enforce this
chapter and is referred to herein as the "Floodplain Administrator." The
Floodplain Administrator may: A) fulfill the duties and responsibilities
set forth in these regulations, B) delegate duties and responsibilities set
forth in these regulations to qualified technical personnel, plan
examiners, inspectors, and other employees, or C) enter into a written
agreement or written contract with another agency or private sector
entity to administer specific provisions of these regulations.
Administration of any part of these regulations by another entity shall
not relieve the community of its responsibilities pursuant to the
participation requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program as
set forth in the Code of Federal Regulations at 44 CFR 59.22.
B. In the absence of a designated Floodplain Administrator, the Floodplain
Administrator duties are to be fulfilled by the Property Maintenance
Officer.
A. The Floodplain Administrator shall issue a permit only after it has been
determined that the proposed work to be undertaken will be in
conformance with the requirements of this chapter and all other
applicable codes and ordinances.
B. Prior to the issuance of any permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall
review the application for the permit to determine if all other necessary
government permits required by state and federal laws have been
obtained, such as those required by the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities
Act (Act 1966-537, as amended);32 the Pennsylvania Dam Safety and
Encroachments Act (Act 1978-325, as amended);33 the Pennsylvania
Clean Streams Act (Act 1937-394, as amended);34 and the United States
Clean Water Act, Section 404, 33 U.S.C. § 1344. No permit shall be
issued until this determination has been made.
C. In the case of existing structures, prior to the issuance of any
development permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall review the
proposed cost of improvements or repairs and the pre-improvement
32.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
33.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 693.1 et seq.
34.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 92-7 FLOOD CONTROL PROPERTY § 92-9
91:105
§ 92-10. Application procedures and requirements.
market value of the structure so that a substantial improvement/
substantial damage determination can be made in accordance with
FEMA's Substantial Improvement/Substantial Damage Desk Reference.
D. In the case of existing structures, prior to the issuance of any
development permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall review the
history of repairs to the subject building so that any cumulative
substantial damage concerns can be addressed before the permit is
issued.
E. During the construction period, the Floodplain Administrator or other
authorized official shall inspect the premises to determine that the work
is progressing in compliance with the information provided on the
permit application and with all applicable municipal laws and
ordinances. He/she shall make as many inspections during and upon
completion of the work as are necessary.
F. In the discharge of his/her duties, the Floodplain Administrator shall
have the authority to enter any building, structure, premises or
development in the identified floodplain area, upon presentation of
proper credentials, at any reasonable hour to enforce the provisions of
this chapter.
G. In the event the Floodplain Administrator discovers that the work does
not comply with the permit application or any applicable laws and
ordinances, or that there has been a false statement or
misrepresentation by any applicant, the Floodplain Administrator shall
revoke the permit and report such fact to the Council for whatever
action it considers necessary.
H. The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain in perpetuity, or for the
lifetime of the structure, all records associated with the requirements of
this chapter, including, but not limited to, finished construction
elevation data, permitting, inspection and enforcement.
I. The Floodplain Administrator is the official responsible for submitting a
biennial report to FEMA concerning community participation in the
National Flood Insurance Program as requested.
J. The responsibility, authority and means to implement the commitments
of the Floodplain Administrator can be delegated from the person
identified. However, the ultimate responsibility lies with the person
identified in this chapter as the Floodplain Administrator/Manager.
K. The Floodplain Administrator shall consider the requirements of 34 Pa.
Code and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC, or the latest revision thereof
as adopted by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 92-9 SUNBURY CODE § 92-10
91:106
A. Application for such a permit shall be made, in writing, to the
Floodplain Administrator on forms supplied by the City of Sunbury.
Such application shall contain the following:
(1) Name and address of applicant.
(2) Name and address of owner of land on which proposed
construction is to occur.
(3) Name and address of contractor.
(4) Site location including address.
(5) Listing of other permits required.
(6) Brief description of proposed work and estimated cost, including a
breakout of flood-related cost and the market value of the building
before the flood damage occurred, where appropriate.
(7) A plan of the site showing the exact size and location of the
proposed construction as well as any existing buildings or
structures.
B. If any proposed construction or development is located entirely or
partially within any identified floodplain area, applicants for permits
shall provide all the necessary information in sufficient detail and
clarity to enable the Floodplain Administrator to determine that:
(1) All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage and conform with the requirements of this chapter and all
other applicable codes and ordinances;
(2) All utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems, are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage;
(3) Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards;
(4) Structures will be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement;
(5) Building materials are flood-resistant;
(6) Appropriate practices that minimize flood damage have been used;
and
(7) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air-conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities have been designed and
located to prevent water entry or accumulation.
C. Applicants shall file the following minimum information plus any other
pertinent information as may be required by the Floodplain
Administrator to make the above determination:
§ 92-10 FLOOD CONTROL PROPERTY § 92-10
91:107
(1) A completed permit application form.
(2) A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one
inch being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
(a) North arrow, scale, and date;
(b) Topographic contour lines, if available;
(c) The location of all existing and proposed buildings, structures,
and other improvements, including the location of any existing
or proposed subdivision and development;
(d) The location of all existing streets, drives, and other
accessways; and
(e) The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
identified floodplain areas, and, if available, information
pertaining to the floodway, and the flow of water, including
direction and velocities.
(3) Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other
improvements, drawn at suitable scale showing the following:
(a) The proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed building
based upon North American Vertical Datum of 1988;
(b) The elevation of the base flood;
(c) Supplemental information as may be necessary under 34 Pa.
Code, the 2009 IBC or the 2009 IRC, or the latest revision
thereof as adopted by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(4) The following data and documentation:
(a) Elevation certificate.
(b) Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures and corresponding elevations.
(c) If available, information concerning flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors associated
with a base flood.
(d) Documentation, certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect, to show that the cumulative effect of any proposed
development within any identified floodplain area (see § 92-17)
when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development, will not cause any increase in the base flood
elevation.
(e) A document, certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect, which states that the proposed construction or
development has been adequately designed to withstand the
§ 92-10 SUNBURY CODE § 92-10
91:108
§ 92-11. Review of application by others.
A copy of all plans and applications for any proposed construction or
development in any identified floodplain area to be considered for approval
may be submitted by the Floodplain Administrator to any other appropriate
agencies and/or individuals (e.g., Planning Commission, Municipal
Engineer, etc.) for review and comment.
§ 92-12. Changes.
After the issuance of a permit by the Floodplain Administrator, no changes
of any kind shall be made to the application, permit or any of the plans,
specifications or other documents submitted with the application without
the written consent or approval of the Floodplain Administrator. Requests
for any such change shall be in writing and shall be submitted by the
applicant to Floodplain Administrator for consideration.
pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces associated with
the base flood. Such statement shall include a description of
the type and extent of floodproofing measures which have
been incorporated into the design of the structure and/or the
development.
(f) Detailed information needed to determine compliance with
§ 92-24F, Storage, and § 92-25, Development which may
endanger human life, including:
[1] The amount, location and purpose of any materials or
substances referred to in §§ 92-24F and 92-25 which are
intended to be used, produced, stored or otherwise
maintained on site.
[2] A description of the safeguards incorporated into the
design of the proposed structure to prevent leaks or spills
of the dangerous materials or substances listed in § 92-25
during a base flood.
(g) The appropriate component of the Department of
Environmental Protection's "Planning Module for Land
Development."
(h) Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting
the requirements of the Department of Environmental
Protection to implement and maintain erosion and
sedimentation control.
D. Applications for permits shall be accompanied by a fee, payable to the
municipality, based upon the estimated cost of the proposed
construction as determined by the Floodplain Administrator.
§ 92-10 FLOOD CONTROL PROPERTY § 92-13
91:109
§ 92-13. Placards.
In addition to the permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall issue a placard,
or similar document, which shall be displayed on the premises during the
time construction is in progress. This placard shall show the number of the
permit and the date of its issuance and shall be signed by the Floodplain
Administrator.
§ 92-14. Start of construction.
§ 92-15. Enforcement.
A. Work on the proposed construction or development shall begin within
180 days after the date of issuance of the development permit. Work
shall also be completed within 12 months after the date of issuance of
the permit or the permit shall expire unless a time extension is granted,
in writing, by the Floodplain Administrator. The issuance of a
development permit does not refer to the zoning approval.
B. The "actual start of construction" means either the first placement of
permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of
slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or
any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor
does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways: nor does it
include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the
erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied
as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial
improvement, the "actual start of construction" means the first,
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a
building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions
of the building.
C. Time extensions shall be granted only if a written request is submitted
by the applicant, who sets forth sufficient and reasonable cause for the
Floodplain Administrator to approve such a request, and the original
permit is compliant with the ordinance and FIRM/FIS in effect at the
time the extension is granted.
A. Notices. Whenever the Floodplain Administrator or other authorized
municipal representative determines that there are reasonable grounds
to believe that there has been a violation of any provisions of this
chapter, or of any regulations adopted pursuant thereto, the Floodplain
Administrator shall give notice of such alleged violation as hereinafter
provided. Such notice shall:
(1) Be in writing;
(2) Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance:
§ 92-13 SUNBURY CODE § 92-15
91:110
§ 92-16. Appeals.
(3) Allow a reasonable time not to exceed a period of 30 days for the
performance of any act it requires;
(4) Be served upon the property owner or his agent as the case may
require; provided, however, that such notice or order shall be
deemed to have been properly served upon such owner or agent
when a copy thereof has been served with such notice by any other
method authorized or required by the laws of this state;
(5) Contain an outline of remedial actions which, if taken, will effect
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
B. Penalties. Any person who fails to comply with any or all of the
requirements or provisions of this chapter or who fails or refuses to
comply with any notice, order or direction of the Floodplain
Administrator or any other authorized employee of the municipality
shall be guilty of a summary offense and upon conviction shall pay a fine
to City of Sunbury of not less than $100 nor more than $300 plus costs
of prosecution. In addition to the above penalties, all other actions are
hereby reserved, including an action in equity for the proper
enforcement of this chapter. The imposition of a fine or penalty for any
violation of, or noncompliance with, this chapter shall not excuse the
violation or noncompliance or permit it to continue. All such persons
shall be required to correct or remedy such violations and
noncompliance within a reasonable time. Any development initiated or
any structure or building constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, altered,
or relocated, in noncompliance with this chapter may be declared by
the Council to be a public nuisance and abatable as such.
A. Any person aggrieved by any action or decision of the Floodplain
Administrator concerning the administration of the provisions of this
chapter may appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board. Such appeal must be
filed, in writing, within 30 days after the decision, determination or
action of the Floodplain Administrator.
B. Upon receipt of such appeal, the Zoning Hearing Board shall consider
the appeal in accordance with the Municipalities Planning Code35 and
any other local ordinance.
C. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Zoning Hearing Board may
seek relief therefrom by appeal to court, as provided by the laws of this
state, including the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act.36
35.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
36.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 92-15 FLOOD CONTROL PROPERTY § 92-16
91:111

ARTICLE IV
Identification of Floodplain Areas
§ 92-17. Identification.
§ 92-18. Description and special requirements of identified
floodplain areas.
The identified floodplain area shall consist of the following specific areas:
A. The identified floodplain area shall be:
(1) Any areas of City of Sunbury, classified as special flood hazard
areas (SFHAs) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and the
accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) dated
September 16, 2016, and issued by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) or the most recent revision thereof,
including all digital data developed as part of the Flood Insurance
Study; and
(2) Any community-identified flood hazard areas.
B. The above-referenced FIS and FIRMs, and any subsequent revisions
and amendments, are hereby adopted by City of Sunbury and declared
to be a part of this chapter.
A. The Floodway Area shall be those areas identified in the FIS and the
FIRM as floodway and which represent the channel of a watercourse
and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge
the base flood without increasing the water surface elevation by more
than one foot at any point. This term shall also include floodway areas
which have been identified in other available studies or sources of
information for those special flood hazard areas where no floodway has
been identified in the FIS and FIRM.
(1) Within any floodway area, no encroachments, including fill, new
construction, substantial improvements, or other development
shall be permitted unless it has been demonstrated through
hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with
standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment
would not result in any increase in flood levels within the
community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
(2) Within any floodway area, no new construction or development
shall be allowed unless the appropriate permit is obtained from the
Department of Environmental Protection Regional Office.
B. The AE Area/District shall be those areas identified as an AE Zone on
the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA for which base flood
elevations have been provided.
§ 92-17 FLOOD CONTROL PROPERTY § 92-18
91:113
(1) The AE Area adjacent to the floodway shall be those areas
identified as an AE Zone on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared
by FEMA for which base flood elevations have been provided and a
floodway has been delineated.
(2) The AE Area without floodway shall be those areas identified as an
AE Zone on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA for
which base flood elevations have been provided but no floodway
has been determined.
(a) No permit shall be granted within any AE Zone without
floodway, and no encroachments, including fill, new
construction, substantial improvements, or other development,
shall be permitted unless it has been demonstrated through
hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance
with standard engineering practice that the proposed
development, together with all other existing and anticipated
development, would not result in an increase in flood levels of
more than one foot within the entire community during the
occurrence of the base flood discharge.
(b) No new construction or development shall be located within
the area measured 50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of
any watercourse unless the appropriate permit is obtained
from the Department of Environmental Protection Regional
Office.
C. A Area/District.
(1) The A Area/District shall be those areas identified as an A Zone on
the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA and for which no
base flood elevations have been provided. For these areas,
elevation and floodway information from other federal, state, or
other acceptable sources shall be used when available. Where
other acceptable information is not available, the base flood
elevation shall be determined by using the elevation of a point on
the boundary of the identified floodplain area which is nearest the
construction site.
(2) In lieu of the above, the municipality may require the applicant to
determine the elevation with hydrologic and hydraulic engineering
techniques. Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken
only by professional engineers or others of demonstrated
qualifications, who shall certify that the technical methods used
correctly reflect currently accepted technical concepts. Studies,
analyses, computations, etc., shall be submitted in sufficient detail
to allow a thorough technical review by the municipality. In the
absence of any of the above data or documentation, the community
may require elevation of the lowest floor to be at least three feet
above the highest adjacent grade.
§ 92-18 SUNBURY CODE § 92-18
91:114
§ 92-19. Changes in identification of area.
The identified floodplain area may be revised or modified by the Council
where studies or information provided by a qualified agency or person
documents the need for such revision. However, prior to any such change
to the special flood hazard area, approval must be obtained from FEMA.
Additionally, as soon as practicable, but not later than six months after the
date such information becomes available, a community shall notify FEMA
of the changes to the special flood hazard area by submitting technical
or scientific data. See § 92-22B for situations where FEMA notification is
required.
§ 92-20. Boundary disputes.
Should a dispute concerning any identified floodplain boundary arise, an
initial determination shall be made by the City of Sunbury, and any party
aggrieved by this decision or determination may appeal to the Council. The
burden of proof shall be on the appellant.
§ 92-21. Jurisdictional boundary changes.
Prior to development occurring in areas where annexation or other
corporate boundary changes are proposed or have occurred, the community
shall review flood hazard data affecting the lands subject to boundary
changes. The community shall adopt and enforce floodplain regulations in
areas subject to annexation or corporate boundary changes which meet or
exceed those in 44 CFR 60.3.
D. The AO and AH Area/District shall be those areas identified as Zones
AO and AH on the FIRM and in the FIS. These areas are subject to
inundation by one-percent-annual-chance shallow flooding where
average depths are between one and three feet. In Zones AO and AH,
drainage paths shall be established to guide floodwaters around and
away from structures on slopes.
E. Community-identified flood hazard areas shall be those areas where the
City of Sunbury has identified local flood hazard or ponding areas, as
delineated and adopted on a "Local Flood Hazard Map" using the best
available topographic data and locally derived information such as flood
of record, historic high-water marks, soils or approximate study
methodologies.
§ 92-18 FLOOD CONTROL PROPERTY § 92-21
91:115

ARTICLE V
Technical Provisions
§ 92-22. General.
A. Alteration or relocation of watercourse.
(1) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse until all adjacent municipalities which
may be affected by such action have been notified by the
municipality, and until all required permits or approvals have first
been obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection
Regional Office.
(2) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse unless it can be shown that the activity
will not reduce or impede the flood-carrying capacity of the
watercourse in any way.
(3) In addition, FEMA and the Pennsylvania Department of Community
and Economic Development shall be notified prior to any alteration
or relocation of any watercourse.
B. When City of Sunbury proposes to permit the following encroachments:
any development that causes a rise in the base flood elevations within
the floodway; or any development occurring in Zones A1-30 and Zone
AE without a designated floodway which will cause a rise of more than
one foot in the base flood elevation; or alteration or relocation of a
stream (including but not limited to installing culverts and bridges), the
applicant shall (as per 44 CFR 65.12):
(1) Apply to FEMA for conditional approval of such action prior to
permitting the encroachments to occur.
(2) Upon receipt of the FEMA Administrator's conditional approval of
map change and prior to approving the proposed encroachments, a
community shall provide evidence to FEMA of the adoption of
floodplain management ordinances incorporating the increased
base flood elevations and/or revised floodway reflecting the postproject
condition.
(3) Upon completion of the proposed encroachments, the City of
Sunbury or applicant shall provide as-built certifications. FEMA
will initiate a final map revision upon receipt of such certifications
in accordance with 44 CFR Part 67.
C. Any new construction, development, uses or activities allowed within
any identified floodplain area shall be undertaken in strict compliance
with the provisions contained in this chapter and any other applicable
codes, ordinances and regulations.
§ 92-22 FLOOD CONTROL PROPERTY § 92-23
91:117
§ 92-23. Elevation and floodproofing requirements.
Within any identified floodplain area, any new construction or substantial
improvements shall be prohibited. If a variance is obtained for new
construction or substantial improvements in the identified floodplain area
in accordance with the criteria in Article VIII, then the following provisions
apply:
A. Residential structures.
(1) In AE, A1-30, and AH Zones, any new construction or substantial
improvement shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated up to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation.
(2) In A Zones, where there are no base flood elevations specified on
the FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall
have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated up to, or above,
the regulatory flood elevation determined in accordance with
§ 92-18C of this chapter.
(3) In AO Zones, any new construction or substantial improvement
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) at or above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number
specified on the FIRM.
(4) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in the
2009 International Residential Code (IRC) or the latest edition
thereof adopted by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and ASCE
24 and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401 to 405, as amended) shall be
utilized, where they are more restrictive.
B. Nonresidential structures.
(1) In AE, A1-30 and AH Zones, any new construction or substantial
improvement of a nonresidential structure shall have the lowest
floor (including basement) elevated up to, or above, the regulatory
flood elevation, or be designed and constructed so that the space
enclosed below the regulatory flood elevation:
(a) Is floodproofed so that the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water; and
(b) Has structural components with the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
(2) In A Zones, where no base flood elevations are specified on the
FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall have
the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or completely
floodproofed up to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation
determined in accordance with § 92-18C of this chapter.
§ 92-23 SUNBURY CODE § 92-23
91:118
(3) In AO Zones, any new construction or substantial improvement
shall have its lowest floor elevated or completely floodproofed
above the highest adjacent grade to at least as high as the depth
number specified on the FIRM.
(4) Any nonresidential structure, or part thereof, made watertight
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be floodproofed in
accordance with the W1 or W2 space classification standards
contained in the publication entitled "Flood-Proofing Regulations"
published by the United States Army Corps of Engineers (June
1972, as amended March 1992) or with some other equivalent
standard. All plans and specifications for such floodproofing shall
be accompanied by a statement certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect which states that the proposed
design and methods of construction are in conformance with the
above-referenced standards. There should be a statement
submitted with the permit application and a statement submitted
with the as-built floodproofing certificate prior to the issuance of
the certificate of occupancy.
(5) Any nonresidential structure that will be floodproofed must submit
the following to the Floodplain Administrator along with the
nonresidential floodproofing certificate and prior to the issuance of
the certificate of occupancy:
(a) An inspection and maintenance plan detailing the annual
maintenance of floodproofed components, ensuring that all
components will operate properly under flood conditions.
Components that must be inspected include at a minimum:
[1] Mechanical equipment such as sump pumps and
generators;
[2] Flood shields and closures;
[3] Walls and wall penetrations; and
[4] Levees and berms (as applicable).
(b) A flood emergency operation plan detailing the procedures to
be followed during a flooding event, which must include
information pertaining to how all components will operate
properly under all conditions, including power failures. The
design professional must produce the plan. An adequate plan
must include the following:
[1] An established chain of command and responsibility, with
leadership responsibilities clearly defined for all aspects of
the plan.
[2] A procedure for notification of necessary parties when
flooding threatens and flood warnings are issued.
§ 92-23 FLOOD CONTROL PROPERTY § 92-23
91:119
Personnel required to be at the building should have a
planned and safe means of ingress and should have no
other emergency response duties during a flood event.
Alternates should be assigned in the event that the
primary persons responsible are unable to complete their
assigned duties under the plan.
[3] A list of specific duties assigned to ensure that all
responsibilities are addressed expeditiously. The locations
of materials necessary to properly install all floodproofing
components must be included in the list.
[4] An evacuation plan for all personnel or occupants, those
without duties for the flood emergency as well as those
with duties for implementing the plan. All possible ingress
and egress routes must be identified.
[5] A periodic training and exercise program to keep
personnel and occupants aware of their duties and
responsibilities. Training drills should be held at least once
a year and should be coordinated with community officials.
(6) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in the
2009 International Residential Code (IRC) or the latest revision
thereof as adopted by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and
ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401 to 405, as amended) shall
be utilized, where they are more restrictive.
C. Space below the lowest floor.
(1) Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor (excluding basements)
which will be used solely for the parking of a vehicle, building
access, or incidental storage in an area other than a basement shall
be designed and constructed to allow for the automatic entry and
exit of floodwaters for the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces
on exterior walls. The term "fully enclosed space" also includes
crawl spaces.
(2) Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect, or meet or exceed
the following minimum criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space
installed on two separate walls.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
§ 92-23 SUNBURY CODE § 92-23
91:120
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
D. Historic structures. Historic structures undergoing repair or
rehabilitation that would constitute a substantial improvement, as
defined in this chapter, must comply with all ordinance requirements
that do not preclude the structure's continued designation as an
historic structure. Documentation that a specific ordinance
requirement will cause removal of the structure from the National
Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places
must be obtained from the Secretary of the Interior or the State
Historic Preservation Officer. Any exemption from ordinance
requirements will be the minimum necessary to preserve the historic
character and design of the structure.
E. Accessory structures. Structures accessory to a principal building need
not be elevated or floodproofed to remain dry, but shall comply, at a
minimum, with the following requirements:
(1) The structure shall not be designed or used for human habitation,
but shall be limited to the parking of vehicles, or to the storage of
tools, material, and equipment related to the principal use or
activity.
(2) Floor area shall not exceed 200 square feet.
(3) The structure will have a low damage potential.
(4) The structure will be located on the site so as to cause the least
obstruction to the flow of floodwaters.
(5) Power lines, wiring, and outlets will be elevated to the regulatory
flood elevation.
(6) Permanently affixed utility equipment and appliances such as
furnaces, heaters, washers, dryers, etc., are prohibited.
(7) Sanitary facilities are prohibited.
(8) The structure shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, and lateral movement and shall be designed to
automatically provide for the entry and exit of floodwater for the
purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces on the walls. Designs for
meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect, or meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one-foot
above grade.
§ 92-23 FLOOD CONTROL PROPERTY § 92-23
91:121
§ 92-24. Design and construction standards.
The following minimum standards shall apply for all construction and
development proposed within any identified floodplain area:
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc., or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
(9) For accessory structures that are 200 square feet or larger in area
(footprint) and that are below the base flood elevation, a variance is
required as set forth in Article VIII. If a variance is granted, a
signed declaration of land restriction (nonconversion agreement)
shall be recorded on the property deed prior to issuance of the
certificate of occupancy.
(10) The storage of hazardous materials is prohibited in accessory
structures.
A. Fill.
(1) Within any identified floodplain area, the use of fill shall be
prohibited. If a variance is obtained in accordance with the criteria
in Article VIII, then the following provisions apply:
(a) If fill is used, it shall:
[1] Extend laterally at least 15 feet beyond the building line
from all points;
[2] Consist of soil or small rock materials only; sanitary
landfills shall not be permitted;
[3] Be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and
resistance to erosion, scouring, or settling;
[4] Be no steeper than one vertical to two horizontal feet
unless substantiated data justifying steeper slopes are
submitted to, and approved by, the Floodplain
Administrator; and
[5] Be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect
adjacent properties.
B. Drainage facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to
convey the flow of stormwater runoff in a safe and efficient manner. The
system shall ensure proper drainage along streets and provide positive
drainage away from buildings. The system shall also be designed to
prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent properties.
C. Water and sanitary sewer facilities and systems.
§ 92-23 SUNBURY CODE § 92-24
91:122
(1) All new or replacement water supply and sanitary sewer facilities
and systems shall be located, designed and constructed to minimize
or eliminate flood damages and the infiltration of floodwaters.
(2) Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to prevent
the discharge of untreated sewage into floodwaters.
(3) No part of any on-site waste disposal system shall be located within
any identified floodplain area except in strict compliance with all
state and local regulations for such systems. If any such system is
permitted, it shall be located so as to avoid impairment to it, or
contamination from it, during a flood.
(4) The design and construction provisions of the UCC and FEMA No.
348, "Protecting Building Utilities From Flood Damages" and the
"International Private Sewage Disposal Code" shall be utilized.
D. Other utilities. All other utilities, such as gas lines, electrical and
telephone systems, shall be located, elevated (where possible) and
constructed to minimize the chance of impairment during a flood.
E. Streets. The finished elevation of all new streets shall be no more than
one foot below the regulatory flood elevation.
F. Storage. All materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or, in
times of flooding, could be injurious to human, animal, or plant life, and
not listed in § 92-25, Development which may endanger human life,
shall be stored at or above the regulatory flood elevation or
floodproofed to the maximum extent possible.
G. Placement of buildings and structures. All buildings and structures
shall be designed, located, and constructed so as to offer the minimum
obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to have a
minimum effect upon the flow and height of floodwater.
H. Anchoring.
(1) All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance
with accepted engineering practices to prevent flotation, collapse,
or lateral movement.
(2) All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks, and other similar objects or
components located below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
securely anchored or affixed to prevent flotation.
I. Floors, walls and ceilings.
(1) Wood flooring used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be installed to accommodate a lateral expansion of the flooring,
perpendicular to the flooring grain, without causing structural
damage to the building.
§ 92-24 FLOOD CONTROL PROPERTY § 92-24
91:123
(2) Plywood used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of
a marine or water-resistant variety.
(3) Walls and ceilings at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be designed and constructed of materials that are water-resistant
and will withstand inundation.
(4) Windows, doors, and other components at or below the regulatory
flood elevation shall be made of metal or other water-resistant
material.
J. Paints and adhesives.
(1) Paints and other finishes used at or below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be of marine or water-resistant quality.
(2) Adhesives used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
of a marine or water-resistant variety.
(3) All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) used at or
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be finished with a marine
or water-resistant paint or other finishing material.
K. Electrical components.
(1) Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three feet above the
base flood elevation.
(2) Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be
dropped from above.
L. Equipment.
(1) Water heaters, furnaces, air-conditioning and ventilating units, and
other electrical, mechanical or utility equipment or apparatus shall
not be located below the regulatory flood elevation and shall be
anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
(2) Ductwork shall be elevated to or above the regulatory flood
elevation or floodproofed to remain water-resistant.
M. Fuel supply systems. All gas and oil supply systems shall be designed to
prevent the infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharges
from the system into floodwaters. Additional provisions shall be made
for the drainage of these systems in the event that floodwater
infiltration occurs.
N. Uniform Construction Code coordination. The standards and
specifications contained in 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401 to 405), as
amended, and not limited to the following provisions, shall apply to the
above and other sections and subsections of this chapter, to the extent
that they are more restrictive and supplement the requirements of this
chapter.
§ 92-24 SUNBURY CODE § 92-24
91:124
§ 92-25. Development which may endanger human life.
Within any identified floodplain area, any structure of the kind described
in Subsection A, below, shall be prohibited. If a variance is obtained in
accordance with the criteria in Article VIII, then the following provisions
apply (§ 92-25B, C, and D):
(1) International Building Code (IBC) 2009 or the latest revision
thereof as adopted by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania: Sections
801, 1202, 1403, 1603, 1605, 1612, 3402, and Appendix G.
(2) International Residential Building Code (IRC) 2009 or the latest
revision thereof as adopted by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania:
Sections R104, R105, R109, R322, Appendix E, and Appendix J.
A. In accordance with the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act,37
and the regulations adopted by the Department of Community and
Economic Development as required by the Act, any new or substantially
improved structure which: will be used for the production or storage of
any of the following dangerous materials or substances; or will be used
for any activity requiring the maintenance of a supply of more than 550
gallons, or other comparable volume, of any of the following dangerous
materials or substances on the premises; or will involve the production,
storage, or use of any amount of radioactive substances shall be subject
to the provisions of this section, in addition to all other applicable
provisions. The following is a list of materials and substances that are
considered dangerous to human life:
(1) Acetone.
(2) Ammonia.
(3) Benzene.
(4) Calcium carbide.
(5) Carbon disulfide.
(6) Celluloid.
(7) Chlorine.
(8) Hydrochloric acid.
(9) Hydrocyanic acid.
(10) Magnesium.
(11) Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen.
(12) Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.).
37.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 92-24 FLOOD CONTROL PROPERTY § 92-25
91:125
§ 92-26. Special requirements for subdivisions and development.
All subdivision proposals and development proposals containing at least 50
lots or at least five acres, whichever is the lesser, in identified floodplain
areas where base flood elevation data are not available shall be supported
by hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses that determine base flood
elevations and floodway information. The analyses shall be prepared by
a licensed professional engineer in a format required by FEMA for a
(13) Phosphorus.
(14) Potassium.
(15) Sodium.
(16) Sulfur and sulfur products.
(17) Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides, and rodenticides).
(18)Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not
otherwise regulated.
B. Within any identified floodplain area, any new or substantially improved
structure of the kind described in Subsection A, above, shall be
prohibited within the area measured 50 feet landward from the top-ofbank
of any watercourse.
C. Within any floodway area, any structure of the kind described in
Subsection A, above, shall be prohibited. Where permitted within any
identified floodplain area, any new or substantially improved residential
structure of the kind described in § 92-25A, above, shall be elevated to
remain completely dry up to at least 1 1/2 feet above base flood
elevation and built in accordance with §§ 92-22, 92-23 and 92-24.
D. New or substantially improved nonresidential structures.
(1) Where permitted within any identified floodplain area, any new or
substantially improved nonresidential structure of the kind
described in § 92-25A, above, shall be built in accordance with
§§ 92-22, 92-23 and 92-24 including:
(a) Elevated, or designed and constructed to remain completely
dry up to at least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation; and
(b) Designed to prevent pollution from the structure or activity
during the course of a base flood.
(2) Any such structure, or part thereof, that will be built below the
regulatory flood elevation shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the standards for completely dry floodproofing
contained in the publication "Flood-Proofing Regulations (United
States Army Corps of Engineers, June 1972, as amended March
1992), or with some other equivalent watertight standard.
§ 92-25 SUNBURY CODE § 92-26
91:126
conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) and letter of map revision
(LOMR). Submittal requirements and processing fees shall be the
responsibility of the applicant.
§ 92-27. Special requirements for manufactured homes.
A. Within any identified floodplain area, manufactured homes shall be
prohibited. If a variance is obtained in accordance with the criteria in
Article VIII, then the following provisions apply.
B. Within any Floodway Area/District, manufactured homes shall be
prohibited. If a variance is obtained in accordance with the criteria in
Article VIII, then the following provisions apply.
C. Within any identified floodplain area, manufactured homes shall be
prohibited within the area measured 50 feet landward from the top-ofbank
of any watercourse.
D. Where permitted within any identified floodplain area, all manufactured
homes, and any improvements thereto, shall be:
(1) Placed on a permanent foundation;
(2) Elevated so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at
least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation; and
(3) Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.
E. Equipment requirement:
(1) Water heaters, furnaces, air-conditioning and ventilating units, and
other electrical, mechanical or utility equipment or apparatus shall
not be located below the regulatory flood elevation and shall be
anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral improvement.
(2) Ductwork shall be elevated to or above the regulatory flood
elevation or floodproofed to remain water-resistant.
F. Installation of manufactured homes shall be done in accordance with
the manufacturer's installation instructions as provided by the
manufacturer. Where the applicant cannot provide the above
information, the requirements of Appendix E of the 2009 International
Residential Building Code or the United States Department of Housing
and Urban Development's "Permanent Foundations for Manufactured
Housing," 1984 Edition, draft or latest revision thereto, and 34 Pa. Code
Chapters 401 to 405 shall apply.
G. Consideration shall be given to the installation requirements of the
2009 IBC, the 2009 IRC or the latest revision thereto as adopted by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and 34 Pa. Code, as amended, where
appropriate and/or applicable to units where the manufacturer's
standards for anchoring cannot be provided or were not established for
the proposed unit's installation.
§ 92-26 FLOOD CONTROL PROPERTY § 92-28
91:127
§ 92-28. Special requirements for recreational vehicles.
Within any identified floodplain area, recreational vehicles shall be
prohibited. If a variance is obtained in accordance with the criteria in
Article VIII, then the following provisions apply:
A. Recreational vehicles in Zones A, A1-30, AH and AE must either:
(1) Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; and
(2) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
(3) Meet the permit requirements for manufactured homes in § 92-27.
§ 92-28 SUNBURY CODE § 92-28
91:128
ARTICLE VI
Prohibited Activities
§ 92-29. General.
In accordance with the administrative regulations promulgated by the
Department of Community and Economic Development to implement the
Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act,38 the following activities shall
be prohibited within any identified floodplain area:
A. The commencement of any of the following activities; or the
construction, enlargement, or expansion of any structure used, or
intended to be used, for any of the following activities:
(1) Hospitals.
(2) Nursing homes.
(3) Jails or prisons.
B. The commencement of, or any construction of, a new manufactured
home park or manufactured home subdivision, or substantial
improvement to an existing manufactured home park or manufactured
home subdivision.
38.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 92-29 FLOOD CONTROL PROPERTY § 92-29
91:129

ARTICLE VII
Existing Structures in Identified Floodplain Areas
§ 92-30. Existing structures.
The provisions of this chapter do not require any changes or improvements
to be made to lawfully existing structures. However, when an improvement
is made to any existing structure, the provisions of § 92-31 shall apply.
§ 92-31. Improvements.
The following provisions shall apply whenever any improvement is made to
an existing structure located within any identified floodplain area:
A. No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed
within any identified floodplain area that would cause any increase in
BFE. In A Areas/Districts, BFEs are determined using the methodology
in § 92-18C.
B. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure to an extent or amount of 50% or more of
its market value shall constitute a substantial improvement and shall be
undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
C. The above activity shall also address the requirements of 34 Pa. Code,
as amended, and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC or most recent
revision thereof as adopted by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
D. Within any Floodway Area/District (see § 92-18A), no new construction
or development shall be allowed unless the appropriate permit is
obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection Regional
Office.
E. Within any AE Area/District without floodway (see § 92-18B), no new
construction or development shall be located within the area measured
50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of any watercourse unless the
appropriate permit is obtained from the Department of Environmental
Protection Regional Office.
F. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of less than 50% of
its market value, shall be elevated and/or floodproofed to the greatest
extent possible.
G. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind that meets the definition of "cumulative substantial damage" shall
be undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 92-30 FLOOD CONTROL PROPERTY § 92-31
91:131

ARTICLE VIII
Variances
§ 92-32. General.
If compliance with any of the requirements of this chapter would result in
an exceptional hardship to a prospective builder, developer or landowner,
the City of Sunbury Zoning Hearing Board may, upon request, grant relief
from the strict application of the requirements.
§ 92-33. Variance procedures and conditions.
Requests for variances shall be considered by the City of Sunbury Zoning
Hearing Board in accordance with the procedures contained in § 92-16 and
the following:
A. No variance shall be granted within any identified floodplain area that
would cause any increase in BFE. In an A Area/District, BFEs are
determined using the methodology in § 92-18C.
B. No variances shall be granted for a proposed accessory structure that
exceeds 200 square feet in size. A signed nonconversion agreement is
required as a condition of receiving the variance.
C. Except for a possible modification of the regulatory flood elevation
requirement involved, no variance shall be granted for any of the other
requirements pertaining specifically to development regulated by
§ 92-25, Development which may endanger human life.
D. No variance shall be granted for prohibited activities (Article VI).
E. If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification necessary
to provide relief.
F. In granting any variance, the City of Sunbury Zoning Hearing Board
shall attach whatever reasonable conditions and safeguards it
considers necessary in order to protect the public health, safety, and
welfare, and to achieve the objectives of this chapter.
G. Whenever a variance is granted, the City of Sunbury Zoning Hearing
Board shall notify the applicant in writing that:
(1) The granting of the variance may result in increased premium rates
for flood insurance.
(2) Such variances may increase the risks to life and property.
H. In reviewing any request for a variance, the City of Sunbury Zoning
Hearing Board shall consider, at a minimum, the following:
(1) That there is good and sufficient cause.
(2) That failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant.
§ 92-32 FLOOD CONTROL PROPERTY § 92-33
91:133
(3) That the granting of the variance will neither:
(a) Result in an unacceptable or prohibited increase in flood
heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary
public expense; nor
(b) Create nuisances, cause fraud on, or victimize the public, or
conflict with any other applicable state or local ordinances and
regulations.
I. A complete record of all variance requests and related actions shall be
maintained by the City of Sunbury Zoning Hearing Board. In addition, a
report of all variances granted during the year shall be included in the
annual report to FEMA.
J. Notwithstanding any of the above, however, all structures shall be
designed and constructed so as to have the capability of resisting the
one-percent-annual-chance flood.
§ 92-33 SUNBURY CODE § 92-33
91:134
ARTICLE IX
Definitions
§ 92-34. Interpretation.
Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give this chapter its most reasonable
application.
§ 92-35. Specific definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE — A use or structure on the same
lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the
principal use or structure.
BASE FLOOD — A flood which has a one-percent chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year (also called the "one-hundred-year flood" or
"one-percent-annual-chance flood").
BASE FLOOD DISCHARGE — The volume of water resulting from a base
flood as it passes a given location within a given time, usually expressed in
cubic feet per second (cfs).
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The elevation shown on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for Zones AE, AH, and A1-30 that indicates
the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one-percent or
greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor below ground level
on all sides.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a permanent structure
having walls and a roof. Included shall be all manufactured homes and
trailers to be used for human habitation.
CUMULATIVE SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Flood-related damages
sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a ten-year period
for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on
average, equals or exceeds 25% of the market value of the structure before
the damages occurred.
DECLARATION OF LAND RESTRICTION (NONCONVERSION
AGREEMENT) — A form signed by the property owner to agree not to
convert or modify, in any manner that is inconsistent with the terms of the
permit and these regulations, certain enclosures below the lowest floor of
elevated buildings and certain accessory structures. The form requires the
owner to record it on the property deed to inform future owners of the
restrictions.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to the construction, reconstruction,
renovation, repair, expansion, or alteration of buildings or other structures;
§ 92-34 FLOOD CONTROL PROPERTY § 92-35
91:135
the placement of manufactured homes; streets and other paving; utilities;
filling, grading and excavation; mining; dredging; drilling operations;
storage of equipment or materials; and the subdivision of land.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to
be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR
SUBDIVISION — The preparation of additional sites by the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FLOOD — A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which the
Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas
of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report provided by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency that includes flood profiles, the
Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the
water surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOODPLAIN AREA — A relatively flat or low land area which is subject to
partial or complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream, river or
watercourse; and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation
of surface waters from any source.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one
foot.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURES — Any structure that is:
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
A.
§ 92-35 SUNBURY CODE § 92-35
91:136
IDENTIFIED FLOODPLAIN AREA — This term is an umbrella term that
includes all of the areas within which the community has selected to enforce
floodplain regulations. It will always include the area identified as the
special flood hazard area on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps and Flood
Insurance Study, but may include additional areas identified by the
community. See §§ 92-17 and 92-18 for the specifics on what areas the
community has included in the identified floodplain area.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished, flood-resistant, partially enclosed
area, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, and incidental
storage, in an area other than a basement area is not considered the lowest
floor of a building, provided that such space is not designed and built
so that the structure is in violation of the applicable nonelevation design
requirements of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis, and is designed for use with
or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities.
The term includes park trailers, travel trailers, recreational vehicles and
other similar vehicles which are placed on a site for more than 180
consecutive days.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after September 16, 2016, and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures. Any construction started after July 18,
1977, and before September 16, 2016, is subject to the ordinance in effect
at the time the permit was issued, provided the start of construction was
within 180 days of permit issuance.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states which
have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
D.
§ 92-35 FLOOD CONTROL PROPERTY § 92-35
91:137
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads)
is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management
regulations adopted by a community.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation, firm, trust, estate, municipality, governmental unit, public
utility, or any other legal entity whatsoever, which is recognized by law as
the subject of rights and duties.
POST-FIRM STRUCTURE — A structure for which construction or
substantial improvement occurred after December 31, 1974, or on or after
the community's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated July 18,
1977, whichever is later, and, as such, would be required to be compliant
with the regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program.
PRE-FIRM STRUCTURE — A structure for which construction or substantial
improvement occurred on or before December 31, 1974, or before the
community's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated July 18, 1977,
whichever is later, and, as such, would not be required to be compliant with
the regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The base flood elevation (BFE) or
estimated flood height as determined using simplified methods plus a
freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet. The freeboard safety factor also applies
to utilities and ductwork.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA) — An area in the floodplain
subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It
is shown on the FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, or AH.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — Includes substantial improvement and other
proposed new development and means the date the permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180
days after the date of the permit and shall be completed within 12 months
after the date of issuance of the permit unless a time extension is granted,
in writing, by the Floodplain Administrator. The "actual start" means either
the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such
as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement
A. Built on a single chassis;
Not more than 400 square feet, measured at the largest horizontal
projections;
B.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck;
C.
Not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living
quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
D.
§ 92-35 SUNBURY CODE § 92-35
91:138
of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does
not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor
does it include the installation of streets and walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection
of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property
of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the
"actual start of construction" means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured
home.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of
land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions
of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs
or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided,
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage from any cause sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% or more of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, of which the cost equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start of
construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which have
incurred substantial damage or cumulative substantial damage, regardless
of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include
any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of
state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been
identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum
necessary to assure safe living conditions.
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE (UCC) — The statewide building code
adopted by the Pennsylvania General Assembly in 1999 applicable to new
construction in all municipalities, whether administered by the municipality,
a third party or the Department of Labor and Industry. Applicable to
residential and commercial buildings, the code adopted the International
Residential Code (IRC) and the International Building Code (IBC), by
reference, as the construction standard applicable with the state floodplain
construction. For coordination purposes, references to the above are made
specifically to various sections of the IRC and the IBC.
VARIANCE — A grant of relief by a community from the terms of a
floodplain management regulation.
§ 92-35 FLOOD CONTROL PROPERTY § 92-35
91:139
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR
60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in
violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
§ 92-35 SUNBURY CODE § 92-35
91:140
ARTICLE X
Enactment
§ 92-36. Effective date.
This chapter shall be effective on September 16, 2016, and shall remain
in force until modified, amended or rescinded by City of Sunbury,
Northumberland County, Pennsylvania.
§ 92-36 FLOOD CONTROL PROPERTY § 92-36
91:141
Chapter 94
FOOD-HANDLING ESTABLISHMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Curbstone market — See Ch. 109.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 124.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 130.
Zoning — See Ch. 175.
§ 94-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
EMPLOYEE — Any person who handles food or drink during preparation or
serving, who comes in contact with any eating or cooking utensils or who is
employed at any time in a room in which food or drink is prepared or served.
HEALTH OFFICER — The Health Officer of the City of Sunbury or his
authorized representative.
ITINERANT RESTAURANT — A restaurant operating for a temporary period
in connection with a fair, carnival, circus, public exhibition or other similar
gathering.
PERSON — Person, firm, corporation or association, either an owner or
employee.
RESTAURANT — Restaurant, club, coffee shop, cafeteria, short-order cafe,
luncheonette, tavern, fireball, sandwich stand, soda fountain and all other
public eating and drinking establishments, as well as kitchens in which food
and drink are prepared for sale elsewhere to the public.
§ 94-2. Permit required; display; exemption.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an eating or drinking
establishment, grocery store, restaurant, itinerant restaurant, butcher
shop or any establishment selling food unwrapped and unprotected in
the City of Sunbury on and after June 1, 1954, who does not possess an
unrevoked permit from the Health Officer of the City of Sunbury and in
whose place of business such permit is not posted in a conspicuous
place.
B. Only persons who comply with the requirements of this chapter shall be
entitled to receive and display such a permit. A person conducting an
itinerant restaurant may, in the discretion of the Health Officer, be
exempted from the requirement of securing a permit.
§ 92-36 SUNBURY CODE § 94-3
94:142
§ 94-3. Annual fee for permit. [Amended 2-14-1977 by Ord. No. 954;
1-14-1991 by Ord. No. 1134; 12-27-2004]
An annual fee in the amount of $100 for the issuance of such permit and
for the continuance of such permit from year to year, with the exception of
churches, lodges and other strictly charitable organizations, shall be paid
on or before June 1, 1954, and each and every year thereafter. Failure to pay
such fee shall be sufficient reason for the revocation of such permit by the
Health Officer without the necessity of a hearing as hereinafter provided.
§ 94-4. Suspension or revocation of permit.
Such a permit may be suspended by the Health Officer, or revoked after an
opportunity for a hearing by the Health Officer, upon the violation of any of
the terms of this chapter by the holder.
§ 94-5. Examination and condemnation of food or drink.
Samples of food and drink may be taken and examined by the Health Officer
as often as he deems it necessary for the detection of unwholesomeness
or adulteration. The Health Officer may condemn and forbid the sale of,
or cause to be removed or destroyed, any food or drink which he deems
unwholesome or adulterated.
§ 94-6. Inspections of establishments.
The Health Officer shall Inspect every eating or drinking establishment,
grocery store, restaurant, itinerant restaurant, butcher shop or any
establishment selling food unwrapped or unprotected located within the
City of Sunbury. In case the Health Officer discovers any improper
sanitation measures, he shall make a second inspection after the lapse
of such time as he deems necessary for the defect to be remedied, and
the second inspection shall be used in determining compliance with the
requirements of this chapter. Two consecutive inspections showing the
same violation of sanitation shall call for an immediate suspension of a
permit.
§ 94-7. Sanitation requirements subject to approval.
Sanitation requirements for restaurants and itinerant restaurants shall be
subject to the approval of the Health Officer.
§ 94-8. Conformance required.
From and after June 1, 1954, no eating or drinking establishment, grocery
store, restaurant, itinerant restaurant, butcher shop or any establishment
selling food unwrapped and unprotected shall be operated within the City of
Sunbury unless it conforms to the requirements of this chapter. When any
such place of business fails to abide by any of the provisions of this chapter,
the Health Officer is authorized to suspend or revoke the permit previously
issued.
§ 94-3 FOOD-HANDLING ESTABLISHMENTS § 94-9
94:143
§ 94-9. Application for reinstatement of permit.
Any eating or drinking establishment, grocery store, restaurant, itinerant
restaurant, butcher shop or establishment selling food unwrapped or
unprotected, the permit of which has been suspended, may at any time
make application for the reinstatement of the permit.
§ 94-10. Successful chest X-ray required for food handlers.
No person, including, the proprietor and any member of his family, shall
be employed or permitted to work in any approved eating or drinking
establishment, grocery store, restaurant, itinerant restaurant, butcher shop
or any establishment selling food unwrapped or unprotected in this City
without first having obtained a certificate, issued by approved and proper
authorities, showing that a chest X-ray examination has been obtained and
successfully passed prior to June 1, 1954, and prior to June 1 of each and
every calendar year thereafter.
§ 94-11. Charitable organizations exempt from provisions.
Church organizations and other strictly charitable organizations of
nonprofit purpose, even though they serve meals to the public, are hereby
specifically declared to be exempt from the operation of this chapter.
§ 94-12. Enforcement; violations and penalties. [Amended
2-14-1977 by Ord. No. 954]
This chapter shall be enforced by the Health Officer. Any person, firm or
corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall for each
violation, upon conviction thereof, pay a penalty of not less than $25 nor
more than $100, and upon default of payment of the penalty and costs, the
person or persons convicted may be imprisoned for a period not exceeding
90 days. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a
separate offense.
Chapter 99
HANDBILLS AND LITTERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dumping — See Ch. 79. Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 124.
§ 99-1. Definitions and word usage.
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
§ 94-9 SUNBURY CODE § 99-1
94:144
AIRCRAFT — Any contrivance now known or hereafter invented, used
or designated for navigation or for flight in the air, including helicopters
and lighter-than-air dirigibles and balloons.
AUTHORIZED PRIVATE RECEPTACLE — A litter storage and collection
receptacle.
CITY — The City of Sunbury.
COMMERCIAL HANDBILL — Any printed or written matter, sample
or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or other
printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of
literature:
GARBAGE — Animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
LITTER — Garbage, refuse and rubbish, as defined herein, and all other
waste material which, if thrown or deposited, as herein prohibited,
tends to create a danger to public health, safety and welfare.
NEWSPAPER — Any newspaper of general circulation, as defined by
general law, any "newspaper" duly entered with the Postal Service of
the United States, in accordance with federal statute or regulation,
and any newspaper filed and recorded with any recording officer, as
Which advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity or
thing.
(1)
Which directs attention to any business or mercantile or
commercial establishment or other activity, for the purpose of
either directly or indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales.
(2)
Which directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical
performance, exhibition or event of any kind for which an
admission fee is charged for the purpose of private gain or profit;
but the terms of this subsection shall not apply where an admission
fee is charged or a collection is taken up for the purpose of
defraying the expenses incident to such meeting, theatrical
performance, exhibition or event of any kind, when it is held, given
or takes place in connection with the dissemination of information
which is not restricted under the ordinary rules of decency, good
morals, public peace, safety and good order; provided that nothing
contained in this subsection shall be deemed to authorize the
holding, giving or taking place of any meeting, theatrical
performance, exhibition or event of any kind without a license,
where such license is or may be required by any law of this state or
under any ordinance of this City.
(3)
Which, while containing reading matter other than advertising
matter, is predominantly and essentially an advertisement and is
distributed or circulated for advertising purposes or for the private
benefit and gain of any person so engaged as advertiser or
distributor.
(4)
§ 99-1 FOOD-HANDLING ESTABLISHMENTS § 99-1
94:145
§ 99-2. Littering in public places prohibited; exception.
No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk,
beach or other public place or upon any private property within the City,
except in public receptacles, in authorized private receptacles for collection
or in official City dumps. However, the depositing of litter is hereby
provided by general law, including any periodical or current magazine
regularly published with not less than four issues per year and sold to
the public.
NONCOMMERCIAL HANDBILL — Any printed or written matter,
sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper,
magazine, paper, booklet or other printed or otherwise reproduced
original, or copies of any matter of literature not included in the
aforesaid definitions of a commercial handbill or newspaper.
PARK — A park, reservation, playground, boardwalk, beach, recreation
center or any other public area in the City owned or used by the City
and devoted to active or passive recreation.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
PRIVATE PREMISES — Any dwelling house, building or other structure
designed or used, either wholly or in part, for private residential
purposes, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously
uninhabited or vacant, including any yard, grounds, walk, driveway,
porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such
dwelling house, building or other structure.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any and all streets, sidewalks, beaches, boulevards,
alleys or other public ways and any and all public parks, squares,
spaces, grounds and buildings.
REFUSE — All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes, (except
body wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead
animals, abandoned automobiles and solid market and industrial
wastes.
RUBBISH — Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both
combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings,
cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard grass, clippings, leaves, wood,
glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which any person or property
is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices
used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
B. Word usage. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the
present tense include the future, words used in the plural number
include the singular number and words used in the singular number
include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and
not merely directory.
§ 99-1 SUNBURY CODE § 99-2
94:146
permitted in and upon any street, sidewalk and/or curb, provided that the
litter has been deposited in a reasonable manner and reasonable place
for purposes of collection by the City Department of Streets and Public
Improvements.
§ 99-3. Method of placing litter in receptacles.
Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private
receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried
or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place
or upon private property.
§ 99-4. Duties of owners and occupants of private property
regarding litter.
No person shall sweep or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place
within the City the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from
any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying
property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of litter.
However, the depositing of litter is hereby permitted in and upon any street,
sidewalk and/or curb, provided that the litter has been deposited in a
reasonable manner and reasonable place for purposes of collection by the
City Department of Streets and Public Improvements.
§ 99-5. Duties of owners and occupants of business premises
regarding litter.
No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into or
deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the City the
accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private
sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying places of business
within the City shall keep the sidewalk in front of their business premises
free of litter.
§ 99-6. Littering from vehicles prohibited.
No person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit
litter upon any street or other public place within the City, or upon private
property.
§ 99-7. Allowing litter to fall from vehicles or trucks prohibited.
No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the City
unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any load,
contents or litter from being blown or deposited upon any street, alley or
other public place, nor shall any person drive or move any vehicle or truck
within the City, the wheels or tires of which carry into or deposit, in any
street, alley or other public place, mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter or
foreign matter of any kind.
§ 99-2 FOOD-HANDLING ESTABLISHMENTS § 99-8
94:147
§ 99-8. Litter regulations for parks.
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park within the City except
in public receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be prevented
from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of the park
or upon any street or other public place. Where public receptacles are
not provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the park by the
person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere, as
provided herein.
§ 99-9. Littering fountains and bodies of water prohibited.
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, bay, stream or
any other body of water in a park or elsewhere within the City.
§ 99-10. Restrictions on handbill distribution in public places.
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial
handbill in or upon any sidewalk, street or other public place within the City,
nor shall any person hand out, distribute or sell any commercial handbill
in any public place; provided, however, that it shall not be unlawful on any
sidewalk, street or other public place within the City for any person to hand
out or distribute, without charge to the receiver thereof, said material to
any person willing to accept it.
§ 99-11. Restrictions on handbill distribution in or on vehicles.
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial
handbill in or upon any vehicle; provided, however, that it shall not be
unlawful in any public place for a person to hand out or distribute, without
charge to the receiver thereof, a noncommercial handbill to any occupant of
a vehicle who is willing to accept it.
§ 99-12. Deposit of handbills on uninhabited premises prohibited.
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial
handbill in or upon any private premises which are temporarily or
continuously uninhabited or vacant.
§ 99-13. Restrictions on handbill distribution on private premises.
A. No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or
noncommercial handbill upon any private premises, if requested by
anyone thereon not to do so, or if there is placed on said premises in a
conspicuous position, near the entrance thereof, a sign bearing the
words "No Trespassing," "No Peddlers or Agents," "No Advertisement"
or any similar notice indicating in any manner that the occupants of
said premises do not desire to be molested or have their right of privacy
disturbed, or to have any such handbills left upon such premises.
§ 99-8 SUNBURY CODE § 99-13
94:148
§ 99-14. Dropping litter from aircraft prohibited.
No person in an aircraft shall throw out, drop or deposit within the City any
litter, handbill or other object.
§ 99-15. Posting restrictions.
No person shall post or affix any notice, poster or other paper or device,
calculated to attract the attention of the public, to any lamppost, public
utility pole or shade tree, or upon any public structure or building, except
as may be authorized or required by law or as may be authorized by City
Council.
§ 99-16. Deposit of litter on occupied private property prohibited.
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied private property
within the City, whether owned by such person or not, except that the owner
or person in control of private property may maintain authorized private
receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will be prevented from
being carried or deposited by the elements upon street, sidewalk or other
public place or upon any private property.
§ 99-17. Owner to maintain premises free of litter.
The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times
maintain the premises free of litter; provided, however, that this section
shall not prohibit storage of litter in authorized receptacles for collection.
§ 99-18. Deposit of litter on vacant property prohibited.
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private
property within the City, whether owned by such person or not.
B. No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or
noncommercial handbill in or upon private premises which are
inhabited, except by handing or transmitting any such handbill directly
to the owner, occupant or other person then present in or upon such
private premises; provided, however, that in case of inhabited private
premises which are not posted as provided in this chapter, such person,
unless requested by anyone upon such premises not to do so, may place
or deposit any such handbill in or upon such inhabited private premises,
if such handbill is so placed or deposited as to be secure or to prevent
such handbill from being blown or drifted about such premises or
sidewalks, streets or other public places, except that mailboxes may not
be so used when so prohibited by federal postal law or regulations. This
section shall not apply to the distribution of mail by the United States or
to newspapers, as defined herein, except that newspapers shall be
placed on private property in such a manner as to prevent their being
carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other
public place or upon private property.
§ 99-13 FOOD-HANDLING ESTABLISHMENTS § 99-19
94:149
§ 99-19. Notice to remove litter; removal by City; collection of costs.
§ 99-20. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction,
pay a fine or penalty of not less than $25 nor more than $300, together
with all costs, for each offense, and in default of the payment thereof shall
undergo imprisonment for a period of not more than 90 days. Each day that
a person continues in violation after notice is given pursuant to this chapter
shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 101
HANDICAPPED PARKING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 145. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 163.
A. Notice to remove. The Director of Public Safety or any person
designated by him is hereby authorized and empowered to notify the
owner of any open or vacant private property within the City, or the
agent of such owner, to properly dispose of litter located on such
owner's property. Such notice shall be by registered mail, addressed to
said owner at his last-known address.
B. Action upon noncompliance. Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any
owner or agent so notified to properly dispose of litter within 10 days
after receipt of written notice provided for in Subsection A above, or
within 15 days after the date of such notice, in the event the same is
returned to the post office because of its inability to make delivery
thereof, provided that the same was properly addressed to the lastknown
address of such owner or agent, the Director of Public Safety is
hereby authorized and empowered to pay for the disposing of such litter
or to order its disposal by the City.
C. When the City has effected the removal of such litter, or has paid for its
removal, the actual costs thereof, plus accrued interest at the rate of
6% per annum from the date of the completion of the work, shall be
charged to the owner of such property and a bill shall be forwarded to
such owner by the City.
D. Where the full amount due the City is not paid by such owner within 90
days after receipt of said bill or within 90 days after the date of said bill,
in the event that said bill is returned to the post office because of its
inability to make delivery thereof, then and in that case the City shall
cause said amount due to be entered as a municipal lien against said
owners' premises.
§ 99-19 SUNBURY CODE § 101-1
101:150
§ 101-1. Legislative intent.
The City Council of the City of Sunbury recognizes the special needs of
handicapped persons in the City of Sunbury and hereby establishes a
Reserved Parking Program which will facilitate access to and from the
handicapped person's place of residence.
§ 101-2. Definitions.
§ 101-3. Application procedure.
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
CITY OF SUNBURY HANDICAPPED PARKING COMMITTEE — This
Committee shall meet on a monthly basis and consist of the following:
HANDICAPPED ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — A certified individual
who qualifies within Pennsylvania state laws to award handicapped
parking violations.
HANDICAPPED PERSON — An individual possessing a handicapped or
severely disabled veteran registration plate.
ISSUING AUTHORITY — The City of Sunbury Handicapped Parking
Committee.
RESERVED PARKING SIGN — A sign issued by the City of Sunbury
reserving parking for one vehicle space and erected at a designated and
agreed upon area for access for handicapped persons.
(1) Mayor — Chairman.
(2) Chief of Police.
(3) Public Works Foreman.
(4) An enforcement officer.
(5) A handicapped citizen of Sunbury.
B. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall
include the singular, and the masculine shall include the feminine and
neuter.
A. The City of Sunbury will promulgate and have available applications for
reserved parking signs. Said applications can be obtained from the
Sunbury City Clerk located on the first floor of Sunbury City Hall, 225
Market Street, Sunbury, Pennsylvania. Once the application has been
completed, it should be submitted to the City of Sunbury Handicapped
Parking Committee, c/o the Sunbury City Clerk.
B. All approved applications shall be subject to annual review and subject
to renovation for cause shown.
§ 101-1 HANDICAPPED PARKING § 101-3
101:151
§ 101-4. General provisions.
C. Applicants must possess a handicapped or severely disabled veteran
registration plate in order to obtain an application. (Owners of disabled
veteran plates as distinguished from owners of severely handicapped
veteran plates are not eligible for handicapped parking signs.)
D. Applications are to be competed in their entirety. Applications not
completed in their entirety will not be considered.
E. Each applicant shall submit with the completed application a written
statement from his or her physician describing the disability at the time
of application, including but not limited to the anticipated duration of
the disability.
F. Approval or denial of applications will be made within 30 days by the
City of Sunbury Handicapped Parking Committee (the issuing
authority).
G. Upon approval of an application, the City of Sunbury will erect one or
two reserved parking signs with the applicant's vehicle registration
number for use by the applicant.
H. The Sunbury Handicapped Parking Committee shall maintain a log of
all applications for a reserved parking location.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person or owner of a realty to erect a
reserved parking sign or handicapped parking sign upon the streets of
the City of Sunbury without first making application to the City of
Sunbury Handicapped Parking Committee. Any person who erects or
utilizes a reserved parking sign or a handicapped parking sign who has
not followed the requirements of this chapter is subject to penalties set
forth herein.
B. Any stipulations made at the time of application regarding the eligibility
of an applicant may be updated periodically at the request of the issuing
authority.
C. Reserved parking signs shall not supersede existing parking
regulations except street sweeping.
D. Reserved parking signs will remain the property of the City of Sunbury.
E. The issuing authority shall be notified immediately if an eligible person
no longer qualifies for a sign under this chapter, for example, if an
eligible person enjoys an improved health condition or moves from the
premises wherein the sign is located. Failure to notify the issuing
authority constitutes a violation of this chapter.
F. The issuing authority will take the following factors into consideration
when issuing reserved parking signs.
§ 101-3 SUNBURY CODE § 101-4
101:152
§ 101-5. Violations and penalties.
(1) Overall availability of parking in the area wherein a sign is
requested.
(2) The living arrangements of an individual applicant, for example, a
disabled person living alone and responsible for his or her own
transportation.
(3) Existing parking problems in the area where a sign is requested.
G. The issuing authority reserves the right to remove any reserved parking
signs or handicapped parking signs for cause shown.
H. No reserved parking sign will be placed in front of the home of a person
other than the applicant unless that property owner signs a notarized
statement stating that they have no objection to the placement of the
sign.
I. The reserved parking area will be defined by the placement of one or
two reserved parking signs. [Amended 6-14-2004]
J. The City Council will issue by resolution at the yearly budget meeting
any fees that may be needed to maintain this program. It shall be the
Council's intent to fund this program with moneys accumulated by
handicapped parking fines.
A. Any person who parks in a reserved parking space who is not
authorized to do so shall be subject to immediate citation and the
vehicle will be subject to immediate removal.
B. No person shall erect a reserved or handicapped parking sign upon the
streets of the City of Sunbury without authority under this chapter from
the City of Sunbury Handicapped Parking Committee.
C. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
summary conviction thereof in a summary proceeding before a District
Justice of the City of Sunbury, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than
$25 and not more than $300 and costs and/or to be imprisoned in the
county jail for a period not exceeding 90 days. Each and every day upon
which any person violates or continues to violate the provisions of this
chapter shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 101-4 HANDICAPPED PARKING § 101-5
101:153
Chapter 102
(RESERVED)
Chapter 103
JAKE BRAKES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 113. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 163.
§ 103-1. Purpose.
To help preserve the peace and tranquility of City residents by prohibiting
the excessive amount of noise produced by the use of brake retarders/"jake
brakes" by truck operators within the City limits.
§ 103-2. Use prohibited.
The use of brake retarders, "jake brakes" or similar devices by truck
operators on the following state routes shall be prohibited: PA 147 (Front
St.), PA Truck 61 South (Chestnut St.) and Truck 61 North (Fifth St. to Arch
St.).
§ 103-3. Applicability.
This chapter shall not apply to fire protection equipment or other
emergency vehicles.
§ 103-4. Posting of signs.
All major routes and streets generally utilized by trucks equipped with
brake retarders/"jake brakes" or similar devices shall be posted with
appropriate signs as required by Penn DOT rules and regulations.
§ 103-5. Violations and penalties.
The relevant fines and penalties as set forth in the City Code and/or the
Motor Vehicle Code shall apply to any motorists found guilty of violating the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 101-5 SUNBURY CODE § 103-5
102:154
Chapter 106
LICENSED OCCUPATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Food-handling establishments — See Ch. 94.
Curbstone market — See Ch. 109.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 124.
Special sales — See Ch. 135.
Transient merchants — See Ch. 157.
§ 106-1. Short title. [Amended 2-14-1977 by Ord. No. 956]
This chapter shall be known as "The City License Fee Ordinance of 1958."
§ 106-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSON — Comprises and includes firms, copartnerships and corporations
as well as individuals.
§ 106-3. Assessment of fee. [Amended 2-14-1977 by Ord. No. 956]
In addition to all other taxes levied and collected, an annual license fee
for general revenue purposes be and the same is hereby authorized and
directed to be assessed, levied and collected from all persons engaged
in the City of Sunbury in each and every trade, business, calling and
occupation and according to the classification as hereinafter in this chapter
set forth.
§ 106-4. License for dealers and collectors of junk and their
vehicles. [Amended 2-14-1977 by Ord. No. 956; 12-22-2008]
All dealers and/or collectors of ashes, garbage, rags, paper, rubber, junk or
other discarded materials shall each pay the annual mercantile fee imposed
thereon under the terms of this chapter and shall pay an annual license fee
of $100 for each truck or vehicle operated in such trade or business.
§ 106-5. License fee for delivery vehicles of nonresident dealers.
[Amended 12-22-2008]
All dealers in wares, merchandise or consumer goods where the principal
office or place of business is outside the City limits, but who sell and deliver
their commodities within the City limits, shall pay an annual license fee of
$100 on each and every delivery truck or car used by them upon the streets
of the City in delivery of said commodities.
§ 103-5 JAKE BRAKES § 106-6
103:155
§ 106-6. License fee for trailers not attached to land. [Amended
2-14-1977 by Ord. No. 956; 12-22-2008]
All owners of trailers not affixed permanently to the land upon which said
trailer is located and used as living quarters shall pay for each trailer an
annual license fee of $100.
§ 106-7. License fee for peddlers and solicitors. [Amended
2-14-1977 by Ord. No. 956; 12-22-2008]
All persons or dealers soliciting or taking orders for goods, wares,
photographs or merchandise, by sample or otherwise, from others, not
dealers or merchants, shall each pay an annual license fee of $100, but this
section shall not apply to commercial travelers taking orders from dealers
or merchants.
§ 106-8. License fee for amusement devices and vending machines.
[Amended 12-14-1970 by Ord. No. 850; 2-14-1977 by Ord. No. 956;
12-28-1987 by Ord. No. 1091; 12-22-2008]
§ 106-9. License fee for public garages and parking lots. [Amended
2-14-1977 by Ord. No. 956; 12-22-2008]
All owners, keepers and operators of public garages and outdoor or open
air public parking lots for the storage of motor vehicles for which pay is
demanded shall pay an annual license fee of $100.
§ 106-10. License fee for advertising vehicles which use sound
amplification. [Amended 2-14-1977 by Ord. No. 956; 12-22-2008]
The owner, operator or lessor of any vehicle used for advertising in, upon
and about the City streets by means of sound amplification or reproduction
shall pay an annual license fee of $100.
A. All owners of bowling alleys, jukeboxes and amusement devices, such
as shuffleboards, miniature pool tables, etc., shall pay for each alley and
for each installation of such piece of equipment an annual license fee of
$100.
B. All owners of billiard or pool tables used by the general public shall pay
for each table an annual license fee of $100.
C. All owners of pinball games and other coin-operated amusement
devices shall pay for each installation of such piece of equipment or
device an annual license fee of $100.
D. All owners of vending machines that dispense beverages in
nonreturnable bottles and cans shall pay for each installation of such
vending machines an annual license fee of $100.
§ 106-6 SUNBURY CODE § 106-11
103:156
§ 106-11. License plate or card; registry. [Amended 6-9-1975 by
Ord. No. 908; 2-14-1977 by Ord. No. 956; 12-22-2008]
Proof of payment of the required fee shall be provided by taxpayers upon
request by the City Treasurer or other authorized agent.
§ 106-12. License fees for public exhibitions. [Amended 2-14-1977
by Ord. No. 956]
All owners or operators of shows, carnivals, circuses, menageries, skating
rinks, theaters and moving-picture houses, and all other kinds of public
exhibitions for pay, except those for religious, educational or charitable
purposes, shall each pay an annual license fee as follows:
§ 106-13. License fees for bankers, investment brokers,
pawnbrokers and billposting, express and telegraph companies.
[Amended 2-14-1977 by Ord. No. 956; 12-22-2008]
All persons engaged in or conducting the several businesses hereinafter
in this section set forth shall each pay an annual license fee as specified,
to wit: all bankers; brokers, excluding real estate and including stock and
investment brokers; bond dealers and bond agents, pawnbrokers;
billposting companies, express companies or agencies and telegraph
companies, an annual fee of $100.
§ 106-14. License fees for market house companies and public
utilities. [Amended 2-14-1977 by Ord. No. 956]
All market house companies and owners of market houses; telephone,
gas, electric light or power companies or agencies (exclusive of telegraph
companies); or individuals furnishing communication, light, heat or power,
an annual fee of $100.
A. All shows, carnivals, circuses and menageries showing for not more
than 24 hours, a fee of $100, with an additional fee of $25 per day for
each succeeding day or fraction thereof. [Amended 12-22-2008]
B. All shows, carnivals, circuses or menageries (exhibiting either within or
outside of the limits of the City) holding or having any parade or
demonstration upon the streets of this City shall pay for each parade
the sum of $100, before said parade shall enter the City limits.
[Amended 12-22-2008]
C. All skating rinks, a fee of $100. [Amended 12-22-2008]
D. All theaters and moving-picture houses, and all other kinds of public
exhibitions for pay, having a seating capacity of 500 or more, a fee of
$100.
§ 106-11 JAKE BRAKES § 106-15
103:157
§ 106-15. Due date for license fees; apportionment of fees.
[Amended 2-14-1977 by Ord. No. 956]
All license fees levied in pursuance of this chapter shall be due and payable
the first day of May 1958 and each first day of May in each year thereafter.
Any person beginning business after the first day of May in any year, except
such as shall be engaged in the businesses mentioned in § 106-14 of this
chapter, shall only be required to pay a license fee for the ratable portion of
the year to the succeeding first day of May.
§ 106-16. Payment of fee. [Amended 2-14-1977 by Ord. No. 956]
All license fees levied in pursuance of this chapter shall be payable to the
City Treasurer, who shall give the person paying the same a receipt therefor,
which shall state the time covered by said license together with street
address and classification, and no person shall begin, continue, conduct
or follow any of the trades, businesses, callings or occupations aforesaid
without first having paid the license fee imposed hereunder.
§ 106-17. Duties of City Treasurer. [Amended 6-9-1975 by Ord. No.
908; 2-14-1977 by Ord. No. 956]
It shall be the duty of the City Treasurer to classify and to assess all persons
made liable for license fees hereunder; provided, however, that the City
Treasurer shall deliver to each and every person liable to assessment under
this chapter the necessary blank upon which a return shall be made and
sworn to of the trade, business, calling or occupation in which he shall be
engaged; and where the business is one requiring classification, the person
to be licensed shall state the class to which he belongs and shall return such
information to the City Treasurer; and, if the City Treasurer is of the opinion
that the return made is true and correct, he shall bill the person making the
return accordingly; but should the City Treasurer find and determine that
the return is not properly made or that the person liable to the license fee
hereunder has failed to make any return, then and in that event, upon such
finding and determination at any time thereafter, the said City Treasurer
shall bill the said person at such rate and in such class as he shall deem
proper and just, and shall give the person a notice in which shall be stated
the trade, business, calling or occupation and class, and the amount of the
license fee imposed or levied for the period in question, and the time for
hearing appeals from the said assessment, which notice shall be served at
least five days prior to the date set forth for the hearing of appeals.
§ 106-18. Duty of Council to hear appeals. [Amended 6-9-1975 by
Ord. No. 908]
The Council of the City, in addition to the duty heretofore devolving upon it
under the laws, shall, further, constitute the Board of Appeals for hearing
appeals from assessments made by the City Treasurer, who shall attend all
hearings of said Board whenever such appeals shall be heard.
§ 106-15 SUNBURY CODE § 106-19
103:158
§ 106-19. Application for assessment by person liable therefor.
[Amended 6-9-1975 by Ord. No. 908; 2-14-1977 by Ord. No. 956]
Any person liable to the payment of a license fee under this chapter who
may have been omitted by the City Treasurer in making the annual
assessments aforesaid, or who may have commenced business after the
annual assessment aforesaid, shall apply to the said City Treasurer for his
assessment, and shall furnish him, under oath, with such facts as to enable
him to properly classify the application and determine the amount of tax to
which he shall be subjected, whereupon the said City Treasurer shall assess
the license in the manner aforesaid.
§ 106-20. Maintenance of record of assessments. [Amended
6-9-1975 by Ord. No. 908]
It shall be the duty of the City Treasurer to keep and maintain a record of
the assessments made as hereinbefore provided in a City License Register.
§ 106-21. Notification of payment as being due; collection upon
nonpayment; penalty. [Amended 6-9-1975 by Ord. No. 908;
2-14-1977 by Ord. No. 956]
It shall be the duty of the City Treasurer to notify all persons subject
to the payment of license fees, as provided by this chapter, on or before
the first day of May in each year, when said license is payable, and the
amount due from them, and if the same is not paid within six months, he
shall place the same, plus a penalty of 5%, in the hands of a collector,
to be by him appointed, for collection. Said collector shall immediately
proceed to collect the same and shall have power in the name of the City
to initiate appropriate proceedings before a court of competent jurisdiction
for the collection of the said tax and penalty, and shall turn over to the City
Treasurer all amounts collected by him within 60 days from the time the
same shall be placed in his hands, and shall receive for his compensation 5%
of the amount thus collected. The City Treasurer shall also have full power
for collection. The City Treasurer shall enter upon the City License Register
the date of giving the notice required by this section and the manner of
giving the same.
§ 106-22. Enforcement.
It shall be the special duty of the Chief of Police of the City to see to the
proper enforcement of the provisions of this chapter and he, as well as the
City Treasurer or other public officials designated by Council, shall have
power in the name of the City to institute proceedings against any or all
persons who violate the provisions of this chapter, whether such suits or
prosecutions be by process of summary conviction or otherwise.
§ 106-19 JAKE BRAKES § 106-23
103:159
§ 106-23. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-14-1977 by Ord. No.
956]
Any person, firm, association or corporation, or any officer, agent, servant
or employee thereof, violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall,
upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $25 or
more than $200 and costs of prosecution, to be collected as other fines and
costs are by law collectible, and in default of payment of said fine and costs,
shall be imprisoned for a period not exceeding 30 days.
Chapter 107
(RESERVED)
Chapter 109
MARKET, CURBSTONE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Food-handling establishments — See Ch. 94.
Licensed occupations — See Ch. 106.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 124.
Street obstructions — See Ch. 145, Art. I.
Transient merchants — See Ch. 157.
Zoning — See Ch. 175.
§ 109-1. Market continued; purpose. [Amended 6-28-1956 by Ord.
No. 589; 2-14-1977 by Ord. No. 957]
The curbstone market as established shall henceforth from the effective
date of this chapter be held for the sale of every article of farm and garden
produce.
§ 109-2. through § 109-3. (Reserved)39
§ 109-4. Violations and penalties.40 [Amended 6-28-1956 by Ord.
No. 589; 2-14-1977 by Ord. No. 957]
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction,
be compelled to forfeit and pay a fine of not less than $10 nor more than
$50, with all costs, for each and every offense, and in default of the payment
thereof shall undergo imprisonment for not less than five days.
39.Editor's Note: Former § 109-2, Location, as amended, and § 109-3, Hours, as amended,
were repealed 10-11-2010.
40.Editor's Note: Original sections 3 to 5, inclusive, which immediately followed this section,
7 to 22, Inclusive, 25 and 27, as well as the entirety of supplements adopted 6-7-1996
(which repealed original sections 23, 24 and 26), 10-2-1996, 8-3-1909 and 3-5-1912, which
immediately followed § 109-5, all of which sections contained provisions regulating the
operation of the curbstone market which are no longer enforced, were repealed 2-14-1977
by Ord. No. 957.
§ 106-23 SUNBURY CODE § 109-5
103:160
§ 109-5. Restrictions on use of sidewalk. [Amended 2-14-1977 by
Ord. No. 957]
No person attending market shall be permitted to occupy, by a bench or
otherwise, more than three feet in width of the sidewalk, measuring from
the curbstone.
Chapter 110
MECHANICAL STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 68.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 82.
Plumbing — See Ch. 127.
§ 110-1. Intent and purpose.
It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to adopt a modern Mechanical
Code, which will prescribe minimum effective standards for the installation,
repair and maintenance of all heating, cooling, ventilating, incinerating and
control equipment, systems and their appurtenances in the City of Sunbury
and to provide informed and professional administration, plan review and
inspection of all work to ensure compliance with the provisions so adopted.
By observing the standards so prescribed, all parties involved in mechanical
plan review and inspection and in mechanical system design, installation,
repair or maintenance of mechanical equipment or systems shall contribute
to the enhancement of life and the protection of property.
§ 110-2. Adoption of standards; copies on file. [Amended 3-24-2003;
12-22-2014]
In accordance with the authority granted the City of Sunbury by the Third
Class City Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania (53 P.S. § 35101 et
seq.), there is hereby adopted by the Council of the City of Sunbury, for
the purposes set forth in § 110-1, that certain code, known as the 2009
International Mechanical Code, as promulgated by the International Code
Council, Inc., except such provisions which may be in conflict with the
laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or the regulations issued by an
agency, board or commission of the commonwealth by virtue of such laws
and which provide a more stringent standard and which are required to be
observed by the City of Sunbury. The provisions of the 2009 International
Mechanical Code, as supplemented, are set forth in those three copies
which are presently on file in the office of the City Clerk and are hereby
adopted as fully as if set forth at length herein. From the date on which
this chapter shall take effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling
within the limits of the City of Sunbury, except as modified by this chapter
§ 109-5 JAKE BRAKES § 110-2
103:161
and any subsequent amendments thereto and as changes set forth by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 110-3. Modifications.
The following sections of the BOCA National Mechanical Code, Seventh
Edition, 1990, as adopted, are amended, deleted or altered to read as
follows:
A. In Section M-100.1, the reference "(name of jurisdiction)" shall mean
the City of Sunbury.
B. Section M-114.2, entitled "Periodic inspections," is deleted.
C. Section M-114.3, entitled "Fee schedule," is amended to read:
M-114.3 Fee schedule: The permit fee for all mechanical work shall
be $0.005 per dollar value of the mechanical work, based upon the
greater of the contract price or the fair market value as determined
by the Code Official, but in no instance shall the fee be less than $20.
When work is performed in conjunction with a more encompassing
construction, the fee shall be included in that charged under the
Building Code. Ordinance No 1136.41 When the applicant on the permit
or his duly authorized agent requests a required inspection and such
inspection reveals that the required work has not been satisfactorily
performed or completed, an additional inspection fee of $20 shall
be charged, and no further inspections will be performed, nor work
permitted to progress until such fee is paid. The fee schedule may be
amended from time to time by resolution of the Council of the City of
Sunbury.
D. Section M-117.4, entitled "Penalties," is hereby deleted.
E. Section M-118.2, entitled "Unlawful continuance," is amended to read:
M-118.2 Unlawful continuance. Any person who shall continue any
mechanical work in or about the building or structure after having
been served with a stop-work order, except such work as that person is
directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be
liable for a fine of $300, and the results of such work shall be ordered
removed by the Code Official. Each day that the work continues or
each day that the results of such work remain shall be considered a
separate violation subject to the fine indicated above.
F. Section M-122.2, entitled "Membership of board," is amended to read:
41.Editor's Note: See Ch. 68, Building Construction.
§ 110-2 SUNBURY CODE § 110-3
103:162
M-122.2 Appeals Board. All appeals shall be made to the City of
Sunbury Building and Housing Code Board of Appeals, as authorized
by the Building Code. Any person having interest in a decision or
action of the Code Official may appeal, in specific writing, on a form
prescribed by the City of Sunbury Building and Housing Code Board
of Appeals and addressed to the Secretary of the Board. A fee of $50
shall accompany the appeal and shall not be refundable. The rules of
that Board shall apply.
G. Section M-122.2.1, entitled "Qualifications," is deleted.
H. Section M-122.2.2, entitled "Alternate members," is deleted.
I. Section M-122.2.6, entitled "Compensation of members," is amended to
read:
M-122.2.6 Compensation of members. Members shall serve in the
public interest and without remuneration.
J. Section M-122.5, entitled "Postponed hearing," is amended to read:
M-122.5 Postponed hearing. When two members are not present
to hear an appeal, the Code Official, the appellant or the appellant's
representative shall have the right to request a postponement of the
hearing.
K. Section M-122.6, entitled "Board decision," is amended to read:
M-122.6 Board decision. The Board shall modify or reverse the
decision of the Code Official by a majority vote of those members
present for testimony; otherwise, the decision shall stand affirmed.
L. Section M-201.0, entitled "General Definitions," is amended to add the
following:
Code Official. The Code Official of City of Sunbury Code
Administration or a duly authorized representative.
M. Section M-201.0, entitled "General Definitions," is amended by
substituting the following definition:
Person. Includes a corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization and any other group acting as a unit, as well as
individuals. It shall also include an executor, administrator, trustee,
receiver or other representative appointed according to law. Whenever
the word "person" is used in any section of this code prescribing
a penalty or fine, as to partnerships or associations, the word shall
include the partners or members thereof, and as to corporations, shall
include the officers, agents or members thereof who are responsible
for any violation of such section.
§ 110-3 JAKE BRAKES § 110-4
103:163
§ 110-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not less than $100 nor more than
$300 or imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days, or both, at the
discretion of the court. Each day that a violation continues after due notice
has been served, in accordance with the terms of and provisions hereof,
shall be deemed a separate offense.
§ 110-5. Construal of provisions.
Nothing in this chapter or the code adopted herein shall be construed to
affect any legal proceeding, rights acquired, liabilities incurred or any cause
or causes of action acquired or existing under Ordinance No. 1102 prior to
its repeal; nor shall any just or legal right or remedy previously existing be
lost, impaired or affected by this chapter.
Chapter 111
MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY REGULATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 139.
§ 111-1. Incorporation of rules and regulations.
The rules and regulations, enforcement response plan and local limits of the
Sewer Department of the Authority, as amended to date and duly amended
in the future, are incorporated herein by reference and made a part of this
chapter.
§ 111-2. Authority to develop limits.
The City hereby delegates the task of developing specific local limits from
time to time to the Authority, and a violation of the Authority's developed
limits shall be a violation of this chapter.
§ 111-3. Authority to be agent of City.
The Authority shall be an agent of the City for the enforcement of this
chapter which incorporates by reference the Rules and Regulations,
Enforcement Response Plan and Local Limits of the Sewer Department of
the Authority and orders and permits issued thereunder.
§ 111-4. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person who violates the rules and regulations, enforcement
response plan and local limits of the Sewer Department of the Authority,
§ 110-4 SUNBURY CODE § 111-4
111:164
Chapter 113
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals and fowl — See Ch. 58.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 121.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 124.
§ 113-1. Legislative findings and determination; purpose.
or permits or orders issued thereunder, shall for each offense, upon
summary conviction, pay a fine of not less than $100, nor more than
$1,000, or a term of imprisonment of not less than 90 days, or both.
Each day that a violation shall continue shall be deemed and shall be
taken to be a separate offense and shall be punishable as such.
B. Any person who knowingly makes any false statement, representation
or certification in any application, record, report, plan, or other
document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to the rules and
regulations, enforcement response plan and local limits of the
Authority, or the permits and orders issued thereunder, or who falsifies,
tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or
method required under the said rules and regulations, enforcement
response plan or local limits, or orders and permits issued thereunder,
shall, for each offense, upon summary conviction, pay a fine of not less
than $100, nor more than $1,000, or a term of imprisonment of not
more than 90 days, or both. Each day that a violation shall continue
shall be deemed and shall be taken to be a separate offense and shall be
punishable as such.
C. The fines and imprisonment set forth in this chapter shall be in addition
to any civil penalties which the Authority may choose to impose
pursuant to 35 P.S. § 752.2 et seq.
A. The making and creation of loud, unnecessary or unusual noises within
the limits of the City of Sunbury is a condition which has existed for
some time, and the extent and volume of such noises are increasing.
B. The making, creation or maintenance of such loud, unnecessary,
unnatural or unusual noises which are prolonged, unusual and
unnatural in their time, place and use affect and are a detriment to
public health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare and prosperity of
the residents of the City of Sunbury.
C. It is declared as a matter of legislative determination and public policy
that it is necessary in the public interest for the provisions and
prohibitions hereinafter contained and enacted, and it is further
declared that the provisions and prohibitions hereinafter contained and
§ 111-4 NOISE § 113-1
113:165
§ 113-2. Causing unreasonable noise prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person with purpose to cause public
inconvenience or annoyance, or with knowledge that he or she is likely to
cause public inconvenience or annoyance, to make or continue or cause to
be made or continued any unreasonable noise within the limits of the City
which serves no legitimate purpose of said person.
§ 113-3. Enumeration of unreasonable noises.
The following acts, among others, are declared to be unreasonable noises
in violation of this chapter, but said enumeration shall not be deemed to be
exclusive, namely:
enacted are in pursuance of and for the purpose of securing and
promoting the public health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare and
prosperity and the peace and quiet of the City of Sunbury and its
inhabitants.
A. Horns, signaling devices, etc. The creation by means of any horn or
signaling device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; the sounding
of any such horn or signaling device for an unnecessary and
unreasonable period of time; or the sounding of any horn or signaling
device on any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle on any street or
public place of the City except as a danger warning.
B. Radios, phonographs, etc. The using, operating or permitting to be
placed, used or operated any radio receiving set, musical instrument,
phonograph or other machine or device for the producing or
reproducing of sound or at any time with louder volume than is
necessary for convenient hearing for the person or persons who are in
the room, vehicle or chamber in which such machine or device is
operated and who are voluntary listeners thereto. The operating of any
such set, instrument, phonograph, machine or device between the
hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such a manner as to be plainly
audible at a distance of 50 feet from said set, instrument, phonograph,
machine or device, if not located in a building, structure or vehicle or 50
feet from the building, structure or vehicle in which it is located, shall
be prima facie evidence of a violation of this chapter.
C. Yelling, shouting, etc. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on
the public streets between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
D. Squealing tires. Causing the tires of any automobile or other vehicle to
make a squealing noise or other harsh or loud sound, except in the
event of an emergency.
E. Exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam
engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motorboat or motor
vehicle, except through a muffler or other device which will effectively
prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom.
§ 113-1 SUNBURY CODE § 113-3
113:166
F. Defect in vehicle or load. The use of any automobile, motorcycle or
vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in such manner as to create a loud
grating, grinding, rattling or other noise.
G. Construction or repairing of buildings. The erection (including
excavating), demolition, alteration or repair of any building other than
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m., except in case of urgent
necessity in the interest of public health and safety, and then only with a
permit from the Building Inspector, which permit may be granted for a
period not to exceed three days or less while the emergency continues
and which permit may be renewed for periods of three days or less
while the emergency continues.
H. Schools, courts, churches and hospitals. The creation of any loud noise
on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, hospital,
church or court while the same are in use which annoys persons
therein, provided that conspicuous signs are displayed along such
streets indicating that the same is a court, school, church or hospital
street.
I. Pile drivers and hammers. The operation between the hours of 11:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of any pile driver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer,
pneumatic drill, derrick, steam or electric hoist or other similar
appliance, the use of which is attended by loud or unusual noise, except
in case of urgent necessity in the interest of public health and safety,
and then only with a permit from the Building Inspector or the
Commissioner of Streets, which permit may be granted for a period not
to exceed three days or less while the emergency continues and which
permit may be renewed for periods of three days or less while the
emergency continues.
J. Motorcycles. The operation of a motorcycle or other two-wheeled
motor-driven vehicle without a permit, between the hours of 11:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m., upon or over the streets and alleys of the City of Sunbury,
and the racing of the motor of such vehicle at any time of the day or
night. Any person using his or her motorcycle or other two-wheeled
motor-driven vehicle to go or come from work during the above hours
may obtain a permit from the City Clerk to operate the same upon the
streets and alleys of the City for said purpose during said hours.
K. Animal noise disturbances. The owning, possessing, harboring or
controlling of any animal within the City limits which makes any noise
continuously and/or incessantly for a period of 10 minutes or makes
such noise intermittently for 1/2 hour or more to the disturbance of any
person at any time of the day or night, regardless of whether the animal
is physically situated in or on private property. [Added 12-13-1993 by
Ord. No. 1183]
§ 113-3 NOISE § 113-4
113:167
§ 113-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be fined not less than $25 and not more than $300 and,
in default of payment of said fine, undergo imprisonment for not more than
30 days.
Chapter 121
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Handbills and littering — See Ch. 99.
Noise — See Ch. 113.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 124.
§ 121-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Offenses Ordinance of
the City of Sunbury."
§ 121-2. Definitions and word usage.
A. Word usage. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the
present tense include the future, words in the plural number include
the singular number and words in the singular number include the
plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely
directory.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CITY — The City of Sunbury.
ILLEGAL SUBSTANCE DISTRIBUTION LISTING — An ongoing list of
Multiconvicted Illegal Substance Distributors that reside in the City
of Sunbury. This list shall be compiled by the City of Sunbury Police
Department based on public information and shall be made public at all
times.[Added 1-23-2012]
MULTICONVICTED ILLEGAL SUBSTANCE DISTRIBUTOR — Any
person that has been convicted of selling or distributing illegal drugs
more than one time.[Added 1-23-2012]
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
ROLLERBLADE — Inline skates with one row of wheels.[Added
2-9-1998]
ROLLERSKATES — Skates with two or more rows of wheels.[Added
2-9-1998]
§ 113-4 SUNBURY CODE § 121-2
113:168
§ 121-3. Offenses against public peace.
SKATEBOARD — A short and narrow board or fiberglass item with ball
bearing wheels mounted on the bottom of it.[Added 2-9-1998]
A. Disorderly conduct. No person in the City shall disturb, tend to disturb
or aid in disturbing the peace of the general public by violent,
tumultuous, offensive or obstreperous conduct, and no person shall
knowingly permit such conduct upon any premises owned or possessed
by him or under his control.
B. Harassment. No person in the City shall, with the intent to do so,
harass, annoy or alarm another by. [Amended 3-24-2003]
(1) Attempting, threatening or subjecting another person to unwanted
physical contact.
(2) Engaging in a course of conduct or repeated acts which serve no
legitimate purpose. Said acts can be either verbal or nonverbal.
C. Fighting. No person in the City shall fight another person except in
boxing exhibitions duly authorized and licensed under law.
D. Vagrancy. No person in the City shall have the status or condition of a
"vagrant." The following persons shall be deemed vagrants:
(1) No lawful means of support. Any person having no lawful means of
support realized solely from lawful occupations or sources; or any
person who lives idly and without visible means of support.
(2) Any person found idling, lingering, standing, strolling in, near or
upon any public area or privately owned property or commercial
establishment which is posted in a manner prohibiting such
loitering shall be guilty of loitering, a summary offense. [Amended
11-27-2000]
(3) Burglars; tools. Any person upon whose person or in whose
possession shall be found any instrument, tool or other implement
for picking locks or pockets, or any implement that is usually
employed or that reasonably may be inferred to have been
designed to be employed in the commission of any felony,
misdemeanor or the violation of any ordinance, and who shall fail to
account satisfactorily for the possession of the same.
(4) Unlawful occupancy. Any person occupying, lodging or sleeping in
any vacant or unoccupied barn, garage, shed, shop or other
building or structure, in any vacant lot or in any automobile, truck,
railroad car or other vehicle, without owning the same or without
permission of the owner or person entitled to the possession of the
same.
(5) Begging. Any person wandering abroad and begging; or any person
who goes about from door to door of private homes or commercial
§ 121-2 NOISE § 121-3
113:169
and business establishments, or places himself in or upon any
public way or public place to beg or receive alms for himself.
(6) Abroad at unusual hours. Any person who wanders about the
streets, alleys or other public ways or places, or who is found
abroad, at late or unusual hours in the night without any visible or
lawful business and not giving a satisfactory account of himself.
(7) Illegal association. Any person who keeps, operates, frequents,
lives in or is employed in any house or other establishment of ill
fame, or who (whether married or single) engages in or commits
acts of fornication or perversion for hire.
(8) Illegal employment. Any person who frequents or loafs, or idles in
or around, is the occupant of or is employed in, any gambling
establishment or establishment where intoxicating liquor is sold
without a license.
(9) Fraudulent schemes. Any person who shall engage in any
fraudulent scheme, device or trick to obtain money or other
valuable thing from others; or any person who aids or assists such
trick, device or scheme.
(10) Concealing stolen property. Any person who keeps a place where
lost or stolen property is concealed.
(11) All persons who by the common law are vagrants, whether
embraced in any of the foregoing classifications or not.
E. Unlawful to disturb religious worship. No person in the City shall
disquiet or disturb any congregation or assembly for religious worship
by making a noise or by rude or indecent behavior or profane discourse,
within their place of worship or so near the same as to disturb the order
or solemnity of the meeting.
F. It is hereby declared to be a nuisance and illegal for any person to drink
in a public place in the City of Sunbury, and such conduct is hereby
prohibited. For purposes of this subsection "drinking" means
consuming or holding an open or partly consumed container of
alcoholic beverage of any nature or having in one's possession an open
or partly consumed container of alcoholic beverage of any nature. For
purposes of this subsection "public place" means any place to which the
public has access and includes all streets, highways, roads, alleys,
sidewalks and parks and parking lots as well as vacant private property
not owned by or under the control of the person charged with violating
this Subsection F, and all other public areas. It also includes the front or
the neighborhood of any store, shop, restaurant, theater, tavern or
other places of business. This subsection shall not apply to drinking of
alcoholic beverages by an owner of private property and/or his guests
upon such private property, nor to drinking of alcoholic beverages by
guests or patrons on the premises of an establishment holding a valid
§ 121-3 SUNBURY CODE § 121-3
113:170
§ 121-4. Offenses against public safety.
liquor license issued by the Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board. [Added
3-14-1983 by Ord. No. 1048]
(1) Notwithstanding the foregoing Subsection F, the City Council shall
have the authority by resolution to permit open containers of
alcohol on public property. This special exception shall be limited to
social events conducted by a nonprofit organization which has full
authority to conduct the event as authorized by the Pennsylvania
Liquor Control Board. In addition, there shall be a showing of
acceptable insurance and other documents as required by the City
for protection of the interests of the City. [Added 8-14-2006]
A. Weapons.
(1) Concealed weapons. No person in the City shall carry concealed
about his person any dangerous or deadly weapon, including, but
not by way of limitation, any pistol, revolver, rifle, cross-knuckles of
lead, brass or other metal, bowie knife or any knife resembling a
bowie knife or any knife with a switchblade or device whereby the
blade or blades can be opened by a flick of a button, pressure on
the handle or other mechanical contrivance.
(2) Sale of switchblade knives prohibited. No person in the City shall
sell, offer for sale or display any knife or knives having the
appearance of a pocket knife, the blade or blades of which can be
opened by a flick of a button, pressure on the handle or other
mechanical devices. Such knife is hereby declared to be a
dangerous or deadly weapon within the meaning of this chapter
and shall be subject to forfeiture to the City as herein provided.
(3) Possession of dangerous or deadly weapons. No person in the City
shall have in his possession, except within his own domicile, or
carry or use, a revolver or pistol of any description, shotgun or rifle;
provided that the foregoing prohibition shall not apply to licensed
shooting galleries under circumstances when such instrument can
be fired, discharged or operated in such a manner as not to
endanger persons or property and in such manner as to prevent the
projectile from traversing any grounds or space outside the limits
of such gallery; and provided that nothing herein contained shall be
construed to prevent the concealed carrying of any type of gun
whatsoever, when unloaded and properly cased, to or from any
range or gallery or to or from an area where hunting is allowed by
law; and, provided that the foregoing prohibition shall not be
construed to forbid sheriffs, constables and their deputies and
regular, special or ex officio police officers, United States Marshals
or any other law enforcement officers from carrying or wearing,
while on duty, such weapons as shall be necessary in the proper
discharge of their duties.
§ 121-3 NOISE § 121-4
113:171
(4) Sales to intoxicated persons and minors. No person in the City shall
sell, loan or furnish any weapon in which any explosive substance
can be used to any person under the influence of alcohol or any
narcotic drug, stimulant or depressant, to any person in a condition
of agitation and excitability or to a minor under the age of 18 years.
(5) Forfeiture of weapons. Every person convicted of a violation of this
subsection shall forfeit to the City such dangerous or deadly
weapon.
(6) Disposition of confiscated weapons. Every police officer, upon
making any arrest and taking a weapon used in violation of this
chapter, shall deliver the same to the Chief of Police to be held by
him until the final determination of the prosecution for said offense,
and upon the finding of guilt, the Chief of Police shall make
disposition of the weapon.
B. Report of treatment of wounds. Every physician or surgeon duly
admitted to the practice of medicine or surgery in the State of
Pennsylvania, whenever he shall treat any person in the City for a
wound inflicted by a dangerous or deadly weapon of any kind, shall
notify the City Police Force within one hour of the time when he renders
such professional service or is called upon to render the same.
C. Possession of burglars; tools. No person in the City shall possess any
nippers known as burglars; nippers, picklock, skeleton key, key to be
used with bit or bits, jimmy or other burglars; instruments or tools of
whatever kind or description, unless it be shown that such possession is
innocent or for lawful purposes.
D. Throwing of missiles. No person in the City shall throw any stone,
snowball or other missile upon or at any vehicle.
E. Fireworks.
(1) Use prohibited. No person in the City shall cast, throw, light or fire
any squib, rocket, cracker, torpedo, grenade, gun, revolver, pistol,
cartridge or other combustible firecrackers or fireworks of any
kind.
(2) Sale and display prohibited. No person in the City shall exhibit, or
have in his possession with intent to give away, sell or offer for sale
within the City any squib, rocket, cracker, torpedo, grenade, gun,
revolver, pistol, cartridge or other combustible firecrackers or
fireworks of any kind; provided that the foregoing prohibition shall
not apply to the sale of any such article or articles by wholesalers
for public demonstrations as herein provided; and provided that the
foregoing prohibition shall not apply to the sale, storage or use of
flashlight composition by photographers or dealers in photographic
supplies, or to prevent any public demonstration or display of
fireworks of any kind if conducted under proper police supervision
§ 121-4 SUNBURY CODE § 121-4
113:172
after an application is made and a permit is issued by the Chief of
Police for such demonstration.
F. Bonfires. No person in the City shall make or assist in making any
bonfire in or upon any public street or place within the City without the
permission of the Chief of Police.
G. False alarm of fire or need for police or ambulance assistance. No
person in the City shall make intentionally, turn in or give a false alarm
of fire or of need for police or ambulance assistance, or aid or abet in
the commission of such act.
H. False report of crime. No person in the City shall make or file with the
Police Force of the City any false, misleading or unfounded statement or
report concerning the commission or alleged commission of any crime
occurring within the City.
I. Interference with Police Force.
(1) Resisting officer. No person in the City shall resist any police
officer, any member of the Police Force or any person duly
empowered with police authority, while in the discharge or
apparent discharge of his duty, or in any way interfere with or
hinder him in the discharge of his duty.
(2) Assisting in escape. No person in the City shall offer or endeavor to
assist any person in the custody of a police officer, a member of the
Police Force or a person duly empowered with police authority to
escape or to attempt to escape from such custody.
(3) Impersonating an officer. No person, other than an official police
officer of the City, shall wear or carry the uniform, apparel, badge,
identification card or any other insignia of office like or similar to,
or a colorable imitation of, that adopted and worn or carried by the
official police officers of the City.
J. Escape of prisoners.
(1) Assisting in escape of prisoners. No person in the City shall make
available to, present to or place within the reach of any person in
the custody of or confined under authority of the City any tool,
implement or other thing calculated to aid in the escape of such
person in custody or so confined.
(2) Aiding escapees. No person in the City shall assist or aid, or
attempt to assist or aid, any person in the custody of or confined
under the authority of the City to escape from jail, place of
confinement or custody.
(3) Escape from jail. No person in the City shall, while a prisoner in the
City jail or in any other place where prisoners are confined, or
otherwise in custody of and confined by the City, escape or attempt
§ 121-4 NOISE § 121-4
113:173
§ 121-5. Offenses against property.
to escape or to assist others to escape or attempt to escape from
such custody or confinement.
A. Against public and private property.
(1) Injury or removal. No person in the City shall willfully, maliciously
or wantonly injure, deface, destroy or remove real property or
improvements thereto, or movable or personal property, belonging
to the City or to any person in the City.
(2) Scattering rubbish. No person in the City shall throw or permit to
be deposited or scattered upon any sidewalk, alley, street, bridge or
public passageway, or upon any private property, any paper, waste,
trash, refuse or other material of a like kind.42
B. Against public property.
(1) Tampering. No person in the City shall tamper with, injure, deface,
destroy or remove any sign, notice, marker, fire alarm box, fireplug,
topographical survey monument or other personal property
erected or placed by the City.
(2) Obstructing passageways. No person in the City shall place or erect
upon the public way or passageway to any building an obstruction
of any type, provided that this prohibition shall not prevent the duly
authorized or required placing of temporary barriers or warning
signs for the purpose of safeguarding the public.
(3) Removal of earth. No person in the City shall move, disturb or take
any earth, stone or other material from any public street, alley or
park or other public ground.
(4) Earthen flood dike. [Added 11-3-1976 by Ord. No. 929]
(a) No person shall enter upon the earthen flood dike protecting
the City of Sunbury or upon the right-of-way of said dike;
provided, however, that this provision shall not apply to any
official of the City of Sunbury or of the United States Corps of
Engineers or any person authorized by said officials who enters
upon said dike and right-of-way for purposes of inspection,
maintenance or repair of said dike and right-of-way, or for
purposes of flood protection or prevention in times of floods or
threat of floods. Any person violating this provision shall, upon
conviction therefor, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than
$25 nor more than $300 and costs of prosecution, and in
default of the payment thereof shall undergo imprisonment for
not less than 10 days nor more than 90 days.
42.Editor's Note: Original Section 5a(3), which immediately followed this Subsection A(2)
and which restricted the posting of notices, was repealed 2-14-1977 by Ord. No. 958. See
Ch. 90, Handbills and Littering, for current regulations on this subject.
§ 121-4 SUNBURY CODE § 121-5
113:174
(b) No person shall mar, deface, injure or damage the earth or the
vegetation upon the earthen flood dike protecting the City of
Sunbury or upon the right-of-way of said dike. Any person
violating this provision shall, upon conviction therefor, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $100 nor more than
$300 and costs of prosecution, and in default of the payment
thereof shall undergo imprisonment for not less than 15 days
nor more than 90 days.
(c) No person shall, upon the earthen flood dike protecting the
City of Sunbury or upon the right-of-way of said dike, operate
or cause to be operated thereupon any self-propelled device
upon which any person or property is or may be transported or
drawn, including but not limited to any motor vehicle,
automobile, truck, motorcycle, motor scooter, motorized
pedalcycle, trail bike or minibike, or be thereupon in
possession and/or control of any self-propelled device upon
which any person or property is or may be transported or
drawn, including but not limited to any motor vehicle,
automobile, truck, motorcycle, motor scooter, motorized
pedalcycle, trail bike or minibike; provided, however, that this
provision shall not apply to any official of the City of Sunbury
or of the United States Corps of Engineers or any person
authorized by said officials who is upon said dike and right-ofway
for purposes of inspection, maintenance or repair of said
dike and right-of-way, or for purposes of flood protection or
prevention in times of floods or threats of floods. Any person
violating this provision shall, upon conviction therefor, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $200 nor more than
$300 and costs of prosecution, and in default of the payment
thereof shall undergo imprisonment for not less than 30 days
nor more than 90 days.
C. Offenses against public safety. [Added 2-9-1998; amended
10-28-2002]
(1) It shall be unlawful to use a skateboard, rollerskates or rollerblades
on the sidewalks, parking lots or Cameron Park in the downtown
business district of the City. The downtown business district shall
include Arch Street, Market Street and Chestnut Street running
from Front Street to Tenth Street.
(2) It shall be unlawful to ride a skateboard, roller skates, rollerblades,
bicycle or any other device mounted on wheels at any designated
skate park within the City of Sunbury without wearing a properly
approved helmet. Any person found in violation of this subsection
shall be subject to an immediate fine which carries a minimum
penalty of $25 and a maximum penalty of $300. [Amended
11-10-2003]
§ 121-5 NOISE § 121-5
113:175
§ 121-6. Conduct in parks and park property.
(3) Any individual violating Subsection C(1) of this section shall be
subject to the penalties in the order set forth below: [Amended
11-10-2003]
(a) A first offense shall result in the confiscation of the skateboard,
roller skates, rollerblades or bicycle for a period of 30 days.
(b) A second offense shall result in the permanent confiscation of
the skateboard, roller skates, rollerblades, or bicycle.
(c) A third offense shall result in the imposition of fine defined at a
minimum amount of $25 and a maximum amount of $300,
along with permanent confiscation of the skateboard, roller
skates, rollerblades, or bicycle.
(d) If a minor is involved with any of the offenses then the parent
or guardian shall be served with written notice of the penalty.
An item of property shall only be returned to a minor with a
parent or guardian present.
A. Buildings and other property.
(1) Disfiguration and removal. No person in a park (defined for
purposes of this chapter as a park, playground, beach, recreation
center or any other area in the City owned or used by the City and
devoted to active or passive recreation, and including comfort
stations) shall willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with
or displace or remove any buildings, bridges, tables, benches,
fireplaces, railings, paving or paving materials, water lines or other
public utilities or parts or appurtenances thereof, signs, notices or
placards, whether temporary or permanent, monuments, stakes,
posts or other boundary markers or other structures or equipment,
facilities or park property or appurtenances whatsoever, either real
or personal.
(2) Rest rooms and washrooms. No person in a park in the City shall
fail to cooperate in maintaining rest rooms and washrooms in a
neat and sanitary condition.
(3) Removal of natural resources. No person in a park in the City shall
dig or remove any beach sand, whether submerged or not, or any
soil, rock, stones, trees, shrubs or plants, down timber or other
wood or materials, or make any excavation by tool, equipment,
blasting or other means or agency.
(4) Erection of structures. No person in a park in the City shall
construct or erect any building or structure of whatever kind,
whether permanent or temporary in character, or run or string any
public service utility into, upon or across such lands, except on
special written permit.
§ 121-5 SUNBURY CODE § 121-6
113:176
(5) Glass containers. No person shall have glass containers in his
possession on the grounds of a City playground. Said areas shall
consist of areas commonly known as a "City playground" and listed
in the office of the City Clerk. [Added 1-9-1995 by Ord. No.
1197]
B. Trees, shrubbery and lawns.
(1) Injury and removal. No person in a park in the City shall damage,
cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree or plant or injure the
bark, or pick the flowers or seeds, of any tree or plant, nor shall any
person attach any rope, wire or other contrivance to any tree or
plant. A person shall not dig in or otherwise disturb grass areas, or
in any other way injure or impair the natural beauty or usefulness
of any area.
(2) Climbing trees, etc. No person in a park in the City shall climb any
tree or walk, stand or sit upon monuments, vases, fountains,
railings, fences or gun carriages or upon any other property not
designated or customarily used for such purposes.
C. Animals, birds, etc.
(1) Hunting. No person in a park in the City shall hunt, molest, harm,
frighten, kill, trap, chase, tease, shoot or throw missiles at any time
at any animal, reptile or bird; nor shall be remove or have in his
possession the young of any wild animal or the eggs, nest or young
of any reptile or bird. Exception to the foregoing is made in that
snakes known to be deadly poisonous, such as rattlesnakes,
moccasins, coral snakes or other deadly reptiles, may be killed on
sight.
(2) Feeding. No person in a park in the City shall give or offer or
attempt to give any animal or bird any tobacco, alcohol or other
known noxious substances.
D. Sanitation.
(1) Pollution of waters. No person in a park in the City shall throw,
discharge or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the waters of
any fountain, pond, lake, stream, bay or tributary, stream, storm
sewer or drain flowing into such waters any substance, matter or
thing, liquid or solid, which will or may result in the pollution of
said waters.
(2) Refuse and trash. No person in a park in the City shall have brought
in or shall dump, deposit or leave any bottles, broken glass, ashes,
paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage or refuse or other
trash. No such refuse or trash shall be placed in any waters in or
contiguous to any park, or left anywhere on the grounds thereof,
but shall be placed in the proper receptacles where these are
provided. Where receptacles are not so provided, all such rubbish
§ 121-6 NOISE § 121-6
113:177
or waste shall be carried away from the park by the person
responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere.
E. Recreational activities.
(1) Bathing and swimming.
(a) Designated areas. No person in a park in the City shall swim,
bath or wade in any waters or waterways in or adjacent to any
park, except in such waters and at such places as are provided
therefor, and in compliance with such regulations as are herein
set forth or may be hereafter adopted, nor shall any person
frequent any waters or places customarily designated for the
purpose of swimming or bathing or congregate thereat, when
such activity is prohibited by the person in charge, upon a
finding that such use of the water would be dangerous or
otherwise inadvisable.
(b) Certain hours. No person in a park in the City shall frequent
any waters or places designated for the purpose of swimming
or bathing or congregate thereat, except between such hours
of the day as shall be designated by the person in charge for
such purposes for each individual area.
F. Behavior.
(1) Intoxicating beverages.
(a) Prohibition. No person in a park in the City shall have brought
alcoholic beverages, nor shall any person drink alcoholic
beverages at any time in the park.
(b) Drunkenness. No person in a park in the City shall be under
the influence of intoxicating liquor.
(2) Fireworks and explosives. No person in a park in the City shall have
brought, or have in his possession, or set off or otherwise cause to
explode or discharge or burn, any firecracker, torpedo, rocket or
other fireworks or explosives of flammable material, or discharge
them or throw them into any such area from land or a highway
adjacent thereto.
(3) Closed areas. No person in a park in the City shall enter an area
posted as "Closed to the Public," nor shall any person use or abet
the use of any area in violation of posted notices.
(4) (Repealed)43
43.Editor's Note: Former Subsection F(4), Games of chance, was repealed 3-14-1983 by Ord.
No. 1048.
§ 121-6 SUNBURY CODE § 121-6
113:178
§ 121-7. Offenses involving morals.
(5) Going onto ice. No person in a park in the City shall go onto the ice
on any of the waters, except such areas as are designated as
skating fields and provided that a safety signal is displayed.
(6) Loitering and boisterousness. No person in a park in the City shall
sleep or protractedly lounge on the seats or benches or other areas,
or engage in loud, boisterous, threatening, abusive, insulting or
indecent language, or engage in any disorderly conduct or behavior
tending to a breach of the public peace or tending to disturb others
in their peaceful use and enjoyment of the park.
G. Food and beverages in Cameron Park. No person shall bring, carry,
transport or cause to be brought, carried or transported into Cameron
Park between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. any food or
beverages of any kind whatsoever, and no person in Cameron Park
between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. shall have upon his
person or in his possession any food or beverages of any kind
whatsoever. This subsection shall not apply to charitable endeavors
approved by City Council or to the person participating in such
endeavors. [Added 6-10-1974 by Ord. No. 902; amended
3-14-1983 by Ord. No. 1048]
A. Prostitution.
(1) Committing. No person in the City shall commit or offer or agree to
commit a lewd act or an act of prostitution of sexual perversion.
(2) Securing. No person in the City shall secure or offer another person
for the purpose of committing a lewd act or an act of prostitution or
sexual perversion.
(3) Frequenting. No person in the City shall be in or near any place
frequented by the public, or any public place, for the purpose of
inducing, enticing or procuring another to commit a lewd act or an
act of prostitution or sexual perversion.
(4) Meretricious display. No person in the City shall make a
meretricious display in or near any public place, any place
frequented by the public or any place open to the public view.
(5) Transportation. No person in the City shall knowingly transport any
person to any place for the purpose of committing a lewd act or an
act of prostitution or sexual perversion.
(6) Permitting. No person in the City shall knowingly receive, or offer
or agree to receive, any person into any place or building for the
purpose of performing a lewd act, or an act of prostitution or sexual
perversion, or to knowingly permit any person to remain in any
place or building for any such purpose.
§ 121-6 NOISE § 121-7
113:179
(7) Directing. No person in the City shall direct or offer to direct any
person to any place or building for the purpose of committing any
lewd act or act of prostitution or sexual perversion.
(8) Aiding. No person in the City shall aid, abet, allow, permit or
participate in the commission of any of the acts prohibited in this
Subsection A.
B. 44Vulgar language. No person in the City shall use vulgar, profane or
indecent language on any public street or other public place or in any
public dance hall, club dance, skating rink or place of business open to
the public patronage.
C. Indecent exposure. No person in the City shall publicly expose his
person or make any indecent gestures.
D. Windowpeeping. No person in the City shall look, peer or peep into a
dwelling house or other building occupied wholly or in part as a
residence within the City, with the intent of watching or looking through
a window to observe any person undressed or in the act of undressing,
or with the intent to do any other wrongful act.
E. Gambling. Except as otherwise allowed by the laws of Pennsylvania:
(1) Participation prohibited. No person in the City shall engage in a
game of chance to win or gain money or other property of value.
(2) Possession of materials. No person in the City shall have in his
possession any evidence of illegal gambling in the nature of policy
or pool tickets, slips, checks or memoranda of any combination or
bet or any policy wheel, dice, implement, apparatus or material of
any form of gambling or lottery.
(3) Owner of premises. No person being the owner or person in control
of premises in the City shall knowingly permit the use or occupancy
thereof for gambling.
F. Animals.
(1) Cruelty to animals. No person in the City shall overwork, cruelly
beat, mutilate, needlessly kill or otherwise cruelly or inhumanely
treat, or carry or transport in any vehicle or other conveyance in a
cruel and inhumane manner, any animal; or cause any of these acts
to be done.
(2) Food and shelter. No person in the City shall fail to provide any
animal in his charge or custody with necessary sustenance, drink
and protection from the elements, or cause any of these acts to be
done.
44.Editor’s Note: Former Subsections B and C, concerning solicitation of drinks and lodging
accommodations, respectively, were repealed 7-9-2018. This ordinance also renumbered
former Subsections D through J as Subsections B through H.
§ 121-7 SUNBURY CODE § 121-7
113:180
(3) Abandonment. No person in the City shall abandon any animal or
cause such act to be done.
(4) Fight upon exhibition. No person in the City shall maintain any
place where fowl or any animals are suffered to fight upon
exhibition or for sport upon any wager.
(5) Poisoning. No person in the City shall poison any domestic animal
or dog or cat or distribute poison in any manner whatsoever with
the intent or for the purpose of poisoning any such animal, dog or
cat.
(6) Indecent exhibition of animals. No person in the City shall exhibit
any animal indecently.
G. Lookouts for illegal acts. No person in the City shall act as a guard or
lookout for any building, premises or establishment used for gambling,
prostitution or any other form of vice or illegal act, or where
intoxicating liquors are illegally kept, sold or purchased, or for any
person soliciting, offering or engaging in prostitution, gambling or any
other form of vice or illegal act, or any prostitute, on any street or
sidewalk, nor shall any person give any signal intended to, or calculated
to, warn or give warning of the approach of any peace officer to any
person in or about such building or premises or places mentioned
herein.
H. Sexual predators. [Added 7-10-2006]
(1) A sexual predator shall be defined for purposes of this subsection
according to the Pennsylvania statute which defines a sexually
violent predator under Registration of Sexual Offenders, 42
Pa.C.S.A. § 9792 as a person who has been convicted of a sexually
violent offense as set forth in Registration of Sexual Offenders, 42
Pa.C.S.A. § 9795.1 (relating to registration under state law quoting
the state registration section number), and who is determined to be
a sexually violent predator under Registration of Sexual Offenders,
42 Pa.C.S.A. § 9795.4 (relating to assessments under the state law
section), due to a mental abnormality or personality disorder that
makes the person likely to engage in predatory sexually violent
offenses. The term includes an individual determined to be a
sexually violent predator where the determination occurred in the
United States or one of its territories or possessions, another state,
the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, a
foreign nation or court martial. [Amended 7-27-2009]
(2) It is unlawful for a sexual predator to be physically present within
1,000 feet of any school, bus stop, child care facility, city sports
recreation area, the Sunbury Youth and Community Center, park,
playground, arcade, movie theatre, athletic field, public library,
skate park, public tennis court, pool, ice rink, YMCA, homeless
shelter, motel and bed-and-breakfast. [Amended 7-27-2009]
§ 121-7 NOISE § 121-7
113:181
§ 121-8. Offenses involving children.
(3) This residency restriction shall not apply to a sexual predator who
resided within those restricted areas prior to passage of the
subsection. The residency restriction shall apply to the areas
specified in the subsection above if new construction of an area
where children regularly congregate should be completed.
(4) Penalties. A person who violates this subsection shall receive a
citation for a summary offense and be subject to punishment issued
by the District Magistrate or the Court of Common Pleas. The fine
shall not exceed $500 and imprisonment not to exceed 60 days.
(5) The City shall notify any interested governmental agency and the
public of any violation of this subsection following a determination
of guilt by the District Magistrate or the Court of Common Pleas.
A. Offenses affecting children.
(1) Wrongs to children. No person in the City having the care, custody,
control or confidence of or influence over any child shall willfully
cause or permit the life of such child to be endangered, the health
of such child to be injured or the morals of such child to be
impaired; or shall willfully cause or permit such child to be placed
in such a situation, business or occupation that its life, health or
morals will be endangered; or shall willfully abandon such child; or
shall torture, torment, cruelly punish or willfully or negligently
deprive of necessary food, clothing or shelter such child or in any
other manner injure such child unnecessarily.
(2) Presence on streets after certain hours. [Amended 7-14-2003;
6-12-2006]
(a) It shall be unlawful for any minor 13 years of age or younger to
be in or upon the public streets, walkways, roads, alleys, parks
or playgrounds, public buildings, vacant lots or other
unsupervised places within the City of Sunbury between the
hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the following day; provided,
however, that the provisions of this subsection do not apply to a
minor accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or other
adult person having the care and custody of the minor, or to a
minor who is upon an emergency errand or legitimate business
directed by his or her parent, guardian or other adult person
having the care and custody of the minor. Further, it shall be
unlawful for any minor over the age of 13 years and under the
age of 18 years to be in or upon the public streets, walkways,
roads, alleys, parks or playgrounds, public buildings, vacant lot
or other unsupervised places within the City of Sunbury
between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the following
day; provided, however, that the provisions of this subsection
do not apply to a minor accompanied by his or her parent,
§ 121-7 SUNBURY CODE § 121-8
113:182
guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of
the minor, or to a minor who is upon an emergency errand or
legitimate business directed by his or her parent, guardian or
other adult person having the care and custody of the minor.
(b) It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian or other adult
person having the care and custody of a minor over the age of
13 years and under the age of 18 years to knowingly permit
such minor to be in or upon the public streets, walkways,
roads, alleys, parks or playgrounds, public buildings, vacant
lots or other unsupervised places within the City of Sunbury
between 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the following day;
provided, however, that the provisions of this subsection do not
apply when the minor is accompanied by his or her parent,
guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of
the minor, or when the minor is upon an emergency errand or
legitimate business directed by his or her parent, guardian or
other adult person having the care and custody of the minor.
Further, it shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian or other
adult person having the care and custody of a minor under the
age of 18 years to knowingly permit such minor to be in or
upon the public streets, walkways, roads, alleys, parks or
playgrounds, public buildings, vacant lots or other
unsupervised places within the City of Sunbury between 11:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the following day; provided, however,
that the provisions of this subsection do not apply when the
minor is accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or other
adult person having the care and custody of the minor, or when
the minor is upon an emergency errand or legitimate business
directed by his or her parent, guardian or other adult person
having the care and custody of the minor.
(3) Purchase for minor. No person in the City shall procure for any
minor any article which the minor is forbidden by law to purchase.
(4) Assault on children under 16 years of age. No person in the City
shall assault any child under 16 years of age; take indecent and
improper liberties with the person of such child; entice, allure or
persuade such child into any room, office or other place for the
purpose of taking any immodest, immoral or indecent liberties with
such child; or take any such liberties with the person of such child
at any place.
(5) Indecent exposure in child's presence. No person in the City shall,
in the proximity of any child under 16 years of age, indecently
expose him or herself with intent to assault or ravish such child.
(6) Abandoned iceboxes. No person in the City shall leave or permit to
remain outside of any dwelling, building or other structure, or
within any unoccupied or abandoned building, dwelling or other
structure under his or its control, in a place accessible to children,
§ 121-8 NOISE § 121-8
113:183
§ 121-9. Violations and penalties.
any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator or
other container which has an airtight door or lid, snaplock or other
locking device which may not be released from the inside, without
first removing said door or lid, snap lock or other locking device
from said icebox, refrigerator or container.
B. Offenses by children.
(1) False statements. It shall be unlawful for a minor to make false
statements; or to furnish, present or exhibit any fictitious or false
registration card, identification card or note or other document; or
to furnish, present or exhibit such document or documents issued
to a person other than the one presenting the same, for the purpose
of gaining admission to prohibited places or for the purpose of
procuring the sale, gift or delivery of prohibited articles, including
beer, liquor or wine.
(2) Procuring unlawful services of others. It shall be unlawful for a
minor to engage or utilize the services of any other person, whether
for remuneration or not, to procure for such minor any article
which the minor is forbidden by law to purchase.
A. Any person violating any of the following provisions of this chapter
shall, upon conviction therefor, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less
than $25 nor more than $300 and costs of prosecution, and in default of
the payment thereof, shall undergo imprisonment for not less than 10
days nor more than 90 days:
(1) § 121-3A.
(2) § 121-3D(1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (8) and (11).
(3) § 121-3E.
(4) § 121-4C.
(5) § 121-4D.
(6) § 121-4E(1) and (2).
(7) § 121-4F.
(8) § 121-6A(2) and (4).
(9) § 121-6B(2).
(10) § 121-6C(1) and (2).
(11) § 121-6E(1)(a) and (1)(b).
(12) § 121-6F(1)(a) and (1)(b), (2), (3), (5) and (6).
(13) § 121-7D.
§ 121-8 SUNBURY CODE § 121-9
113:184
(14) § 121-7H(1), (2), (3), (4), (5) and (6).
(15) § 121-7I.
(16) § 121-8A(2)(a) and (2)(b).
(17) § 121-8B(1) and (2).
(18) § 121-6G. [Added 6-10-1974 by Ord. No. 902]
(19) § 121-3F. [Added 3-14-1983 by Ord. No. 1048]
B. Any person violating any of the following provisions of this chapter
shall, upon conviction therefor, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less
than $50 nor more than $300 and costs of prosecution, and in default of
the payment thereof, shall undergo imprisonment for not less than 10
days nor more than 90 days:
(1) § 121-3B.
(2) § 121-3C.
(3) § 121-3D(9) and (10).
(4) § 121-4A(1), (2) and (3).
(5) § 121-4B. [Amended 2-14-1977 by Ord. No. 958]
(6) § 121-4I(3).45
(7) § 121-5B(2) and (3).
(8) § 121-6A(1) and (3).
(9) § 121-6B(1).
(10) (Reserved)46
(11) § 121-7G(1), (2) and (3).
C. Any person violating any of the following provisions of this chapter
shall, upon conviction therefor, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less
than $100 nor more than $300 and costs of prosecution and, in default
of the payment thereof, shall undergo imprisonment for not less than 15
days nor more than 90 days:
(1) § 121-3D(7).
(2) § 121-4A(4).
45.Editor's Note: Original Subsection b(7), which immediately followed this subsection and
provided a penalty for violations of original Section 5a(3) (which restricted the posting of
notices and was repealed at time of adoption of Code) was repealed 2-14-1977 by Ord. No.
958.
46.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(10), which listed § 121-6F(4), was repealed 3-14-1983
by Ord. No. 1048.
§ 121-9 NOISE § 121-9
113:185
§ 121-10. Bad checks. [Added 12-14-1992 by Ord. No. 1170]
The officers and agents of the City shall have the right to process criminal
bad check offenses against any individuals or entities that attempt to make
payments to the City with checks drawn on accounts with insufficient funds.
The City shall further assess a charge of $25 for all bad checks that must be
processed as a bad check offense.
§ 121-11. Closing of parks. [Added 6-14-1993 by Ord. No. 1178]
The Mayor of the City of Sunbury shall have emergency power to declare
a park area, including but not limited to the sidewalks within the park,
as closed to the public. If such action is taken, the City shall not be
required to use City resources to maintain that specific area. The term
"maintenance" shall include snow and ice removal in the park grounds
and on the sidewalks. The Mayor shall exercise this emergency power by
posting a notice at the park and on the bulletin board in the City Hall.
§ 121-12. Smoking by minors. [Added 4-12-1999 by Ord. No. 1218]
(3) § 121-4H.
(4) § 121-4I(1) and (2).
(5) § 121-4J(1), (2) and (3).
(6) § 121-5A(1) and (2).
(7) § 121-5B(1).
(8) § 121-6D(1) and (2).
(9) § 121-7A(1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7) and (8).
(10) § 121-7B.
(11) § 121-7C(1), (2), (3), (4) and (5).
(12) § 121-7E.
(13) § 121-7F.
(14) § 121-8A(1), (3) and (5).
D. Any person violating any of the following provisions of this chapter
shall, upon conviction therefor, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less
than $200 nor more than $300 and costs of prosecution and, in default
of the payment thereof, shall undergo imprisonment for not less than 30
days nor more than 90 days:
(1) § 121-4G.
(2) § 121-8A(4) and (6).
§ 121-9 SUNBURY CODE § 121-12
113:186
§ 121-13. Control and prohibition of synthetic cannabis and other
synthetic drugs. [Added 5-5-2011]
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
CITY PROPERTY — Includes the streets, parks, sidewalks, buildings
and other property in which the City of Sunbury has a property interest.
MINOR — Includes any individual who is under the age of 18.
SMOKING — Includes the possession of a lighted cigarette, cigar, pipe
or other lighted smoking equipment.
TOBACCO USE — Includes smoking and the use of smokeless tobacco
in any form.
B. Restriction. Tobacco use by minors on City property is prohibited. Any
tobacco use or smoking by a minor on City property shall be considered
a violation of this section, and the minor shall be subject to the penalty
provisions of this section.
C. Penalty. Any minor violating any of the provisions of this section of the
Code of the City of Sunbury shall be subject to pay a fine which shall not
exceed $300, following a hearing before the District Magistrate.
A. Definitions. The following terms shall have the following meanings,
unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is
intended:
DELIVER or DELIVERY — Actual, constructive or attempted transfer of
possession of synthetic cannabis and synthetic drugs, with or without
consideration, whether or not there is an agency relationship.
KNOWLEDGE — Knows, acts knowingly or with knowledge:
MANUFACTURE — The production, preparation, propagation,
compounding, conversion or processing of synthetic cannabis or
synthetic drugs, either directly or indirectly, by extraction from
substances of natural origin, or independently by means of chemical
synthesis, and includes any packaging or repackaging of synthetic
cannabis or synthetic drugs or labeling of its container, except that
this term does not include the preparation, compounding, packaging
The nature or attendant circumstances of his/her conduct,
described by the section defining the offense, when he/she is
consciously aware that his/her conduct is of such nature or that
such circumstances exist. Knowledge of a material fact includes
awareness of the substantial probability that such fact exists.
(1)
The results of his/her conduct, described by the section defining
the offense, when he/she is consciously aware that such result is
likely to be caused by his/her conduct.
(2)
(3) Knowledge may be inferred from the surrounding circumstances.
§ 121-12 NOISE § 121-13
113:187
or labeling of synthetic cannabis or synthetic drugs as an incident to
lawful research, teaching or chemical analysis and not for sale.
METHYLENEDIOXYPYROVALERONE (MDPV) — A psychoactive drug
with stimulant properties which acts as a norepinephrine-dopamine
reuptake inhibitor (NDRI). Reportedly, it has been sold since around
2004 as a research chemical. It is also known as MDPK, Magic, Super
Coke and PV. In 2010 it was reportedly sold as a legal drug alternative
and marketed in the United States as "bath salts" (under such names
as Cloud 9, Ivory Wave, Ocean, Charge Plus, White Lightning, Scarface,
Hurricane Charlie, Vanella Sky, Bonzai Grow, Blue Silk, Serenity Now,
Lovey Dovey, Euphoria, Aura, Red Dove and White Dove).
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, business trust, estate, trust,
partnership or association, or any other entity.
POSSESSION — Possession may be either actual or constructive:
PRODUCE or PRODUCTION — Planting, cultivating, tending or
harvesting.
SYNTHETIC CANNABIS — Includes the brand names K2 and Spice. It is
an herbal and chemical product which mimics the effects of Cannabis,
including but not limited to synthetic cannabinoids,
cannabicyclohexanol, JWH-018, JWH-073, JWH-200, HU-210, CP-47,
497, CP 55 and 212-2.
(1) Actual possession means exercising physical dominion.
Constructive possession may be inferred if the defendant has intent
and capacity to maintain control and dominion over the cannabis,
synthetic drug or drug paraphernalia.
(2)
B. It is unlawful for any persons or corporation knowing, or under
circumstances where one reasonably should know to sell, lend, rent,
lease, give, exchange, or otherwise distribute to any persons or
corporation any product containing the following chemicals: JWH-018,
JWH-073, JWH-200, CP-47, 497, Cannabicyclohexanol, CP 55, 490,
HU-210 or Methylenedioxypyrovalerone and marketed as, Cloud 9,
Ivory Wave, Ocean, Charge Plus, White Lightning, Scarface, Hurricane
Charlie, Vanella Sky, Bonzai Grow, Blue Silk, Serenity Now, Lovey
Dovey, Euphoria, Aura, Red Dove and White Dove, spice, K-2, Blaze and
Red X Dawn, but not limited to incense, potpourri, plant fertilizers,
insect repellant or bath salts.
C. It is unlawful for any person or corporation, knowing, or under any
circumstances where one reasonably should know, to display for sale or
possess with intent to distribute any product containing the following
chemicals: JWH-018, JWH-073, JWH-200, CP-47, 497,
Cannabicyclohexanol, or Methylenedioxypyrovalerone and marketed as
Cloud 9, Ivory Wave, Ocean, Charge Plus, White Lightning, Scarface,
Hurricane Charlie, Red Dove and White Dove, spice, K-2, Blaze and Red
§ 121-13 SUNBURY CODE § 121-13
113:188
Chapter 124
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Food-handling establishments — See Ch. 94.
Handbills and littering — See Ch. 99.
Licensed occupations — See Ch. 106.
Curbstone market — See Ch. 109.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 121.
Special sales — See Ch. 135.
Transient merchants — See Ch. 157.
§ 124-1. License required; exempt organizations or individuals to
register.
X Dawn, but not limited to incense, potpourri, plant fertilizers, insect
repellant or bath salts.
D. It is unlawful for any person or use, or to possess with intent to use,
ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body any product
containing the following chemicals: JWH-018, JWH-073, JWH-200,
CP-47, 497, Cannabicyclohexanol, or Methylenedioxypyrovalerone and
marketed as Cloud 9, Ivory Wave, Ocean, Charge Plus, White Lightning,
Scarface, Hurricane Charlie, Red Dove and White Dove, spice, K-2,
Blaze and Red X Dawn, but not limited to incense, potpourri, plant
fertilizers, insect repellant or bath salts.
E. Penalties.
(1) Violation. No person shall possess any substance containing
synthetic cannabis or synthetic drugs, or violate any other portion
of this section.
(2) Penalty. Any person who pleads guilty or is found guilty by a court
of law shall be punished by a minimum fine of not less than $100
and no more than $600 and/or undergo imprisonment for not more
than 30 days.
(3) Administrative fee. In addition, any person who violates any
provision of this section and is convicted, pleads guilty, receives
court supervision or probation by a court of law shall be ordered to
pay an administrative fee to the law enforcement agency for testing
of the substance(s) collected.
(4) Forfeiture. Any items which may be seized or forfeited pursuant to
statutes or guidelines for the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania may
be forfeited in the same manner as described therein for a violation
of this section.
§ 121-13 NOISE § 124-1
113:189
§ 124-2. Licenses; application; fee; issuance; refusal; renewal.
A. From and after the effective date of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for
any organization or individual not exempted by § 124-6 hereof who is
not the holder of a valid and unexpired license issued pursuant to this
chapter to engage in selling, purchasing or soliciting the sale or
purchase of food, printed matter, services, goods, wares or
merchandise of any description or to solicit contributions, gifts or
pledges of money or any other thing of value by visitation to private
homes or residences or on the public streets or highways of the City of
Sunbury.
B. Those organizations or individuals who desire to engage in such
activities but are not required to obtain a license by virtue of exemption
pursuant to § 124-6 hereof must register in accordance with § 124-7
hereof.
A. Any organization or individual desiring to obtain a license to engage in
the activities described in § 124-1 hereof shall make application
therefor, in person, to the Department of Code Enforcement.
(1) The applicant shall supply, over his, her, or its signature, the date of
application and the following information:
(a) The name of the individual, or, if an organization, the name of
any agent acting on behalf of said organization (hereinafter
referred to as "licensed agent");
(b) The licensed agent's date of birth, social security number, and
place of birth;
(c) The licensed agent's temporary address of where said
applicant is staying while conducting business within the City;
(d) The licensed agent's home/mailing address;
(e) The licensed agent's supervisor's name and phone number;
(f) The name and address of the licensed agent's employer, if any,
and the nature of the business or activity thereof.
(g) The nature of the business or activity in which the licensed
agent wishes to engage within the City. Also the licensed agent
shall supply a copy of all information that will be distributed.
(h) A statement as to whether the licensed agent has been
convicted in any jurisdiction of any crime other than of minor
traffic violations and, if so, of what crime or crimes, and
whether the licensed agent has been arrested for a felony
offense and, if so, what crime or crimes, and when the crime or
crimes occurred.
(i) The length of time for which the license is desired.
§ 124-1 SUNBURY CODE § 124-2
113:190
§ 124-3. Rules of conduct for licensees.
Every individual, organization, or agent thereof to whom a license has
been issued under this chapter shall, in the carrying on of his business or
activities in the City, comply with the following rules of conduct:
(2) In addition to the information required above, the applicant shall
also submit:
(a) Two forms of identification, one of which must be in the form of
a driver's license or identification card issued by the state of
residence. Additional forms of identification that will be
accepted are a recent pay stub, social security card, recent bill
in the applicant's name, or state-issued identification of any
form.
(b) Certification that a request for criminal record check has been
completed by the Sunbury Police Department and the
applicant has been cleared by the Chief of Police or his/her
designees.
B. The City Code Enforcement Office shall be informed, in writing, of any
change in the information supplied during the period for which a
license has been issued pursuant to said application within 24 hours of
said change.
C. Upon submission of said application, the applicant shall pay to the City
Code Enforcement Office a license fee of $100 per day, not to exceed
$250 per month. Proof of payment of said fee shall be submitted to the
City Code Enforcement Office, who shall issue to the applicant, on or
before the next business day of the City, a license in the form of a card
which shall, unless revoked, entitle the licensee to engage in the
activities specified for the period of time stated on the license;
provided, however, that the City Code Enforcement Office shall refuse
to issue a license if the applicant has had a license revoked by Council,
the Sunbury Police Department, or the City Code Enforcement Office
within the preceding five years, has been convicted of violating § 124-1
of this chapter within the preceding five years, or has made any false
statement in his application for a license pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter. Any applicant who has been refused a license may appeal
to Council in the same manner as from a suspension of license under
§ 124-5 hereof.
D. Licenses shall not be effective until 24 hours after the time of issuance,
and no organization or individual shall commence to engage in any
activity specified on such license until said 24 hours have elapsed.
E. Licenses may be renewed upon payment of the fee hereinabove
provided for, unless the licensee is exempt from such requirement
pursuant to § 124-6 below, and amendment of the original application
shall reflect any changes in the information therein contained.
§ 124-2 NOISE § 124-3
113:191
§ 124-4. Suspension of license.
Any license hereafter issued may be suspended by the City Code
Enforcement Office upon the failure of the licensee to comply with the
standards of conduct established by § 124-3 hereof or upon ascertainment
that the licensee has made any false statement in the license application
hereunder. Notice of suspension shall be given by written notice personally
served or sent by registered mail to the address designated for this purpose
in the application for license.
§ 124-5. Appeal from license suspension.
Any individual, organization, or agent thereof whose license has been
suspended shall be entitled to appear before the City Council at the next
regular or special meeting and be heard in behalf of a request for
reinstatement of the license. Council shall hear the licensee at that time if
the licensee has given Council at least five days' notice of the desire for
a hearing. Otherwise Council may hear the licensee at that time or may
decline to hear the licensee at that time, in which case it shall schedule a
hearing within five days. Following the hearing, Council may reinstate or
revoke the license or may continue the suspension of the license for a period
not to exceed five years. No individual, organization, or agent thereof shall
be denied a license or have his license suspended or revoked except by
procedures consistent with the procedures herein.
§ 124-6. Individuals or organizations exempt from licensing fee
requirements.
A. The licensed agent shall carry his or her license card at all times and
exhibit it upon request to any Code Enforcement Officer, Sunbury police
officer, City Council member, or any person upon whom the licensed
agent shall call or with whom the licensed agent shall talk in carrying
on the licensed activities.
B. The licensed agent shall not permit any other person to have possession
of his or her license card and shall immediately report its loss to the
City Code Enforcement Office. The licensed agent shall not cause or
permit the license card to be altered or defaced.
C. The licensed agent shall not enter, or attempt to enter, any dwelling
house without invitation or permission of the occupant and shall
immediately leave any premises upon request.
D. The licensed agent shall not represent the license card to be an
endorsement of himself or of his goods or the services of his principal or
employer.
E. The licensed agent shall immediately surrender the license card upon
suspension and/or revocation of the license as hereinafter provided.
F. The licensed agent shall comply with all the provisions of this chapter.
§ 124-3 SUNBURY CODE § 124-6
113:192
§ 124-7. Registration of exempted individuals, organizations, or
agents thereof required; exception.
All individuals, organizations, or agents thereof exempted from the
licensing requirements hereof shall nevertheless register with the City
Code Enforcement Office, supplying proper identification of the individual,
organization, or agent thereof, and sign all registration forms. The City
A. The following individuals, organizations, or agents thereof, although
subject to all other provisions of this chapter and required to register
under § 124-7 below, are exempted from the licensing fee requirements
only of this chapter:
(1) Farmers engaged in selling only the produce of their own farms.
(2) Individuals or organizations engaged in the sale of goods, wares
and merchandise donated by the owner thereof, the proceeds
whereof are to be applied to any charitable or philanthropic
purpose.
(3) Property owners or residents who hold yard sales, garage sales, or
porch sales; provided, however, that all yard sales, garage sales, or
porch sales are subject to the regulations under Chapter 175,
Zoning, Article XI, Supplementary Regulations, § 175-84, Special
sales.
B. The following individuals, organizations, or agents thereof, although
subject to all other provisions of this chapter and required to register
under § 124-7 below, are exempted from the licensing fee requirements
only of this chapter:
(1) Individuals, organizations, or agents thereof, soliciting
contributions on behalf of organizations or nonprofit corporations
exempted from the provisions of, or duly registered pursuant to,
the Act of 1925, May 13, P.L. 644, as amended,47 who while
soliciting possess a card or other written evidence of their
appointment or authority to solicit for said organization or
nonprofit corporation.
(2) Individuals, organizations, or agents thereof who have been
licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to engage in an
activity described in § 124-1 hereof, when so engaged, including
real estate, insurance or securities brokers or salesmen.
(3) These exemptions shall apply to the aforesaid individuals,
organizations, or agents thereof only, and then only while they are
engaged in the aforesaid activity. At all other times, all the
provisions of this chapter shall apply.
47.Editor's Note: Repealed by 1963, Aug. 9, P.L. 628, § 16 (10 P.S. § 160-16). For the current
statute on this subject, the Solicitation of Funds for Charitable Purposes Act, see 10 P.S.
§ 162.1 et seq.
§ 124-6 NOISE § 124-7
113:193
Code Enforcement Office shall issue a registration card good for one year
from date of issuance. Chairmen of door-to-door fund drives for charitable
organizations may register in behalf of the volunteer solicitors, provided
that the Chairman agrees to provide some identifying tag, button or similar
identification for all the door-to-door solicitors.
§ 124-8. Occupying fixed locations on streets prohibited; time
restrictions on solicitations.
§ 124-9. Violations and penalties.
Any individual, organization, or agent thereof who violates any provisions
of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than $100
and not more than $300 and, in default of payment of said fine, undergo
imprisonment for not more than 30 days. Any unused license fee for a
suspended or revoked license shall be deemed forfeited, not as a penalty,
but as assessed and liquidated damages for failure to comply with the
provisions of this chapter.
Chapter 127
PLUMBING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 68.
Mechanical standards — See Ch. 110.
Sewers — See Ch. 139.
§ 127-1. Intent and purpose.
It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to adopt a modern Plumbing
Code, which will prescribe minimum effective standards for the installation,
repair and maintenance of all water distribution and waste removal piping,
equipment and appurtenances on all premises and in all structures in the
City of Sunbury and to provide informed and professional administration,
plan review and inspection of all work to ensure compliance with the
provisions so adopted. By observing the standards so prescribed, all persons
A. No individual, organization, or agent thereof licensed under this
chapter shall occupy any fixed location upon any of the streets, alleys or
sidewalks of the City for the purpose of engaging in the business
aforesaid, with or without any stand or counter.
B. No individual, organization, or agent thereof licensed under this
chapter shall, at any time on a Sunday or on any other day of the week
before 9:00 a.m. or after 5:00 p.m., engage in selling, purchasing, or
soliciting the sale or purchase of food, printed matter, services, goods,
wares, or merchandise of any description.
§ 124-7 SUNBURY CODE § 127-1
113:194
involved in plumbing plan review and inspection and in plumbing systems
or equipment design, installation, repair or maintenance shall contribute to
the enhancement of life and the protection of property.
§ 127-2. Adoption of standards; copies on file. [Amended 3-24-2003;
12-22-2014]
In accordance with the authority granted the City of Sunbury by the Third
Class City Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania (53 P.S. § 35101
et seq.), there is hereby adopted by the Council of the City of Sunbury,
for the purposes set forth in § 127-1, that certain code, known as the
2009 International Plumbing Code, as promulgated by the International
Code Council, Inc., except such provisions which may be in conflict with
the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or the regulations issued
by an agency, board or commission of the commonwealth by virtue of
such laws and which provide a more stringent standard and which are
required to be observed by the City of Sunbury. The provisions of the 2009
International Plumbing Code, as supplemented, are set forth in those three
copies which are presently on file in the office of the City Clerk and are
hereby adopted as fully as if set forth at length herein. From the date
on which this chapter shall take effect, the provisions thereof shall be
controlling within the limits of the City of Sunbury, except as modified by
this chapter and any subsequent amendments thereto and as changes set
forth by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 127-3. Modifications.
The following sections of the BOCA National Plumbing Code Eighth Edition,
1990, as adopted, are amended, deleted or altered as follows:
A. In Section P.100.1, the reference "(name of jurisdiction)" shall mean the
City of Sunbury.
B. Section P-110.8, entitled "Rule-making," is added to read:
P-110.8 Rule-making. The Code Official shall make such rules and
regulations in the furtherance of the purposes of this Plumbing Code,
and not inconsistent with the specific provisions thereof, as may be
deemed necessary to properly protect the water supply system and
to carry out the purposes of this Plumbing Code, including rules and
regulations for installation, repair or alteration of air-conditioning
systems, water-treatment equipment and water-operated devices.
C. Section P-114.2, entitled "Fee schedule," is amended to read:
§ 127-1 NOISE § 127-3
113:195
P-114.2 Fee schedule: The permit fee, which will cover all required
inspections, shall be $0.005 per dollar value of the plumbing work
performed, based upon the greater of the contract price or the
reasonable market value as determined by the Code Official, but in
no instance shall the fee be less than $20. When work is performed
in conjunction with a more encompassing construction, the fee shall
be included in that charged under the Building Code, Ordinance No.
1136.48 When the applicant on the permit or his duly authorized agent
requests a required inspection and such inspection reveals that the
necessary work has not been satisfactorily performed or completed,
an additional inspection fee of $20 shall be charged, and no further
inspections will be performed nor work permitted to progress until
such fee is paid. The fee schedule may be amended from time to time
by resolution of the Council of the City of Sunbury.
D. Section P-117.4, entitled "Penalties," is deleted.
E. Section P-118.2, entitled "Unlawful continuance," is amended to read as
follows:
P-118.2 Unlawful continuance: Any person who shall authorize or
continue any plumbing work upon a premises or in or about a building
or structure after having been served with a stop-work order, except
such work as that person is directed by the Code Official to perform
to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable for a fine
not less than $100 nor more than $300 or imprisonment for a term
not to exceed 90 days, or both, at the discretion of the court, and the
results of such work shall be ordered removed by the Code Official.
Each day that the work continues or each day that the result of such
work remains shall be considered a separate violation and subject to
the fine or imprisonment, or both, as herein indicated.
F. Section P-122.2, entitled "Membership of board," is amended to read:
P-122.2 Appeals Board: All appeals shall be made to the Sunbury
Building and Housing Code Board of Appeals, as authorized by the
Building Code. Any person having interest in the decision or action of
the Code Official may appeal, in specific writing on a form prescribed
by the City of Sunbury Building and Housing Code Board of Appeals
and addressed to the Secretary of that Board. A fee of $50 shall
accompany the appeal and shall not be refundable. The rules of the
Board shall apply.
G. Section P-122.2.1, entitled "Qualifications," is deleted.
H. Section P-122.2.2, entitled "Alternate members," is deleted.
I. Section P-122.2.6, entitled "Compensation of members," is amended to
read:
48.Editor's Note: See Ch. 68, Building Construction.
§ 127-3 SUNBURY CODE § 127-3
113:196
P-122.2.6 Compensation of members: Members shall serve in the
public interest and without remuneration.
J. Section P-122.5, entitled "Postponed hearing," is amended to read:
P-122.5 Postponed hearing: When two members are not present
to hear an appeal, the Code Official, the appellant or the appellant's
representative shall have the right to request a postponement of the
hearing.
K. Section P-122.6, entitled "Board decision," is amended to read:
P-122.6 Board decision: The Board shall modify or reverse the
decision of the Code Official by a majority vote of those members
present for testimony; otherwise, the decision shall stand affirmed.
L. Section P-201.0, entitled "Definitions of Plumbing Terms," is amended
to provide the following:
Code Official: The Code Administrator of the Sunbury Code
Administration or a duly authorized representative.
M. Section P-201.0, entitled "Definitions of Plumbing Terms," is amended
to provide the following:
Person: Includes a corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization and any other group acting as a unit, as well as
individuals. It shall also include an executor, administrator, trustee,
receiver or other representative appointed according to law. Whenever
the word "person" is used in any section of this code prescribing
a penalty or fine, as to partnerships or associations, the word shall
include the partners or members thereof, and as to corporations, shall
include the officers, agents or members thereof who are responsible
for any violation of such section.
N. Section P-303.2, entitled "Public systems available," is amended to
read:
P-303.2 Public systems available: A public water main or public
sewer system shall be considered available to a building when the
building is located within 150 feet of the public water main or sewer.
O. Section P-308.1, entitled "Breakage," is amended to read:
P-308.1 Breakage: Pipes passing under or through walls shall be
protected from breakage. Any plumbing pipe passing under a footing
or through a foundation wall shall be provided with a relieving arch,
or there shall be built into the masonry wall sleeve two pipe sizes
greater than the pipe passing through. The sleeve material may be
iron, steel or Schedule 40 or greater PVC, or Schedule 40 or greater
ABS. Equivalent protection shall be provided, as may be approved in
writing.
§ 127-3 NOISE § 127-3
113:197
§ 127-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not less than $100 nor more than
$300 or imprisonment for a term of not to exceed 30 days, or both, at the
discretion of the court. Each day that a violation continues after due notice
has been served, in accordance with the terms of and provisions hereof,
shall be deemed a separate offense.
§ 127-5. Construal of provisions.
Nothing in this chapter or the code adopted herein shall be construed to
affect any legal proceeding, rights acquired, liabilities incurred or any cause
or causes of action acquired or existing under Ordinance No. 1101 prior to
its repeal; nor shall any just or legal right or remedy previously existing be
lost, impaired or affected by this chapter.
Chapter 130
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 68.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 82.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 88.
Mechanical standards — See Ch. 110.
Nuisance property — See Ch. 131.
Inoperable vehicles — See Ch. 166.
§ 130-1. Adoption of standards. [Amended 12-22-2014; 7-10-2017;
12-11-2017]
A certain document, a copy of which is on file in the office of the City
Clerk of the City of Sunbury, being marked and designated as the 2015
International Property Maintenance Code, as published by the International
Code Council, Inc., is hereby adopted as the Property Maintenance Code
of the City of Sunbury in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania for regulating
and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and
structures, by providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities
P. Section P-308.3, entitled "Freezing," is amended to read:
P-308.3 Freezing: Water service piping and services shall be installed
below recorded frost penetration but not less than three feet six inches
below grade for water piping and three feet six inches below grade for
drains, waste lines and sewers. Plumbing piping in exterior buildings
walls or areas subject to freezing temperatures shall be adequately
protected against freezing by insulation or heat, or both.
Q. Section P-308.4, entitled "Sewer depth," is deleted.
§ 127-3 SUNBURY CODE § 130-1
113:198
and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures
are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation
of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use, and the
demolition of such existing structures as herein provided; providing for the
issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of
the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said 2015
International Property Maintenance Code on file in the office of the City
Clerk are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set
out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if
any, prescribed in § 130-2 of this chapter.
§ 130-2. Modification of standards. [Amended 12-11-2017]
A. The following sections of the International Property Maintenance Code
are hereby revised:
(1) In Section 101.1, insert "City of Sunbury."
(2) In Section 103.5, insert "See City of Sunbury Fee Schedule adopted
annually by resolution."
(3) In Section 202, add "of City of Sunbury" to the definition of Code
Official.
(4) In Section 202, the definition of "Person" is amended to include the
following:
Person: It shall also include an executor, administrator, trustee,
receiver or other representative appointed according to law.
Whenever the word "person" is used in any section of this code
prescribing a penalty or fine, as to partnerships or association,
the word shall include the partners or members thereof, and as to
corporations, shall include the officers, agents or members thereof
who are responsible for any violation of such section.
(5) In Section 202, insert the following:
Material storage: All building materials stored on any lot, land or
open structure, or part thereof, such as siding, roofing, boards,
fencing, bricks, etc., shall be placed on elevated racks with at least
18 inches of clear space beneath. "Open structure," as defined
herein, shall include, but not be limited to, carports, tarps, or any
other types of temporary coverings used to cover or store building
materials.
(6) In Section 302.4, insert "10 inches."
(7) In Section 304.14, insert "April 15 through October 15."
(8) In Section 308.2, add the following to "Disposal of rubbish":
§ 130-1 NOISE § 130-2
113:199
Disposal of rubbish: The owner, operator, or agent of any property
within City limits shall be responsible for the removal of such
rubbish, including any costs associated with such removal.
(9) In Section 308.3, add the following to "Disposal of garbage":
Disposal of garbage: The owner, operator, or agent of any property
within City limits shall be responsible for the costs of removal of
such garbage, including any costs associated with such removal.
(10) In Section 308.3.2, add the following to "Containers":
Containers: The owner, operator, or agent of any property within
City limits shall be responsible for the costs of removal of such
garbage, including any costs associated with such removal.
(11) In Section 602.3, insert "September 15 through April 15."
(12) In Section 602.4, insert "September 15 through April 15."
B. The following are hereby added as Property Maintenance Code
standards:
(1) Prohibited furniture. Interior-type furniture that would be
adversely affected by the elements and/or susceptible to infestation
by insects, rats, or other vermin is prohibited from being placed
outside a structure. Such prohibited furniture shall include but is
not limited to upholstered couches and chairs or other fabriccovered
articles not designed or intended for exterior use.
(2) Removal of abandoned or prohibited furniture. When the Code
Administration Officer determines that prohibited or abandoned
furniture is located in an exterior property area, the Code
Administration Officer shall cause the owner or other responsible
person to be notified of the violation. If the prohibited or
abandoned furniture is not removed within the time set forth in
such notice, the owner of the premises or other responsible person,
including a tenant, shall be issued a citation based upon the
discretion of the Code Administration Officer. Upon the issuing of
the citation, the City may cause the abandoned or prohibited
furniture to be removed, and the owner shall be responsible for all
costs associated with such removal.
(3) Egress, escape, and rescue openings.
A. Every existing sleeping room shall have at least one operable
emergency escape, egress, and/or rescue window or exterior
door or a door leading to a direct secondary exterior escape or
egress. Any such emergency escape, egress, and/or rescue
window shall meet the conditions set forth in Subsection C
below.
§ 130-2 SUNBURY CODE § 130-2
113:200
§ 130-3. Construal of provisions.
Nothing in this chapter or in the Property Maintenance Code hereby
adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in
any court, or any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or
causes of action acquired or existing under any act or ordinance hereby
repealed by this chapter; nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any
character be lost, impaired or affected by this chapter.
§ 130-4. Violations and penalties. [Added 12-11-201749]
B. Third floor access for existing structures. When it is impossible
to have an exterior stairway for a second egress and/or escape,
a fire ladder may be used so long as the following conditions
are met:
i. Any emergency escape, egress, and/or rescue window
shall meet the conditions set forth in Subsection C below.
ii. A UL- or OSHA- or NFPA-approved ladder must be
installed, with the proper length to match the egress
height of the structure.
iii. The fire ladder must be kept no less than 12 inches from
the egress window.
C. Size of egress window. The size of any window used for egress
and/or escape shall be as follows: The minimum opening height
shall be 24 inches, and the minimum opening width shall be 20
inches. The window shall be no more than 44 inches from the
floor.
(4) Landscaping. All premises shall be landscaped, and the lawns,
hedges and bushes shall be kept trimmed.
A. Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not less than $100 nor more
than $1,000, together with the costs of prosecution, or imprisonment
for a term of not to exceed 30 days, or both, at the discretion of the
court. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been
served, in accordance with the terms and provisions hereof, shall be
deemed a separate offense.
B. All violations, both interior and exterior of any property and/or
structure, shall show proof of a signed contract with a licensed
contractor or a plan of action for the work to be completed within 30
days of the receipt of a notice for the violations.
49.Editor's Note: Pursuant to this ordinance, former § 130-4, Publication requirements, was
removed.
§ 130-2 NOISE § 130-4
113:201
Chapter 131
PROPERTY, NUISANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 130.
§ 131-1. Intent and purpose.
The City adopts this chapter so that City Council shall have the legal
authority to designate a property as a nuisance property.
§ 131-2. Conditions for designation of property as a nuisance.
A property may be listed as a "nuisance property" if the following events
occur:
§ 131-3. Right to appeal.
The property owner shall have the right to appeal the determination of City
Council by written request made within 30 days of the date of determination
that a property is a nuisance property. The cost for processing the appeal
shall be $150 payable at the time of filing for the appeal.
(1) Failure to comply with either the signed contract or having the
work begin may result in a citation of not less than $100 nor more
than $1,000, together with the costs of prosecution.
(2) Further failure to comply with the violations and correction of
either interior or exterior nature will result in the issuance of
citations of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000, together with
the costs of prosecution.
A. The Code Administration Office has received more than three founded
complaints on a property in violation of the Property Maintenance
Code.50 The complaints may be filed either through the Code
Administration Office or through the Sunbury Police Department; and
B. The property owner has not resolved the issue under complaint to the
satisfaction of the Code Administration Office; and
C. City Council has voted that the property shall be listed as a nuisance
property at a public meeting after giving notice of the upcoming vote by
regular mail and the posting of the property.
50.Editor's Note: See Ch. 130, Property Maintenance.
§ 130-4 SUNBURY CODE § 131-4
131:202
§ 131-4. Public notice.
The list of properties deemed to be a nuisance property shall be available
for public inspection. Property owners should recognize that a specific
nuisance property may be advertised from time to time as City Council
deems appropriate.
§ 131-5. Notice for citations waived.
The Code Administration Office will not give property owners warnings
prior to issuing citations for properties that are on the nuisance property
list.
§ 131-6. Removal of nuisance property determination.
The City Council shall have the authority to remove the nuisance property
designation. The City Council shall consider the following factors: The
absence of citations for a six-month period, the completion of a satisfactory
inspection of the property by the Code Enforcement Office or the absence
of a founded complaint for a six-month period.
§ 131-7. Violation and penalties.
The City, through its Code Administration Office or the Sunbury Police
Department, may file a citation against the property owner if a property
has been determined to be a nuisance property. Upon conviction, the fine
shall be not less than $300 nor more than $1,000, together with costs of
prosecution.
Chapter 133
RECYCLING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Municipal Authority — See Ch. 24.
Dumping — See Ch. 79.
Municipal Authority regulations — See Ch.
111.
Waste management — See Ch. 169.
§ 133-1. Regulations incorporated by reference.
The regulations of the Authority51 in connection with recycling as may from
time to time be duly amended are incorporated herein by reference and
made a part of this chapter.
51.Editor's Note: The "Authority" refers to the Municipal Authority of the City of Sunbury.
§ 131-4 RECYCLING § 133-2
133:203
§ 133-2. Enforcement.
The Authority shall be an agent of the City for the enforcement of this
chapter and the regulations of the Authority thereunder in connection with
recycling in the City of Sunbury.
§ 133-3. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 134
RENTAL PROPERTY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Housing Authority — See Ch. 15.
Licensed residential structures — See Ch.
107.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 130.
Nuisance property — See Ch. 131.
§ 134-1. Permit required.
A. It shall be a violation of said regulations for any person not authorized
by the Authority to collect, pick up or remove or cause to be collected,
picked up or remove any recyclables, and each such unauthorized
collection, pickup or removal shall be a separate and distinct offense,
punishable as provided above unless such person has been authorized
to collect, pick up or remove recyclables by the Authority by resolution.
B. It shall be a violation of this chapter and the regulations of the Authority
for any person not to separate and recycle recyclables as provided by
the Authority's regulations. It shall be a separate offense for the failure
to separate and recycle each container of nonrecyclables which also
contains recyclables.
C. Any person who violates the regulations as provided herein of the
Authority in connection with recycling shall for each offense, upon
conviction, pay a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000,
together with the costs of prosecution, and in the event of failure to pay
such fine and costs, to undergo imprisonment for not more than 30
days.
A. Permit required. No person shall operate or rent to another for
occupancy any residential dwelling unit, rooming unit, bed-andbreakfast,
one-family dwelling, two-family dwelling, multifamily
dwelling, boardinghouse, lodging house, tourist home, dormitory, hotel,
or motel until a housing permit has been issued by the Code
Administration Office. "Person" shall be defined herein to include, but
not be limited to, any individual, agent, corporation, firm, partnership,
association, organization, or any other group acting as a unit. It shall
also include an executor, administrator, trustee, receiver or other
§ 133-2 SUNBURY CODE § 134-1
133:204
§ 134-2. Permit application information required.
representative appointed according to law. Whenever the word
"person" is used in any section of this code prescribing a penalty or fine,
as to partnerships or association, the word shall include the partners
or members thereof, and as to corporations, shall include the officers,
agents or members thereof who are responsible for any violation of
such section.
B. The property owner or manager shall list all individuals living in the
rental unit on the housing permit application in order to maintain a
valid rental permit. The property owner or manager shall not allow
anyone who is not listed on said housing permit application to live in the
rental unit.
C. Designation of manager. Every owner who is not a full-time resident of
the City of Sunbury, and/or who does not live within 25 miles of the
boundaries of the City of Sunbury, shall designate a manager who shall
reside in an area that is within 25 miles from the City of Sunbury. If the
owner is a corporation, a manager shall be required if an officer of the
corporation does not reside within the above-referenced area. The
officer shall perform the same function as a manager. If the owner is a
partnership, a manager shall be required if a partner does not reside
within the above-referenced area. Said partner shall perform the same
function as a manager. The manager shall be the agent of the owner for
service of process and receiving of notices and demands, as well as for
performing the obligations of the owner under this chapter and under
rental agreements with occupants. The identity, address and telephone
number(s) of a person who is designated as manager hereunder shall be
provided by the owner or manager to the City, and such information
shall be kept current and updated as it changes.
D. Display and use of permit. The housing rental permit shall be posted in
a conspicuous place in the building inspected if reasonably possible.
The permit is and shall remain the property of the City of Sunbury and
may be rescinded for noncompliance of the owner, manager, or
structure with any provisions of the code or this chapter. The issuance
of a permit to an owner or manager of rental property shall constitute
consent for inspection and upon request by the Code Administration
Office the permit shall be produced by the owner or manager within 24
hours.
A. Each owner or manager in the City shall submit a list on a form
provided by the City of Sunbury to the Code Administration Office at the
time of requesting an occupancy permit which sets forth the following
information:
(1) Owner name, address, telephone number.
(2) Local manager name, address, telephone number (an emergency
contact person).
§ 134-1 RECYCLING § 134-2
133:205
§ 134-3. Dispersal of information.
The Code Administration Office shall share this information with the office
of the City Treasurer, Sunbury Police Department and Sunbury Fire
Department.
§ 134-4. Issuance of occupancy permit.
The Code Administration Office shall issue a new or renewed housing
permit to the applicant subject to the following conditions:
(3) Property address and number of units.
(4) Maximum occupancy per unit.
(5) Emergency telephone number.
(6) Actual number of all tenants and/or occupants.
(7) Names, addresses, and identification documentation of all tenants
and/or occupants over 18 years of age. Identification
documentation shall include a copy of driver's license or other
government-issued photo identification such as nondriver's photo
identification, passport, or birth certificate. Each tenant and/or
occupant over 18 years of age shall attest in writing that the
information provided is true and correct subject to the penalties
provided for unsworn falsification to authorities.
B. Each time an owner or manager and tenant enters into a new lease, or
additional occupants begin living in the leased property, the owner or
manager shall update the housing rental permit application submitted
to the Code Administration Office within 10 days of the change to the
landlord-tenant relationship and/or additional occupants of the
premises and shall provide the information required herein.
C. The owner or manager is required to maintain the rental permit for
inspection by the Code Administration Officer and upon request provide
the following:
(1) The current permit and current inspection report issued by the
Code Administration Office of the City of Sunbury.
(2) The addendum to the license application required by this chapter
showing the names of the authorized occupants of the residential
rental unit.
A. The applicant and structure comply with all provisions of the applicable
code of the City of Sunbury.
B. A zoning use permit has been issued for the structure and for the
purpose for which it will be used.
§ 134-2 SUNBURY CODE § 134-4
133:206
§ 134-5. Maintenance of premises and inspections.
C. The applicant property owner and/or manager are in compliance with
the provisions of this chapter.
D. The appropriate rental housing permit fees have been paid by the
owner and/or manager.
E. The applicant maintains fire insurance for the premises and is in good
standing regarding all applicable property taxes, sewer fees, and Code
Administration Office violations and fees. The Code Administration
Office shall not issue a new or renewed permit if the applicant has
delinquent property taxes, sewer fees, or has any outstanding fines and
costs arising from the enforcement of the applicable code of the City of
Sunbury. The owner shall certify and attest in writing that there are no
such outstanding taxes, violations, and/or fees, and said information
provided is true and correct subject to the penalties provided for
unsworn falsification to authorities.
A. The owner or manager shall maintain the premises in compliance with
the applicable code of the City of Sunbury and shall promptly take all
action necessary to fulfill this obligation at the expense of the owner.
B. In no case shall the existence of any agreement between owner and
occupant relieve an owner of any responsibility under this chapter, or
other provisions of the Code of the City of Sunbury, for maintenance of
the premises.
C. Inspections. The owner or manager shall permit inspections of any
premises by the Code Administration Officer at reasonable times upon
reasonable notice. Inspections may be made to obtain and maintain
compliance with the purposes, intent and requirements of this chapter
based upon any one of the following:
(1) A complaint received by the City, or by any law enforcement officer,
or by the Code Administration Officer, indicating that there is a
violation of any ordinance adopted by the City or of Pennsylvania
law;
(2) An observation by any law enforcement officer, or by the Code
Administration Officer, of a violation of the standards or the
provisions of any ordinance adopted by the City or of Pennsylvania
law;
(3) A report or observation of a rental unit that is unoccupied and
unsecured or a rental unit that is damaged by fire;
(4) The failure to register or comply in any manner with the provisions
of this chapter;
(5) By resolution of the Board of Health;
§ 134-4 RECYCLING § 134-5
133:207
(6) The need to determine compliance with a notice or an order issued
by the City or by its Board of Health;
(7) An emergency observed or reasonably believed to exist;
(8) A request for an inspection by the owner; or
(9) A routine inspection as described in Subsection D below.
D. Inspection procedures and standards.
(1) The Code Administration Officer shall inspect all rental units at
least once every three years and report the inspection on a written
inspection report to the owner or manager. Said inspections may be
made by the Code Officer anytime within the inspection year.
(2) If the inspection discloses violations, the Code Administration
Officer shall issue a letter to the owner or manager within seven
days of said inspection. The letter shall set forth the following:
(a) Street address or appropriate description of the property.
(b) Date of inspection.
(c) Statement of code violations.
(d) Number of days in which the owner is to accomplish repairs
and which the temporary certificate of compliance will be in
effect.
(e) Statement that if the repairs are not completed within the
stipulated time frame, the owner will be subject to fines and
penalties, including revocation of the temporary certificate of
compliance.
(f) Statement of delinquent taxes and/or utilities.
(3) When the Code Administration Officer has determined that a rental
unit is in compliance with all applicable City ordinances, codes and
regulations, and with all applicable state laws and regulations, the
Code Administration Officer shall issue a certificate of compliance
for the inspected rental unit.
(4) If, upon completion of an inspection, a rental unit is found to be in
violation of one or more provisions of applicable City code or state
law, the Code Administration Officer shall take one of the following
actions:
(a) Provide the owner and/or manager with written notice of such
violation(s) and require that they be corrected within a time
frame stipulated by the Code Administration Officer. The time
period for correcting most violations shall be 30 days or less;
however, if a violation cannot reasonably be expected to be
corrected within that time period, an extended period shall be
§ 134-5 SUNBURY CODE § 134-5
133:208
permitted at the discretion of the Code Administration Officer.
For serious violations that pose a serious risk to the health
and safety of the tenants and/or occupants of the premises or
others but do not require the property be immediately vacated
under Subsection D(4)(c) below, the Code Administration
Officer may require that the violations be corrected within a
period as short as 24 hours.
(b) Set a reinspection date before which such violation(s) shall be
corrected. If such violation(s) have not been corrected within
the stipulated period of time, the Code Administration Officer
shall not issue the certificate of compliance and may take any
action necessary to enforce compliance with applicable City
code and state law as provided herein.
(c) Provide the owner with written notice of violations and make a
determination that the rental unit is unfit for human habitation,
in which case it shall be vacated. In the event of a violation, a
rental unit cannot be occupied unless and until the rental unit
is approved as meeting the criteria of this chapter and any
other applicable code of the City of Sunbury as determined by
the Code Administration Officer.
(5) If there is a complaint filed about a rental unit or premises with the
City, the owner and/or manager shall be notified in writing. In the
event that the complaint is of an emergency nature, as determined
by the City or Board of Health, it will require immediate compliance
and remediation by the owner and/or manager. In the absence of
adequate compliance and remediation, any code violation(s) may
be abated by the City and charged to the owner. If the complaint is
not of an emergency nature, the owner and/or manager shall be
afforded a reasonable period of time to correct such violation(s).
The time period for correcting most violations shall be 30 days or
less; however, if a violation cannot reasonably be corrected within a
thirty-day period, an extended period may be granted by the Code
Administration Officer. In the absence of adequate compliance and
remediation, any code violation(s) may be abated by the City and
charged to the owner.
(6) No inspection shall be complete until, inter alia, all inspection fees
are paid in full. Failure to secure the required inspection within 30
days of the first scheduled inspection shall result in revocation of
any existing certificate of compliance for the rental unit. The owner
or manager of any rental unit shall pay a fee for each and every
reinspection to cover the costs associated with such reinspection.
Said fee shall be charged and shall increase each time a
reinspection is required under the terms of this chapter or
requested by the Code Administration Officer to determine
compliance with this chapter or any other applicable provisions of
the Code of the City of Sunbury. A failure to appear for the
reinspection or rescheduling a new inspection or reinspection more
§ 134-5 RECYCLING § 134-5
133:209
§ 134-6. Disclaimer of liability.
The issuance of a certificate of compliance or a temporary certificate of
compliance shall not impose any liability upon the City for any errors or
omissions which resulted in the issuances of such certificate, nor shall the
City be responsible for any liability not otherwise imposed by law.
§ 134-7. City can make repairs.
In case the owner of premises shall neglect, fail or refuse to comply with
any notice from the City or its Code Administration Officer to correct a
violation relating to quality of life at the premises under any code in effect
in the City of Sunbury within the period of time stated in such notice, the
City may cause the violation to be corrected. There shall be imposed upon
the owner a charge of the actual costs involved, plus 10% of said costs for
each time the City shall cause a violation to be corrected, and the owner
of the premises shall be billed after same has been completed. Any such
bill which remains unpaid and outstanding after the time specified therein
for payment shall be grounds for the imposition of a municipal lien upon
the premises as provided by law. Such a lien may be reduced to judgment
and enforced and collected as provided by law, together with interest at
the legal rate and court costs. The remedies provided by this subsection
are not exclusive, and the City and its Code Administration Officer may
invoke such other remedies available under this chapter or the applicable
codes, ordinances or statutes, including, where appropriate, condemnation
than twice shall result in the imposition of doubling of the
applicable inspection fee. The fees set forth herein shall be listed
on the City Fee Schedule.
(7) The owner and/or manager shall allow any and all agents,
employees and contractors of the City access to the premises, and
to any owner-occupied rental unit and/or rental unit situate
thereon, to enable the City to make any examinations and
investigations that it deems necessary and proper and shall further
allow the City and all of its agents, employees, representatives and
contractors to take any compliance action authorized by this article
or by an order of the Board of Health. No owner and/or manager
shall obstruct, impede or otherwise interfere with the entry and
actions of the City or of its agents, employees, representatives or
contractors. If entry is refused or not obtained, the City and its
agents are authorized to pursue recourse as provided by law,
including, but not limited to, seeking the issuance of a search
warrant.
(8) A temporary certificate of compliance may not be upgraded to a
certificate of compliance if all associated fees have not been paid in
full. Furthermore, a certificate of compliance shall be revoked if all
associated fees have not been paid in full within 90 days from
original billing date.
§ 134-5 SUNBURY CODE § 134-7
133:210
proceedings or declaration of premises as unfit for habitation; or
suspension, revocation or nonrenewal of the license issued hereunder.
§ 134-8. Health and safety regulations.
§ 134-9. Illegal activities.
An individual convicted of any felony drug offense, upon conviction and
expiration of any applicable appeal period, shall not be eligible to be listed
on an occupancy permit. "Felony drug offense" shall mean an offense that
is punishable by imprisonment for more than one year under any law of
the United States or of a state or foreign country that prohibits or restricts
conduct relating to narcotic drugs and other controlled substances, and
specifically includes any prohibited act under Pennsylvania's Controlled
Substance, Drug, Device and Cosmetic Act, 35 P.S. § 780-101 et seq., where
the offense is graded as a felony under § 780-113 of that Act. A convicted
illegal substance distributor shall not be eligible to be listed on an annual
permit and shall be considered in violation of this City ordinance. Seven
years after an individual's conviction and the expiration of any applicable
appeal period, that individual shall be eligible to be placed back on a rental
permit, provided that the individual has no additional conviction(s) of any
felony drug offense during that seven-year period. Failure of the property
owner to remove said convicted individual from the occupancy permit shall
result in nonrenewal of the rental permit.
§ 134-10. Grounds for nonrenewal, suspension or revocation of
license.
A. The number of persons occupying a dwelling unit shall not create
conditions that, at the discretion of the Code Administration Officer,
endanger the life, health, safety or welfare of the occupants.
B. The owner or manager shall require that each occupant shall deposit all
rubbish, garbage and other waste from the rental unit into container(s)
provided by the owner or manager in a clean and safe manner and shall
separate and place for collection all recyclable materials, in compliance
with the recycling plan submitted by the owner to the City of Sunbury
or, if there is no recycling plan for the premises, then in compliance
with City of Sunbury's Recycling Ordinance and all other applicable
ordinances, laws and regulations. The owner shall be responsible for
the removal of such rubbish, garbage, or recycling materials at the
expense of the owner.
A. General. The Code Administration Officer may initiate disciplinary
action against an owner that may result in a formal warning,
nonrenewal, suspension or revocation of the owner's license, for
violating any provision of this chapter that imposes a duty upon the
owner and/or for failing to regulate the breach by occupants as
provided for herein.
B. Definition of options.
§ 134-7 RECYCLING § 134-10
133:211
§ 134-11. Violations and penalties.
(1) Formal warning: formal written notification of at least one violation
of this chapter. Upon satisfactory compliance with this chapter and
any conditions imposed by the Code Administration Officer and/or
the Council of the City of Sunbury, the formal warning shall be
removed when the owner applies for license renewal at a time set
by the Code Administration Officer or by the Council of the City of
Sunbury.
(2) Nonrenewal: the denial of the privilege to apply for license renewal
after expiration of the license term. The City will permit the owner
to maintain occupants in the premises until the end of the license
term but will not accept applications for renewal of the license until
a time set by the Code Administration Officer or by the Council of
the City of Sunbury.
(3) Suspension: the immediate loss of the privilege to rent residential
rental units for a period of time set by the Code Administration
Officer or City Council. The owner, after the expiration of the
suspension period, may apply for license renewal without the need
to show cause why the owner's privilege to apply for a license
should be reinstated. Upon suspension, the owner shall take
immediate steps to evict the occupants.
(4) Revocation: the immediate loss of the privilege to rent residential
rental units for a period of time set by the Code Administration
Officer or the City Council and the loss of the privilege to apply for
renewal of the license at the expiration of the time period. Upon the
loss of the privilege to rent, the owner shall take immediate steps to
evict the occupants.
A. The Sunbury Code Administration Office shall revoke any and all
housing permits if they are found to be in violation of any part of this
chapter.
B. Property owners shall be notified and given 30 days to comply.
C. Any property owner who violates the regulations herein shall, for each
offense, upon conviction, pay a fine of not less than $100 nor more than
$1,000, together with the costs of prosecution.
D. A property owner may appeal to Sunbury City Council the revocation or
nonrenewal of a rental permit within 30 days of the revocation or
nonrenewal of the permit.
§ 134-10 SUNBURY CODE § 134-11
133:212
Chapter 135
SALES, SPECIAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licensed occupations — See Ch. 106.
Curbstone market — See Ch. 109.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 124.
Transient merchants — See Ch. 157.
§ 135-1. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, association or corporation
in the City of Sunbury to advertise or hold out by any means that any sale
of goods, wares and merchandise is an insurance, bankruptcy, mortgage,
insolvent, assignees, receivers, trustees, removal or closing-out sale or a
sale of goods damaged by fire, smoke or water unless a license to conduct
such sale is first obtained from the City Clerk of the City of Sunbury.
§ 135-2. Application for license.
A. Upon application for such license, the applicant shall make a full
disclosure under oath of the following information:
(1) The true name of the owner of the goods to be offered for sale.
(2) The name of the operator of the sale, if a person other than the true
owner.
(3) A full and complete, detailed and itemized inventory of the quantity,
kind, brand name and character of the goods to be offered for sale
and the source from which the goods, wares and merchandise were
secured, together with the names and addresses of the last
previous owners thereof, which shall be prepared in the following
manner:
(a) First, a listing of all goods which have been in stock for a
period of 15 days or longer prior to the application for the
license.
(b) Second, a listing of all goods received in stock within the 15
days immediately preceding the application for the license.
(c) Third, a listing of all goods which have been ordered and will
be placed in stock during the pendency of the sale.
(4) The method by which the applicant for the license or the true
owner of the goods, if a different person, acquired title to the same,
and the reason for the urgent and expeditious disposal thereof.
§ 134-11 SALES, SPECIAL § 135-2
135:213
§ 135-3. License fee.
The City Treasurer of the City of Sunbury shall receive from the applicant
for such license, upon the granting thereof or the renewal thereof, a license
fee which shall be $100 per month.
§ 135-4. Duration of license; renewals.
Any license so granted as aforesaid shall be good for no more than a period
of 30 consecutive calendar days (Sundays and legal holidays excluded), and
may be renewed for two consecutive periods not exceeding 30 consecutive
calendar days each (Sundays and legal holidays excluded), provided that
a revised inventory is filed with each application for renewal of a license,
showing the items listed on the original inventory remaining unsold and that
no goods, wares or merchandise not included in the original inventory are
in stock.
§ 135-5. Revocation of license.
After a license has been granted and it is established that the licensee
has violated any provisions of this chapter, the license shall be revoked
immediately.
§ 135-6. Merchandise excluded from sale.
B. Upon receipt of the application, the City Clerk may, in her discretion,
make or cause to be made an examination or audit or investigation of
the applicant and all of the facts contained in the application and
inventory in relation to the proposed sale.
C. A license shall be denied or refused if any defect appears in the title to
the goods or wares represented or any false representation is made in
the application or inventory, or if the inventory contains goods, wares
and merchandise purchased by the applicant on consignment, except if
the goods, wares or merchandise have been damaged while in the
consignee's possession.
D. Application for a license, except a license for sale of goods damaged by
fire, within one year of a previous sale for the same type of business
shall be presumptive evidence that the sale for which the license is
sought is not bona fide, and the license may be refused.
A. No merchandise shall become the subject of any sale licensed pursuant
to this chapter if it has not been listed in the application for the license
as goods, wares or merchandise in stock or in transit.
B. No merchandise shall become the subject of any sale licensed pursuant
to this chapter if it has previously been the subject of a licensed sale
unless the original licensee conducts the subsequent sale under a
subsequent license.
§ 135-2 SUNBURY CODE § 135-7
135:214
§ 135-7. Posting copy of application and inventory.
It shall be the duty of each such licensee to post a copy of the said
application and inventory in the salesroom or place where the goods are to
be sold, so that the public may be informed of the facts in relation to the
goods before purchasing the same.
§ 135-8. Reopening of business.
Reopening of a business similar to the one for which a sale licensed
pursuant to this chapter was conducted, except the licensed sale of goods
damaged by fire, by the person, partnership, association or corporation
who or which conducted the sale upon the same premises upon which the
business for which the sale was conducted, within 30 days of the sale shall
constitute presumptive evidence of a violation of this chapter. Every day in
which business is conducted within the prohibited period of 30 days shall
constitute a separate violation of this chapter.
§ 135-9. Violations and penalties; right of appeal.
Any person conducting or being responsible for any sale as set forth in
§ 135-1 without first having obtained the license, or any person making or
being responsible for any misrepresentation in connection with the goods
so offered for sale or sold, or continuing the same business at the same
location after the expiration of a license issued for conducting a removal
or closing-out sale, shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine
of not less than $25 nor more than $300 and costs of such proceedings
or, upon default of payment of such fines and costs, by imprisonment in
the county jail for a term of not more than 30 days. Each day any sale is
conducted in violation of this section shall be a separate violation of this
chapter. The right to appeal from such conviction shall exist as in other
cases of summary convictions.
Chapter 139
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 68.
Plumbing — See Ch. 127.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 145.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 148.
Zoning — See Ch. 175.
§ 135-7 SEWERS § 135-9
139:215

ARTICLE I
Drains Under Sidewalks
[Adopted 1-8-1973 by Ord. No. 888]
§ 139-1. Installation of soil pipe for storm drainage: where
required.
Upon the installation, replacement, renewal or substantial repair of all
or part of the sidewalk adjoining or abutting any property in the City of
Sunbury, the persons, firms, associations, corporations or other entities
installing, replacing, renewing or substantially repairing said sidewalk shall
install under the sidewalk and curb at the place where such installation,
replacement, renewal or substantial improvement is being made and/or at
any other place or places under the sidewalk along the property abutting or
adjoining said sidewalk so much cast-iron soil pipe as will be sufficient to
carry the roof and surface drainage from said property to the street.
§ 139-2. Transfer of storm drains from sanitary to storm sewers.
The owner of any property abutting or adjoining any sidewalk under which
cast-iron soil pipe has been installed shall, within 30 days after said
installation, disconnect or cause to be disconnected from the sanitary sewer
system any and all roof drains and connect said roof drains into the cast-iron
soil pipes or locate said roof drains in such a manner that the roof drainage
flows through said cast-iron soil pipes onto the street.
§ 139-3. Removal of roof drains and downspouts from over
sidewalks required.
From and after the passage of this article, all roof drains and downspouts
over any sidewalk or public walkway within the City shall be removed and
all such over the sidewalk installations are hereby prohibited.
§ 139-4. Setback restrictions for roof drains and downspouts.
All roof drains and downspouts that cannot be connected to cast-iron soil
pipes installed under the sidewalk shall outflow no closer than 10 feet to
any adjoining property line.
§ 139-5. Permit for exception; fee.
The City Engineer, upon application made to him through the City Clerk,
may in his discretion issue a permit granting exceptions to the provisions of
this article, where the level of the street, the contour of the land or other
factors would make compliance impossible, impractical or unnecessary. No
such permit shall be granted unless the applicant shall have first paid to the
City Clerk a fee of $5.
§ 139-1 SEWERS § 139-6
139:217
§ 139-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm, association, corporation or other entity who or which
shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be made to pay a fine of not less than $25 nor more than $300
and costs of prosecution, provided that each day after the first day that said
person, firm, association, corporation or other entity shall fail to comply
with the provisions of this article shall constitute a separate offense and
the maximum fine shall be no more than $5 for each day of the continuing
offense.
§ 139-6 SUNBURY CODE § 139-6
139:218
ARTICLE II
Holding Tanks
[Adopted 1-5-1976 by Ord. No. 921]
§ 139-7. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish procedures for the use and
maintenance of holding tanks designed to receive and retain sewage,
whether from residential or commercial uses, and it is hereby declared
that the enactment of this article is necessary for the protection, benefit
and preservation of the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of this
municipality.
§ 139-8. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTHORITY — The Council of the City of Sunbury, Pennsylvania.
HOLDING TANK — A watertight receptacle which receives and retains
sewage and is designed and constructed to facilitate ultimate disposal of the
sewage at another site. Holding tanks include, but are not limited to, the
following:
IMPROVED PROPERTY — Any property within the City of Sunbury,
Pennsylvania, upon which there is erected a structure intended for
continuous or periodic habitation, occupancy or use by human beings or
animals and from which structure sewage shall or may be discharged.
MUNICIPALITY — The City of Sunbury, Pennsylvania.
OWNER — Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or
partial, of any property located in the City.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, company, association, corporation
or other group or entity.
SEWAGE — Any substance that contains any of the waste products or
excrement or other discharge from the bodies of human beings or animals,
and any noxious or deleterious substance which is harmful or inimical to the
public health, to animal or aquatic life or to the use of water for domestic
water supply or for recreation.
CHEMICAL TOILET — A toilet using chemicals that discharge to a
holding tank.
A.
RETENTION TANK — A holding tank where sewage is conveyed to it by
a water-carrying system.
B.
VAULT PIT PRIVY — A holding tank designed to receive sewage where
water under pressure is not available.
C.
§ 139-7 SEWERS § 139-9
139:219
§ 139-9. Power to regulate holding tank sewage disposal granted.
The Authority is hereby authorized and empowered to undertake within the
City of Sunbury the control and methods of holding tank sewage disposal
and the collection and transportation thereof.
§ 139-10. Promulgation of rules and regulations authorized.
The Authority is hereby authorized and empowered to adopt such rules and
regulations concerning sewage which it may deem necessary from time to
time to effect the purposes herein.
§ 139-11. Rules and regulations to be in conformity with applicable
law.
All such rules and regulations adopted by the Authority shall be in
conformity with the provisions herein, with all other ordinances of the
City of Sunbury, with all applicable laws and with applicable rules and
regulations of administrative agencies of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
§ 139-12. Power to fix and collect rates and charges granted.
The Authority shall have the right and power to fix, alter, charge and collect
rates, assessments and other charges in the area served by its facilities at
reasonable and uniform rates as authorized by applicable law.
§ 139-13. Regulation of collection and transportation of sewage;
disposal restrictions.
The collection and transportation of all sewage from any improved property
utilizing a holding tank shall be done solely by or under the direction and
control of the Authority, and the disposal thereof shall be made only at
such site or sites as may be approved by the Department of Environmental
Resources of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 139-14. Duties of property owner.
The owner of an improved property that utilizes a holding tank shall:
A. Maintain the holding tank in conformance with this or any ordinance of
this City, the provisions of any applicable law and the rules and
regulations of the Authority and any administrative agency of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. Permit only the Authority or its agent to collect, transport and dispose
of the contents therein.
C. Maintain the holding tank and have the contents thereof removed at
such intervals of time so that the contents of said holding tank do not
escape, seep or overflow from said tank.
§ 139-9 SUNBURY CODE § 139-14
139:220
§ 139-15. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provisions of § 139-14 shall, upon conviction
thereof by summary proceedings, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than
$100 nor more than $300 and costs, and in default of said fine and costs to
undergo imprisonment for a period not in excess of 30 days.
§ 139-16. Abatement of nuisances.
In addition to any other remedies provided in this article, any violation
of § 139-14 above shall constitute a nuisance and shall be abated by the
municipality or the Authority by seeking either appropriate equitable or
legal relief from a court of competent jurisdiction.
D. Keep a record of the dates, times and all other pertinent data relating to
the collection and disposal of the holding tank's contents.
E. Inform the Authority of the date of installation of the holding tank
within 10 days after its installation, and submit to said Authority three
months after said date of installation, and on the same day of the month
every three months thereafter so long as the holding tank is used, a
copy of the records required to be kept in Subsection D of this section.
§ 139-14 SEWERS § 139-16
139:221

ARTICLE III
Separation of Storm and Sanitary Sewer Systems
[Adopted 8-9-1976 by Ord. No. 928]
§ 139-17. Separation required.
Whenever any portion of a combined storm and sanitary sewer in the City
of Sunbury is separated, the owner or owners of properties whose roof
drains and/or surface water drains are connected to or drain into the thenseparated
sanitary sewer shall, within 30 days after the separation has been
completed:
§ 139-18. Permit required to work under sidewalks.
Before installing soil pipe(s) or steel box(es) under the sidewalk, the owner
shall apply for, through the City Clerk, and obtain a permit without charge
from the City Engineer or the Assistant City Engineer on forms provided by
the City.
§ 139-19. Exceptions; fee.
The City Engineer or the Assistant City Engineer, upon application made to
him through the City Clerk, may in his discretion issue a permit granting
exceptions to the provisions of this article where the level of the street or
the contour of the land or other factors would make compliance impossible,
impractical or unnecessary. No such permit shall be granted unless the
applicant shall have first paid to the City Clerk a fee of $5.
§ 139-20. Violations and penalties.
Any persons, firms, associations, corporations or other entities who or
which shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be made to pay a fine of not less than $25 and not more than
$300 and costs of prosecution. Each day after the first day that said person,
firm, association, corporation or other entity shall fail to comply with the
provisions of this article shall constitute a separate offense, and the
maximum fine shall be no more than $5 for each day of the continuing
offense.
A. Disconnect said drains from and discontinue drainage into the sanitary
sewer.
B. Install under the sidewalk soil pipe(s) or steel box(es) of sufficient size
to carry roof drainage and surface drainage from said property to the
street, and connect said drains into the soil pipe(s) or steel box(es) or
locate said drains in such manner that said drainage flows through the
soil pipe(s) or steel box(es) onto the street.
§ 139-17 SEWERS § 139-20
139:223
Chapter 143
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 68. Subdivision of land — See Ch. 148.
§ 139-20 SUNBURY CODE § 139-20
143:224
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 143-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Sunbury
Stormwater Management Ordinance."
§ 143-2. Authority.
This chapter is enacted and ordained under the grant of powers by the
General Assembly of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the Storm Water
Management Act, Act of 1978, Act 167, P.L. 864, 32 P.S. §§ 680.1 through
680.17, inclusive.
§ 143-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect, maintain and enhance the public
health, safety and general welfare by establishing minimum requirements
and procedures to control the adverse impacts associated with increased
stormwater runoff. Proper management of stormwater runoff will minimize
damage to public and private property, reduce the effects of development on
land and stream channel erosion, assist in the attainment and maintenance
of water quality standards, reduce local flooding and preserve and maintain
after development, as nearly as possible, the predevelopment runoff
characteristics of the City.
§ 143-4. Scope.
A. This chapter shall apply to all land and watercourses within the City in
conjunction with the following activities: land development; land
disturbance and alteration; construction of impervious surfaces, new
structures and additions to existing structures; changes or alterations
of any watercourse or drainageway; diversion or piping of any natural
or man-made stream channel, and installation of stormwater systems or
appurtenances thereto.
B. This chapter shall provide for and maintain the existing flows and
quality of streams and watercourses in the City; preserve and restore
the flood-carrying capacity of streams; establish criteria for the design,
installation and proper maintenance of all permanent stormwater
management structures which are constructed in the City; and, to the
extent practical, assure that the peak rate of stormwater runoff is no
greater after development than prior to development activities.
§ 143-1 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 143-4
143:225

ARTICLE II
Terminology
§ 143-5. Language interpretation.
For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms and words used herein shall
be interpreted as follows:
§ 143-6. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have,
unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the meanings given to them
in this section. All words and terms not defined herein shall be used with a
meaning of standard usage.
ADVERSE IMPACT — Any deleterious effect on waters or wetlands,
including their quality, quantity, surface area, species composition,
aesthetics or usefulness for human or natural uses which are or may
potentially be harmful or injurious to human health, welfare, safety or
property, to biological productivity, diversity or stability or which
unreasonably interfere with the enjoyment of life or property, including
outdoor recreation.
ALTERATION — As applied to land, a change in topography as a result of
the moving of soil and rock from one location or position to another; also
the changing of surface conditions by causing the surface to be more or less
impervious; land disturbance.
APPLICANT — A landowner or developer, as hereinafter defined, who has
filed an application for development, including his heirs, successors and
assigns.
CLEARING — The removal of trees and brush from the land, but shall not
include the ordinary mowing of grass.
A. Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the singular
includes the plural, and the plural includes the singular; words of
masculine gender include feminine gender, and words of feminine
gender include masculine gender.
B. The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the
specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other
instances of like kind and character.
C. The word "person" includes an individual, firm, association,
organization, partnership, trust, company, corporation or any other
similar entity.
D. The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory; the words "may" and
"should" are permissive.
E. The words "used" or "occupied" include the words "intended, designed,
maintained or arranged to be used or occupied."
§ 143-5 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 143-6
143:227
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — The Northumberland County Soil
Conservation District.
CULVERT — A pipe, conduit or similar structure, including appurtenant
works, which carries surface water.
DESIGN STORM — The magnitude of precipitation from a storm event
measured in probability of occurrence and duration and used in computing
stormwater management control systems.
DETENTION BASIN — A basin designed to retard stormwater runoff by
temporarily storing the runoff and releasing it at a predetermined rate. A
detention pond is designed to drain completely after a storm event and is
not to create a permanent pool of water.
DEVELOPER — Any landowner, agent of such landowner or tenant with
permission of such landowner who makes or causes to be made a
subdivision of land or land development.
DEVELOP LAND — To change the runoff characteristics of a parcel of
land in conjunction with residential, commercial, industrial or institutional
construction or alteration.
DRAINAGE AREA — An area contributing runoff to a single point measured
in a horizontal plane, which is enclosed by a ridge line.
DRAINAGE EASEMENT — A grant by a landowner to a grantee, allowing
the use of private land for stormwater management purposes.
ENGINEER — A professional engineer registered in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
EROSION — The removal of soil, stone and other surface materials by the
action of natural elements.
FLOODPLAIN — Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water
from any natural source and specified by the National Flood Boundary and
Floodways, Federal Emergency Management Agency and Federal Insurance
Administration.
GRADING — Any act by which soil is cleared, stripped, stockpiled,
excavated, scarified, filled or any combination thereof.
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE — Replenishment of existing natural
underground water supplies.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface which prevents the penetration of
water into the ground.
INFILTRATION — The passage or movement of water into the soil surface.
INFILTRATION STRUCTURE — A structure designed to direct runoff into
the ground, such as french drains, seepage pits or seepage trenches.
LAND DEVELOPMENT —
A. Any of the following activities:
§ 143-6 SUNBURY CODE § 143-6
143:228
LAND DISTURBANCE — Any activity involving grading, tilling, digging
or filling of ground or stripping of vegetation or any other activity which
causes land to be exposed to erosion.
MUNICIPALITY — The City of Sunbury, Northumberland County,
Pennsylvania; also referred to as the "City."
OFF-SITE STORMWATER MANAGEMENT — The design and construction
of a facility necessary to control stormwater from more than one
development.
ON-SITE STORMWATER MANAGEMENT — The design and construction of
systems necessary to control stormwater within an immediate or proposed
development.
PEAK DISCHARGE — The maximum rate of flow of water at a given point
and time resulting from a storm event.
PENNSYLVANIA MUNICIPALITIES PLANNING CODE — Act of 1968, P.L.
805, No. 247, July 31, reenacted and amended December 21, 1988, by Act
of 1988, P.L. 1329, No. 170.52
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts
or parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulative, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the
number of occupants or tenure; or
(a)
The division or allocation of land or spaces, whether initially
or cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of or for the purpose of
streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building
groups or other features.
(b)
(1)
(2) A subdivision of land.
Excluded from this definition of "land development" are the following:
The conversion of an existing single-family detached dwelling into
not more than three residential units, unless such units are
intended to be a condominium.
(1)
The addition of an accessory building, including farm buildings, on
a lot or lots subordinate to an existing principal building.
(2)
The addition or conversion of buildings or rides within the confines
of an enterprise which would be considered an amusement park.
For the purposes of this subsection, an amusement park is defined
as a tract or area used principally as the location for permanent
amusement structures or rides. This exclusion shall not apply to
newly acquired acreage by an amusement park until initial plans
for the expanded area have been approved by proper authorities.
(3)
B.
§ 143-6 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 143-6
143:229
PLANS — The final construction or as-built Mylars which have been
approved and signed by all required agencies. The Mylar, after all
signatures, becomes a permanent record of the City.
POROUS PAVING — An open graded asphaltic or reticular concrete or other
material which allows water to pass through it.
RETENTION BASIN — A basin in which the runoff from a given flood event
is stored and is not discharged into the downstream drainage system during
the flood event. A permanent pool of water is retained in such basin.
RETENTION STRUCTURE — A permanent structure that provides for the
storage of runoff by means of a permanent pool of water.
RUNOFF — That part of precipitation which flows over the land and is not
absorbed into the ground.
SCS — The Soil Conservation Service, United States Department of
Agriculture.
SEDIMENT — Soils or other surficial materials transported or deposited by
the action of wind, water, ice or gravity as a product of erosion.
SEDIMENT BASIN — A barrier, dam, retention or detention basin located
and designed to retain rock, sand, gravel, silt or other water-transported
material.
SEEPAGE PIT or SEEPAGE TRENCH — An area of excavated earth filled
with loose stone or similar material and into which surface water is directed
for infiltration into the ground.
SITE — Any tract, lot or parcels of land which are in one ownership,
or are contiguous and in diverse ownership, where development is to be
performed as part of a unit, subdivision or project.
SOIL-COVER COMPLEX METHOD — A method of runoff computation
developed by the SCS and found in its publication Urban Hydrology for
Small Watersheds, Technical Release No. 55, January 1957.
STABILIZATION — The prevention of soil movement by any of the various
vegetative or structural means.
STORMWATER — The drainage runoff from the surface of the land resulting
from precipitation, snow or ice melt.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT —
For quantitative control, a system of vegetative and structural
measures that control the increased volume and rate of surface runoff
caused by man-made changes to the land.
A.
For qualitative control, a system of vegetative, structural and other
measures that reduce or eliminate pollutants that might otherwise be
carried by surface runoff.
B.
52.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 143-6 SUNBURY CODE § 143-6
143:230
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — A set of drawings or other
documents submitted by a person as a prerequisite to obtaining stormwater
management approval, which contain all of the information and
specifications pertaining to stormwater management.
STORM SEWER — A system of pipes or other conduits which carries
intercepted surface runoff, street water and other water or drainage,
excluding domestic sewage and industrial wastes.
STRIPPING — Any activity which removes the vegetative surface cover,
including tree removal, clearing, grubbing and storage or removal of
topsoil.
USDA — The United States Department of Agriculture.
VARIANCE — The modification of the minimum stormwater management
requirements for specific circumstances such that strict adherence of the
requirements would result in unnecessary hardship and not fulfill the intent
of this chapter.
WAIVER — The relinquishment from stormwater management
requirements by the City for a specific development on a case-by-case
review basis.
WATERCOURSE — Any natural or artificial stream, river, creek, ditch,
channel, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine or wash in an
area, including any area adjacent thereto, which is subject to inundation by
reason of overflow or floodwater.
WATERSHED — The total drainage area contributing runoff to a single
point.
§ 143-6 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 143-6
143:231

ARTICLE III
Applicability
§ 143-7. Stormwater plan required. [Amended 3-22-2004]
Prior to the final approval of subdivision and/or land development plans or
the issuance of any permit or the commencement of any land disturbance
activity, the applicant, subdivider, developer or the designated agent shall
submit a stormwater management plan to the Code Administration office.
This stormwater management plan must be reviewed by the Sunbury
Municipal Authority and approved by the Sunbury Code Administration
Office before any work shall proceed.
§ 143-8. Exemptions.
The following development activities are exempt from the provisions of this
chapter and the requirements of providing stormwater management:
§ 143-9. Waivers. [Amended 3-22-2004]
The City Council may grant a waiver of the stormwater management
requirements for individual developments, provided that a written request
is submitted by the applicant containing descriptions, drawings and any
other information that is necessary to evaluate the proposed development.
A separate written waiver request shall be required in accordance with the
provisions of this article if there are subsequent additions, extensions or
modifications to a development receiving a waiver. Eligibility for a waiver
shall be determined if the applicant can conclusively demonstrate that the
proposed development will not generate more than a ten-percent increase
in the ten-year predevelopment peak discharge rate and will not cause
an adverse impact on the receiving wetland, watercourse, water body or
adjacent lands.
§ 143-10. Variances. [Amended 3-22-2004]
The Zoning Hearing Board may grant a written variance from any
requirement of Article VI, Design Criteria, of this chapter if there are
exceptional circumstances applicable to the site such that strict adherence
A. Agriculture land management activities, when operated in accordance
with a conservation plan or erosion and sedimentation control plan
prepared by the Conservation District.
B. Construction of new buildings (including additions and modifications)
or any improvements thereto, parking lots, subdivisions or land
developments; all of the above being performed on a lot of 5,000 square
feet or less. [Amended 3-22-2004]
C. Land development activities which the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Resources determines will be regulated under the
specific state laws which provide for managing stormwater runoff.
§ 143-7 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 143-10
143:233
to the provisions of this chapter will result in unnecessary hardship and
not fulfill the intent of the chapter. A written request for variance shall be
provided to the Zoning Hearing Board and shall state the specific variances
sought and reasons for their granting. The Zoning Hearing Board shall not
grant a variance unless and until sufficient specific reasons justifying the
variance are provided by the person developing land and said justification
has been reviewed by the City's Engineer.
§ 143-10 SUNBURY CODE § 143-10
143:234
ARTICLE IV
Plan Requirements
§ 143-11. Review procedure.
§ 143-12. Contents.
A. For all lands subdivided after the enactment of this chapter, a
stormwater management plan and other information as specified herein
shall be submitted at the same time and together with submission of a
preliminary subdivision or land development plan. Such plan and
information shall be considered part of said land and subdivision
documents and shall be reviewed in accordance with procedures
established thereunder. Preliminary approval or final approval of a
subdivision or land development plan shall be contingent upon the
submission of a stormwater management plan and other materials
specified herein, and approval of the stormwater management plan in
accordance with provisions of this chapter.
B. Once a stormwater management plan has been approved, together with
a subdivision or land development plan approval, said stormwater
management plan shall be valid only for that subdivision or land
development. Any further development on the lot or lots requiring a
revision of the approved plan or other construction or activities shall
require the submission of a new or revised stormwater management
plan and other information specified herein.
A. The stormwater management plan shall contain supporting
computations, drawings and sufficient information describing the
manner, location and type of measures in which stormwater runoff will
be managed from the entire development. Once approved, the plan
shall serve as the basis for all subsequent construction. The following
items, where appropriate, shall be included in the plan:
(1) General:
(a) A general description of the project.
(b) A general description of erosion and sedimentation controls.
(c) A general description of stormwater controls both during and
after development.
(2) Maps of the project area showing:
(a) Existing contours on intervals of two feet. In areas of steep
slopes [greater than 15%], five-foot intervals may be used.
(b) Streams, lakes, ponds or other bodies of water within the
project area or which will be affected by runoff from the
project.
§ 143-11 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 143-12
143:235
(c) Locations of proposed underground utilities, sewers and water
lines.
(d) An overlay showing soil types and boundaries.
(e) Proposed changes to land surfaces and vegetative cover.
(f) Areas to be cut or filled.
(g) Final contours at intervals of two feet. In area of steep slopes
(greater than 15%), five-foot intervals may be used.
B. The minimum information submitted for support of a stormwater
management plan or application for a waiver, variance or exception
shall include the following:
(1) The name of the proposed development and the name and address
of the owner of the property and the individual or firm preparing
the plan, the date of submission, graphic scale and North point.
(2) The total tract boundary with distances marked to the nearest foot
and bearings to the nearest degree, the total acreage, existing and
proposed use, including the total area of impervious surfaces after
construction, existing soil types, flood hazard boundaries, onehundred-
year floodplain if applicable, sinkholes, stream drainage
courses and vegetation.
(3) A key map showing all existing natural and man-made features
beyond the property boundary affected by the project and the
extent of the watershed or subbasin which drains through the
project site.
(4) Topographic conditions of both existing and proposed contours at
intervals of two feet for land with an average natural slope of 5% or
less, and five-foot contour interval for land with an average natural
slope exceeding 5%.
(5) Horizontal and vertical profiles of any existing watercourses,
drainageways, channels or streams, including hydrologic capacity;
construction specifications, including the materials to be used for
stormwater management structures; hydraulic, hydrologic and
structural computations for all proposed stormwater management
facilities; and ten-foot access easement around all stormwater
management structures and from such structures to a public rightof-
way.
(6) If stormwater management facilities are off-site, a note on the plan
indicating the location and responsibility for conveyance and
maintenance; all such off-site facilities shall meet the design
standards and criteria specified in this chapter and shall be
included with the plan.
§ 143-12 SUNBURY CODE § 143-12
143:236
§ 143-13. Supplemental information.
In addition to the plan information enumerated above, the following
information shall be submitted:
(7) A statement, signed by the applicant/developer, acknowledging the
stormwater management system will be a permanent fixture which
can be altered or removed only after approval of a revised plan by
the City.
A. A written description of the overall project concept; stormwater runoff
computations as specified in Article VI; stormwater controls both
during and after development; and the expected project time schedule.
B. A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan, including all reviews and
approvals, as required by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Resources.
C. The effect of the project on runoff volume and rate of flow on adjacent
property and upon a municipal stormwater drainage system when such
will be utilized.
D. Review and comment on the stormwater management plan by the
Northumberland County Conservation District.
E. Perpetual maintenance measures of the system as defined under Article
V of this chapter.
F. Permits that are required by other City, state and federal agencies.
§ 143-12 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 143-13
143:237

ARTICLE V
Ownership and Maintenance Agreements
§ 143-14. General requirements.
At the time a stormwater management plan is submitted for review by the
City, the ownership and maintenance responsibilities of all temporary and
permanent stormwater management and soil erosion and sedimentation
control facilities shall be clearly defined.
A. Prior to the issuance of any building permit for which stormwater
management is required, the City shall require the applicant or owner
of any residential, commercial, industrial or institutional establishment
to execute an inspection and maintenance agreement binding on all
subsequent owners of land served by the private stormwater
management facility. Such agreement shall provide for access to the
facility at reasonable times for regular inspection by the City or its
authorized representative and for regular or special inspections of
stormwater facilities to ensure that the facility is maintained in proper
working condition to meet the approved design standards and any
provisions or conditions established by the City.
B. All executed agreements shall be approved by the City Solicitor and
shall be recorded by the applicant or owner in the land records of
Northumberland County. The applicant shall pay these costs.
C. The owner of the property on which work has been done pursuant to
this chapter for private stormwater facilities, or any other person or
agent in control of such property, shall maintain the same in good
condition and promptly repair and restore all grade surfaces, walls,
drains, dams and structures, vegetation, erosion and sedimentation
control measure and other protective devices. Such repairs or
restorations and maintenance shall be in accordance with approved
plans.
D. A maintenance schedule shall be developed for the life of any private
stormwater management facility and shall state the maintenance to be
completed, the time period for completion and who shall perform the
maintenance. This maintenance schedule shall be printed on the
stormwater management plan.
E. The agreement shall also provide that if, after notice by the City to
correct a violation requiring maintenance work and satisfactory
corrections, the same are not made by the owner(s) within a reasonable
period of time (three days maximum), the City may perform all
necessary work to place the facility in proper working condition. The
owner(s) of the facility shall be assessed the cost of the work and any
penalties as defined under Article VIII of this chapter.
§ 143-14 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 143-14
143:239

ARTICLE VI
Design Criteria
§ 143-15. General requirements.
All activities regulated herein shall be designed and maintained in
accordance with the following requirements:
§ 143-16. Specific requirements.
A. Sites. All sites shall limit the rate of stormwater runoff so that no
greater rate of runoff from the site is permitted than that occurring
prior to development. Predevelopment stormwater runoff shall be
computed for storm frequencies of 10 years.
B. Conveyance system. All stormwater conveyance elements shall be
designed to adequately handle the stormwater flows from the peak rate
of discharge from a ten-year postdevelopment storm event.
C. Detention facilities. Storage calculations for surface detention facilities
shall be designed based on the difference between the one-hundredyear
predevelopment and the one-hundred-year postdevelopment
storms. The primary outlet from the basin shall be no greater than to
allow for a ten-year predevelopment release rate. An emergency
spillway shall be provided for the one-hundred-year postdevelopment
storm.
D. Existing drainageways. Natural drainageways shall be utilized to the
maximum extent possible in carrying stormwater runoff, provided that
such uses remain consistent with the purpose of this chapter and are
not in violation of any existing local, county, state or federal regulations.
Where the tract is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, channel or
stream, there shall be provided a drainage easement conforming
substantially to the line of such watercourse, drainageway, channel or
stream, and of such width as will be adequate to preserve the
unimpeded flow of natural drainage or for the purpose of widening,
deepening, improving or protecting such drainage facilities. An existing
watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream location shall be changed
only when approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Resources, Fish Commission, the United States Army Corps of
Engineers and the Northumberland County Soil Conservation Service,
whichever and to the extent their respective regulatory jurisdiction
applies.
A. General. The minimum stormwater control requirements shall require
that all facilities provide management measures pursuant to § 143-15
above. The pre- and postdevelopment peak discharge rate shall be
computed based on existing and proposed land uses, provided that all
land uses in the site after development are in good hydrologic
condition. Where existing land uses are agricultural, all
predevelopment rates shall be computed based on the land being in
§ 143-15 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 143-16
143:241
§ 143-17. Design constants and regulations.
good condition. Supporting drainage area and imperviousness area
maps and detailed calculations shall be submitted.
B. Supplemental standards. The following technical reference materials
are hereby incorporated into this chapter for information and to govern
the design and hydrologic control provisions of this chapter. The most
current edition or subsequent revision to these publications shall
prevail.
(1) Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Manual, Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Resources, dated May of 1990.
(2) Soil Survey of Northumberland County, Pennsylvania, USDA SCS,
dated May 1963.
(3) Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Department of Transportation
Design Manual Part 2, Chapter 12.
(4) Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds, Technical Release No. 55
(TR-55). USDA SCS, dated June 1986.
(5) Flood Hazard Boundary Map for the City of Sunbury, United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development, Federal
Insurance Administration, National Flood Insurance Program,
Flood Boundary Map.
(6) Engineering Field Manual, USDA SCS Code 378, dated May 1977.
(7) Title 25 of the Department of Environmental Resources Part 1,
Article II, Chapter 105, titled "Dam Safety and Waterway
Management."
(8) Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources and the
United States Army Corps of Engineers, Pennsylvania Act 14, P.L.
834.
(9) Chapter 73, Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act, Article 73.15,
titled "Percolation Tests."
(10) Standard Specifications for Ponds, Service Manual USDA SCS
Code 378, dated May 1977.
A. Conveyance systems. The Rational Equation, as outlined in the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Design Manual No. 2, shall
be used for areas of 320 acres or less. Areas in excess of 320 acres shall
be either the USDA SCS TR-20 Method or an alternate method as
approved by the engineer.
B. Stormwater management storage facilities. The TR-55 of the USDA SCS
shall be used in the sizing of all stormwater storage facilities. Alternate
methods may be used with the approval of the engineer.
§ 143-16 SUNBURY CODE § 143-17
143:242
C. Stormwater conduits.
(1) Stormwater conduits of whatever material utilized shall be
installed with a minimum of 15 inches of coverage below design
finish grade elevations. Pipe strength shall conform to the
minimum standards determined under Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation Design Manual No. 2, Chapter 12.
(2) Conduits shall be sized to accommodate the entire drainage basin
discharge for the respective storm event enumerated under
Paragraph C-16, titled "Conveyance Conduit Storm Events."
D. Channel velocities. Channel velocities, wherever applicable, shall not
exceed the permissible velocities specified under the Department of
Environmental Resources Soil and Erosion Control Manual, dated
February 15, 1988, Appendix 67.
E. Emergency spillway outlets. Emergency spillways and outlets shall be
designed for a postdevelopment one-hundred-year peak discharge. A
minimum of one foot of freeboard shall be provided around the entire
top of the pond embankment. This freeboard shall be provided above
the effective spillway design depth. The spillway top of the embankment
shall also be provided with a five-foot-wide and level pathway on top.
F. Energy dissipation. Energy dissipation shall be provided at the outfall of
detention or retention ponds, along outfall channels and at the
discharge end of all conveyance conduits. Design shall provide a
nonerosion velocity of flow from the structure to a watercourse.
G. Easements or rights-of-way. Where a stormwater management plan
involves the direction of some or all stormwater off the site, it shall be
the responsibility of the developer to obtain from adjacent property
owners any easements or other necessary property interests
concerning the flowage of water. Approval of a stormwater
management plan does not create or affect any such rights.
H. Off-site structures. Off-site structures shall not have a contributory
drainage area in excess of 400 acres unless, on a case-by-case basis, a
larger drainage area is approved by the Department of Environmental
Resources, USDA, SCS and the United States Army Corps of Engineers
as their respective interests control such facilities.
I. Trash rack. Trash rack for vertical pipe inlets and other water receiver
structures shall be installed in the design, unless otherwise approved
by the City Engineer.
J. Construction details. Construction details shall conform to the latest
standard of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Form 408
Specifications and Roadway Construction Series of Roadway
Construction Standards. Infiltration structures and other construction
structures, including fencing, shall conform to the applicable standards
of the City.
§ 143-17 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 143-17
143:243
§ 143-18. Effect on other requirements.
Permits and approvals issued pursuant to this chapter do not relieve the
applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits or approvals for
activities regulated by any other applicable codes, rules, act or ordinances.
If more stringent requirements concerning regulation of stormwater or
erosion and sedimentation control are contained in other codes, rules, acts
or ordinances, the more stringent regulation shall apply.
K. Conveyance conduit storm events. Conveyance conduits shall be sized
utilizing the following storm events:
(1) Minor roadway: 10 years.
(2) Collector roadway: 10 years.
(3) Watercourse crossing minor road: 100 years.
(4) Watercourse crossing collection road: 100 years.
L. Infiltration rates. Infiltration rates applicable to the design of
underground stormwater management facilities shall be computed in
accordance with the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act, Article 73.15,
titled "Percolation Tests."
§ 143-17 SUNBURY CODE § 143-18
143:244
ARTICLE VII
Inspections
§ 143-19. Routine inspections.
The City or its agent(s) shall perform routine inspections during the
construction of the stormwater management facilities and periodically
thereafter to ensure compliance with the approved plans. Any portion of the
stormwater management facilities which does not comply with the approved
plan will be promptly corrected after receiving notice from the City. The
notice shall set forth the nature of the deficiency and the time under which
such deficiencies shall be completed.
§ 143-20. Construction inspections.
§ 143-21. Maintenance inspections.
A. After commencement of initial site operations, regular inspection shall
be made at the following stages of construction:
(1) Upon completion of stripping, stockpiling and installation of the
temporary sediment control and drainage facilities.
(2) Excavation of the facility to subbase and trenches for enclosed
storm drainage pipe, concrete structures and catch basins.
(3) During placement of structural fill, trench backfill and
embankment construction.
(4) Upon completion of final grading, fencing and establishment of
permanent stabilization.
B. A final inspection shall be conducted by the Code Enforcement Officer
upon completion of the stormwater management facility to determine if
the completed work is constructed in accordance with the approved
plan and this chapter. The Code Enforcement Officer may have the City
Engineer jointly conduct an inspection.
C. An as-built drawing certified by the developer and his engineer is
required to certify that the facility has been constructed as shown on
the as-built plans and meets the approved plans and specifications.
D. The City shall provide the developer with written notification of the
results of the final inspection.
E. If, as a result of the final inspection, the facility does not comply with
the approved plans and the developer fails to correct any and all
deficiencies within 30 days of written notification by the City, the City
shall utilize the posted bond moneys or securities and have the facility
constructed according to the plans.
A. Maintenance shall be ensured through inspection of all infiltration
systems, retention or detention structures or other approved
§ 143-19 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 143-21
143:245
stormwater management facilities by the City or its Engineer.
Inspection shall occur during its first year of operation and periodically
thereafter at the discretion of the City.
B. If, after an inspection by the City or its Engineer, the condition of a
stormwater management facility presents an immediate danger to the
public health or safety because of an unsafe condition or improper
maintenance, the developer shall be notified, in writing, of the condition
and granted no more than 30 days to correct the problem.
§ 143-21 SUNBURY CODE § 143-21
143:246
ARTICLE VIII
Enforcement
§ 143-22. Notice of violation.
§ 143-23. Violations and penalties; other remedies.
A. Whenever any person shall have violated the terms of this chapter, the
Zoning Officer and/or the Code Enforcement Officer shall cause a
written notice to be served upon the owner, applicant, developer,
property manager or other person responsible for the property or the
violation, directing him to comply with all the terms of this chapter
within seven days, or such additional period, not to exceed 30 days, as
the Zoning Officer and/or the Code Enforcement Officer shall deem
reasonable; and further, the Zoning Officer and/or the Code
Enforcement Officer shall give notice to the owner, applicant,
developer, property manager or other person responsible for the
property or the violation that if the violation is not corrected, the City
may correct the same and charge the landowner or other person
responsible the cost thereof plus penalties as specified herein for
failure to comply.
B. Such notice may be delivered by the United States mail, first class,
postage prepaid, or by certified or registered mail; or by personal
service; or, if the property is occupied, by posting the notice at a
conspicuous place upon the affected property.
A. Any person who fails to comply with this chapter within the period
stated in the notice of the Zoning Officer and/or the Code Enforcement
Officer shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a summary offense
and shall be sentenced to pay a penalty of not more than $1,000. Each
and every day of continued violation shall constitute a separate
violation. In the event that the owner, developer, occupant, applicant,
property manager or other person responsible fails to comply with the
terms of this chapter within the time specified by the Zoning Officer
and/or the Code Enforcement Officer, the City may take any actions
necessary to remove the public nuisance. The costs of removal of the
violation shall be in addition to any penalties for violations for failure to
comply.
B. In addition to the fines for violations, costs and penalties provided for
by this article, the City may institute proceedings in courts of equity to
require owners or occupants of real estate to comply with the
provisions of this chapter. The cost of removal, fine and penalties
hereinabove mentioned may be entered by the City as a lien against
such property in accordance with existing provisions of law.
§ 143-22 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 143-23
143:247

ARTICLE IX
Fees
§ 143-24. Fees.
An application fee, review fees and inspection fees shall be paid by the
applicant in accordance with the Fee Schedule as established by resolution
of the City of Sunbury. Any amendment to the aforesaid Fee Schedule shall
also be authorized by resolution of the City of Sunbury from time to time as
the City of Sunbury deems necessary.
§ 143-24 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 143-24
143:249
Chapter 145
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Shade Tree Commission — See Ch. 44.
Bicycles — See Ch. 64.
Handbills and littering — See Ch. 99.
Curbstone market — See Ch. 109.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 121.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 124.
Sewers — See Ch. 139.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 148.
Trees — See Ch. 159.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 163.
Zoning — See Ch. 175.
§ 143-24 SUNBURY CODE § 143-24
143:250
ARTICLE I
Street Obstructions
[Adopted 7-13-1959 by Ord. No. 642]
§ 145-1. Definitions and word usage.
§ 145-2. Prohibited acts; exception. [Amended 7-13-1981 by Ord.
No. 1027]
A. Definitions. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
PERSON — Any natural person, association, partnership, firm or
corporation.
B. Word usage. The singular shall include the plural and the masculine
shall include the feminine and neuter.
A. No person shall put, place, erect, maintain or cause, or allow to be put,
placed, erected, or maintained on any sidewalk in the Central Business
District, any temporary article, object, fixture, or obstruction of any
kind without prior acquisition of a permit from the City Clerk's office.
[Amended 8-22-1996]
(1) If permit is acquired, person or persons shall be permitted to utilize
public sidewalks. All material or objects must be arranged in such a
manner that walkway is kept clear for a distance of five feet from
curbline and five feet from edge of tree planting sites. Use of
sidewalk area will be limited to sale of merchandise available in
store only. No person or persons shall obstruct this area with the
exception of Sunbury curb market vendors or merchants who
participate in special downtown sidewalk sale days as approved by
City Council.
(2) Cost of permit shall be $10 per month. It shall not be permitted to
block streets, alleys, or thoroughfares at any time without
permission of City officials. Said permission shall be in writing and
available for inspection by any City official upon request.
B. There shall be a $10 fee for sidewalk usage on Market Street. [Added
8-22-1996]
C. Vending machines must be removed from the sidewalk when the
business is closed. [Added 7-24-1997]
D. Any merchandise on the sidewalk for sale during business hours, when
a permit is issued, must be removed from the sidewalk when the
business is closed. [Added 7-10-2000]
§ 145-1 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 145-3
143:251
§ 145-3. Curb market exempted from provisions.
This article shall not apply to, nor in any way disturb existing regulation and
operation of, the Sunbury Curb Market, and anything contained herein shall
not constitute an amendment to or restriction thereon.53
§ 145-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-14-1977 by Ord. No.
960]
Any person who shall violate any provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not less than $25 nor more
than $300 and costs of such proceedings or, upon default of payment of
such fines and costs, by imprisonment in the county jail for a term of not
more than 30 days. The continuation of such violation for each successive
day shall constitute a separate offense, and the person or persons allowing
or permitting the continuation of the violation may be punished as provided
above for each separate offense.
53.Editor's Note: See Ch. 109, Market, Curbstone.
§ 145-3 SUNBURY CODE § 145-4
143:252
ARTICLE II
Awnings
[Adopted 5-9-1960 by Ord. No. 655]
§ 145-5. Applicability of provisions to all sidewalk awnings.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect or maintain
in the City of Sunbury, Pennsylvania, awnings over sidewalks or sidewalk
canopies, except as hereinafter in this article prescribed.
§ 145-6. Height support and advertising regulations. [Amended
8-13-1984 by Ord. No. 1058]
Canvas awnings or awnings of any other construction material may be
placed over sidewalks, and sidewalk canopies may be erected, provided that
no such awning or sidewalk canopy shall have a clearance above the surface
of the sidewalk of less than seven feet three inches. No post supporting any
awning or sidewalk canopy shall be constructed, erected or located upon
any sidewalk, street or public right-of-way. No advertising shall be displayed
on any awning over a sidewalk or any sidewalk canopy except for a business
name, logo, insignia, street number or combination thereof.
§ 145-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-14-1977 by Ord. No.
961]
Any person who shall violate any provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not less than $25 nor more
than $300 and costs of such proceedings or, upon default of payment of
such fines and costs, by imprisonment in the county jail for a term of not
more than 30 days. The continuation of such violation for each successive
day shall constitute a separate offense, and the person or persons allowing
or permitting the continuation of the violation may be punished as provided
above for each separate offense.
§ 145-5 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 145-7
143:253

ARTICLE III
Street Excavations
[Adopted 7-13-1981 by Ord. No. 102654]
§ 145-8. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CITY — City of Sunbury, Northumberland County, Pennsylvania.
PERSON — Any person or persons, firm, partnership, corporation or public
utility.
STREET(S) — Any street(s), lane(s) or alley(s).
§ 145-9. Conformity with provisions required.
It is in the public interest to regulate the location, construction and repair
of utility facilities and other structures and related work in streets of the
City. It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person to enter upon any street
of the City and to cut or open the surface or pavement thereof, or conduct
any excavation or backfill work, or excavate in any manner for the purpose
of laying pipes, drains, conduits or cables, repairing the same or making
connections therewith, or for any other purpose or purposes, except in
accordance with the provisions of this article.
§ 145-10. Permit required; application.
A. Before any cut, opening or excavation may be made in, upon or under
any street of the City by, for or in behalf of any person, an application
shall be made in writing to the Code Enforcement Officer of the City for
a permit to make said proposed cut, opening or excavation. Said
application shall be in such form as the City Council may from time to
time designate, and there shall be set forth therein the dimensions of
said proposed cut, opening or excavation, the location where it is to be
made, the name or names of the owner or reputed owners of the
property where the work is to be done in case of tap connections, the
character of the pipe, drain or conduit to be laid, the time when the
work is to be commenced and also the approximate time required to
complete the work.
B. No permit shall be issued to make any cut, opening or excavation or to
lay any pipes, mains, drains, conduits or cables in any trench already
occupied by the same appliances of another. The applicant shall comply
with the provisions of Act 28755 prior to making application for said
permit to prevent utility conflicts.
54.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. III, Street Excavations, adopted
11-16-1970 by Ord. No. 848, as amended.
55.Editor's Note: See 73 P.S. § 176 et seq.
§ 145-8 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 145-11
143:255
§ 145-11. Fees.
The applicant shall pay permit application fees and general inspection
fees in accordance with the fee schedule entitled "Schedule of Fees for
Excavation Permits" as from time to time adopted by resolution of City
Council.56
§ 145-12. Bond required; insurance.
The applicant shall include with his application the following:
§ 145-13. Receipts required prior to issuance of permit.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a permit to the person in whose
behalf a cut, opening or excavation is to be made upon receipt of:
§ 145-14. Repair of emergency conditions without permit.
No work of any nature in connection with any proposed cut, opening or
excavation shall be done until the permit or permits as herein required
are issued to the applicant, except that in the case of sudden unavoidable
emergency which should require the cut, opening or excavation of any
street at a time when a permit could not be obtained under the provisions
of this article, a cut, opening or excavation necessary only to repair the
A. A bond naming the City as the obligee and the person who shall make
the cut, opening or excavation and also the person in whose behalf the
cut, opening or excavation is made as the obligors, and shall be in the
amount of 150% of the estimated cost of the proposed permitted work;
provided, however, that said bond shall in no event be less than $500. It
shall be a condition of said bond that any person who shall have made
the cut, opening or excavation and the person in whose behalf the cut,
opening or excavation shall have been made shall jointly or severally
restore the street to its original grade and maintain said grade and
condition for one year from the work completion date, all in accordance
with the provisions of this article.
B. A certificate of insurance on a form as shown on Exhibit 3 to this
article.57
A. The fee as outlined in the above-referenced schedule.
B. The bond and certificate of insurance as required by § 145-12 of this
article.
C. Filing of a properly completed application, including a drawing of the
proposed work and other required supporting forms and
documentation, as required in § 145-10 of this article.
56.Editor's Note: The Schedule of Fees for Excavation Permits is on file in the office of the
City Clerk and may be examined there during normal office hours.
57.Editor's Note: Exhibit 3 is on file in the office of the City Clerk and may be examined there
during normal office hours.
§ 145-11 SUNBURY CODE § 145-14
143:256
emergency conditions may be made, provided that in such cases application
under the provisions of this article for a permit to make such opening or
excavation shall be made within 24 hours after opening of the street.
§ 145-15. Excavations prohibited during winter; exception.
No cut, opening or excavation of any nature shall be allowed in the streets,
lanes or alleys of the City between November 15 of one year and March
15 of the next succeeding year, except in the case of unavoidable accident
or sudden emergency when an emergency permit shall be issued under
provisions of § 145-14 or by special authorization by the Director of the
Department of Streets and Public Improvements.
§ 145-16. Designation of authority.
The Director of the Department of Streets and Public Improvements or his
authorized agent shall have the authority to supervise and inspect the cuts,
openings or excavations authorized under said permits.
§ 145-17. Responsibility for filling; required safety precautions.
The person who shall make a cut, opening or excavation or the person for
whom or in whose behalf there is made a cut, opening or excavation in the
streets of the City shall be jointly and severally responsible for trenching,
backfilling and completely restoring the trench to the grade and condition
as required by this article and for removing and disposing of excess earth
and other materials from the site. All work shall be performed at such time
and in such manner as shall be consistent with the safety of the public
and shall conform to all requirements and standards of the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation and specifically the Roadway Standards and
Specifications Form 408. Specific trenching, backfill and trench restoration
requirements are contained in Exhibit 1 of this article.58
§ 145-18. Additional responsibilities and requirements of permittee.
The permittee shall also be responsible for performance of the work in
accordance with the requirements as set forth in Exhibit 2 of this article.59
§ 145-19. Deposit of fees and charges.
The fees and charges paid in accordance with this article shall be deposited
into and credited to Department D, Department of Streets and Public
Improvements.
§ 145-20. Violations and penalties.
A. Should any person make any cut, opening or excavation in any street of
the City in violation of any of the provisions of this article, any or all of
58.Editor's Note: Exhibit 1 is included at the end of this chapter.
59.Editor's Note: Exhibit 2 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 145-14 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 145-20
143:257
the following actions will be taken. Upon receipt of oral or written
notice from the Code Enforcement Officer, the permittee shall cease to
perform any further work, except to restore the area to a safe condition,
and said person shall be subject to any or all of the following:
(1) Confiscation of the permit.
(2) Revocation of the permit.
(3) Removal of facilities installed in violation of this article.
B. Any person violating any provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $300 and not
less than $200 for each separate offense, together with costs of
prosecution, and, in default of the payment of such fine and costs, shall
be imprisoned in the Northumberland County Jail for a period not
exceeding 30 days.
C. Any person violating any provisions of this article shall be subject to any
other penalties or remedies provided by law for cities of the Third Class.
§ 145-20 SUNBURY CODE § 145-20
143:258
ARTICLE IV
Snow and Ice Removal
[Adopted 10-11-1971 by Ord. No. 863]
§ 145-21. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DIRECTOR — The Director of Streets and Public Improvements of the City
of Sunbury or, in his absence, his duly designated and acting representative.
ROADWAY — That portion of a street or highway improved, designed or
ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm shoulder.
SIDEWALK — That area, paved or unpaved, between the curblines, or the
lateral lines of a street, highway or roadway and the adjacent properties
intended for the use of pedestrians.
STREET or HIGHWAY — The entire width between the boundary lines of
every way publicly maintained, when any part thereof is open to the use of
the public for purposes of vehicular travel.
§ 145-22. Removal required within certain time limitations.
Every person, partnership, corporation or other entity in charge or control
of any building or lot of land within the City fronting or abutting on a
sidewalk, whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or otherwise, shall
remove and clear away, or cause to be removed and cleared away, snow and
ice from so much of said sidewalk as is in front of or abuts on said building
or lot of land within 24 hours after the cessation of any fall of snow, sleet or
freezing rain, except as provided below:
A. In the event that the snow from any one snowfall shall exceed 12 inches,
then the person or entity charged with its removal shall, within the
twenty-four-hour period above-mentioned, remove or clear away, or
cause to be removed or cleared away, a path of at least 24 inches in
width from said sidewalk; and shall then, within 48 hours after the
cessation of said fall of snow, cause said sidewalk to be completely
cleared of snow.
B. In the event snow and ice on a sidewalk has become so hard that it
cannot be removed without likelihood of damage to the sidewalk, the
person or entity charged with its removal shall, within the twenty-fourhour
period above-mentioned, cause enough sand, salt or other suitable
substance to be put on the sidewalk to make travel thereon reasonably
safe; and shall then, as soon thereafter as weather permits, cause said
sidewalk to be thoroughly cleaned.
§ 145-21 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 145-23
143:259
§ 145-23. Deposit of snow and ice on fire hydrants, parking meters
and City streets prohibited. [Amended 2-27-1989 by Ord. No. 1112]
No person, partnership, corporation or other entity shall deposit or cause to
be deposited any snow and ice on or against a fire hydrant or parking meter
or in the City streets.
§ 145-24. Removal by City upon noncompliance; penalty; bill for
costs.
§ 145-25. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-14-1977 by Ord. No.
963; 3-22-2004]
Any person who shall violate any provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not less than $100 nor more
than $300 and costs of such proceedings or, upon default of payment of
such fines and costs, by imprisonment in the county jail for a term of not
more than 30 days. The continuation of such violation for each successive
day shall constitute a separate offense, and the person or persons allowing
or permitting the continuation of the violation may be punished as provided
above for each separate offense.
A. In the event of the failure of any person, partnership, corporation or
other entity to clear away or treat with abrasives and subsequently
clear away any snow and ice from any sidewalk as hereinbefore
provided, or cause this to be done, the Director shall, as soon as
practicable after such failure, cause such work to be done.
B. Each person, partnership, corporation or other entity whose act or
omission makes it necessary that the Director cause work to be done in
accordance with this section shall be liable to the City for the cost of
such work plus a penalty of 10% of such cost. [Amended 2-14-1977 by
Ord. No. 963]
C. The Director shall ascertain and keep a record of the exact cost of all
work he causes to be done in accordance with this section on account of
each act or omission of such person, partnership, corporation or other
entity; and he shall identify these persons or entities with particularity
and bill them for the cost of the work and the penalty upon completion
of said work.
§ 145-23 SUNBURY CODE § 145-25
143:260
ARTICLE V
Street Construction Specifications
[Adopted 4-10-1972 by Ord. No. 873]
§ 145-26. Adoption of standard specifications by reference.
The Standard Specifications of PennDOT Form 408, latest edition, are
hereby adopted by the City of Sunbury as its standard specifications for
work performed within the City of Sunbury for construction of streets,
curbs, sidewalks and storm drainage.
§ 145-27. Adoption of standard drawings by reference.
The standard details of PennDOT Bureau of Design Construction Standards,
latest edition, are hereby adopted by the City of Sunbury as its standard
drawings for work performed within the City of Sunbury for construction of
streets, curbs, sidewalks and storm drainage.
§ 145-28. Grant of authority to City personnel.
Where, in the standard specifications and drawings of PennDOT, reference
is made and authority or responsibility is given to certain state officials or
personnel, for purposes of this article the equivalent officials or personnel
of the City of Sunbury shall be substituted therefor.
§ 145-29. Authority of City Engineer to modify standards to special
conditions.
The City Engineer of the City of Sunbury shall have the authority to modify
these standards to special or exceptional conditions as the need arises
within good engineering practice.
§ 145-26 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 145-29
143:261

ARTICLE VI
Curb and Sidewalk Specifications
[Adopted 7-12-1982 by Ord. No. 104160]
§ 145-30. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPLICANT — The contractor or the owner(s) of the property abutting the
right-of-way in or along which the curb, sidewalk or driveway work is to be
done.
CITY — City of Sunbury, Northumberland County, Pennsylvania.
CONTRACTOR — Person hired by the owner(s) of the property abutting the
right-of-way in or along which the curb, sidewalk or driveway work is to be
done to perform the curb, sidewalk or driveway work.
PERMITTEE — The owner(s) of the property abutting the right-of-way in
or along which the curb, sidewalk or driveway work is to be done or said
owner(s) authorized agent(s) or lessee(s).
PERSON — Any person or persons, firm, partnership, corporation or public
utility.
STREET(S) — Any street(s), lane(s) or alley(s).
§ 145-31. Sidewalks and curbs required. [Amended 1-2-1984 by
Ord. No. 1053]
A. Owners of property abutting on any street right-of-way shall construct,
pave, curb, repave and recurb the sidewalks and keep the same in good
repair along such property, at such grades and under such regulations
and specifications as contained herein.
B. The owner of property shall have the option of installing a brick
sidewalk if the sidewalk complies with the regulations and
specifications which shall be on file in the office of the Code
Administrator. The regulations and specifications shall be set forth by
the Director of Public Safety. The regulations and specifications shall
include the requirements for construction along with the areas where
brick sidewalks shall be permitted. [Added 10-14-1991 by Ord. No.
1163]
C. The owner of the property shall also have the option of repairing a slate
sidewalk if the sidewalk complies with the regulations and
specifications on file in the office of the Code Administrator. The
regulations and specifications shall be set forth by the Director of
Public Safety. The regulations and specifications shall include the
60.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. VI, Curb and Sidewalk
Specifications, adopted 11-12-1973 by Ord. No. 893, as amended.
§ 145-30 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 145-31
143:263
§ 145-32. Regulations to be followed.
It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person to enter upon any street
right-of-way of the City and conduct any work in connection with the
construction, reconstruction or repair of curb, sidewalk or driveway
entrances and related work, except in accordance with the provisions of this
article.
§ 145-33. Permit required.
Before any construction, reconstruction or repair as stated above is made
within the street right-of-way of the City, an application shall be made
in writing to the Code Enforcement Officer of the City for a permit to
conduct said work. Said application shall be in such form as City Council
may from time to time designate, and there shall be set forth therein the
location and a detailed description of work to be conducted, the name or
names of the owner or reputed owners of the property where the work
is to be conducted, the time when the work is to be commenced and
the approximate time required to complete the work. The applicant shall
comply with the provisions of Act No. 287 of 1974 (73 P.S. § 176 et seq.)
relating to underground utility lines, prior to making application for said
permit where excavation is involved in curb and sidewalk work.
§ 145-34. Fees.
The applicant shall pay permit application fees and general inspection fees
in accordance with the fee schedule entitled "Schedule of Fees for Curb,
Sidewalk and Driveway Permits," as adopted from time to time by resolution
of the City Council.
§ 145-35. Issuance of permit; scope; display; term.
requirements for construction along with the areas where slate
sidewalks will be permitted. [Added 3-26-1997]
A. The Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a permit to the permittee
upon receipt of: the fee as outlined in the above-referenced schedule, a
properly completed application, including a drawing of the proposed
work and other required supporting forms and documentation as
required in § 145-33 of this article.
B. Scope of permit. The permit shall be binding upon the permittee and
the permittee's agents, contractors, successors and assigns.
C. The permit shall be located at the work site and shall be available for
inspection by the Code Enforcement Officer, any police officer or other
representative of the City.
D. The permit shall be maintained by the City as a permanent record and
remain in effect, subject to the permit conditions and these regulations,
§ 145-31 SUNBURY CODE § 145-35
143:264
§ 145-36. Emergency construction.
No work of any nature in connection with any of the above-mentioned
work shall be done until the permit or permits as herein required are
issued except in the case of a sudden unavoidable emergency which would
require said work to be done before a permit could be obtained under
the provisions of this article. In emergency situations, work shall be done
only upon prior approval of the Director of the Department of Streets and
Public Improvements and only work required to repair the emergency may
be done. In such cases, application under the provisions of this article to
conduct such work shall be made within 24 hours after the emergency
repairs are commenced. If a dangerous condition exists that can be repaired
by an expenditure of not more than $50 and the property owner fails to
repair said condition within 48 hours after serving of notice upon such
property owner to do so, the City may make the necessary repairs and
collect the costs thereof from the owner pursuant to §§ 3003 and 3004 of
the Third Class City Code.61
§ 145-37. Supervision and inspection of work.
The Director of the Department of Streets and Public Improvements or his
authorized agent shall have the authority to supervise and inspect the work
as authorized by permit(s).
§ 145-38. Work prohibited during certain times of year.
No cut, opening or excavation of any nature shall be allowed in the streets,
lanes or alley rights-of-way of the City between November 15 of one year
and March 15 of the next succeeding year, except in the case of unavoidable
accident or sudden emergency when an emergency permit shall be issued
under provisions of § 145-36.
§ 145-39. Restoration of facility required.
If the permittee, after making a cut, opening or excavation in the surface
to place or repair a facility or for any other purpose, fails to restore any
portion of the right-of-way to conform with the provisions of this article, the
City reserves the right to do the work, and the permittee shall reimburse the
City for the costs. If the permittee fails to pay said costs within 30 days after
receipt of the City's invoice, said costs shall be a lien upon the permittee's
premises and may be collected by action in assumpsit, or such lien may be
filed and proceeded in as provided by law in the case of municipal liens.
as long as the permittee's facilities authorized by the permit occupy the
right-of-way.
61.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 38003 and 38004.
§ 145-35 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 145-40
143:265
§ 145-40. Material and construction requirements.
The permittee shall be responsible for all the work, including the
excavation, backfilling and completely restoring any trench within the
paved area to the grade and condition as existed prior to the excavation
for the curb, sidewalk or driveway entrance and also for removing and
disposing of all excess material from the site. All work shall be performed
at such time and in such manner as shall be consistent with the safety
of the public and shall be governed by the contractor by provisions of
the City's material and construction requirements as contained herein and
also all Standards of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation and
specifically the Roadway Standards and Specifications Form 408. Specific
material and construction requirements are contained in Exhibit 1 of this
article.62 In case any dispute arises between the permittee and the City's
Inspector, the City's Inspector shall have the authority to suspend work until
the question at issue can be referred to and be decided by the Director of
Streets and Public Improvements and/or the City Engineer.
§ 145-41. Additional responsibilities of permittee.
The permittee shall also be responsible for performance of the work in
accordance with the following requirements:
A. The permittee shall be responsible for causing compliance with all
terms and conditions of the permit by its agents, contractors and
successors.
B. Responsibility for compliance with the terms of the permit cannot be
assigned or transferred by the permittee without first obtaining
approval from the Director of the Department of Streets and Public
Improvement. In the event that a permit is assigned or transferred
without first obtaining said approval, the permit assigned or
transferred shall become null and void, and any facility installed on the
basis of such permit shall be subject to removal at the expense of the
permittee.
C. The permittee shall be principally liable to the City for any failure to
comply with the permit and these regulations. The principal liability of
the permittee to the City shall not preclude the permittee from taking
any subsequent action against the permittee's contractor,
subcontractor, material men, engineer, architect or the like, arising
from the project.
D. Disputes between the permittee and the City concerning material and
construction requirements shall be governed by the appropriate
provisions of Exhibit 1 of this article.63
62.Editor's Note: Exhibit 1 is included at the end of this chapter.
63.Editor's Note: Exhibit 1 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 145-40 SUNBURY CODE § 145-42
143:266
§ 145-42. Deposit of fees and charges.
The fees and charges paid in accordance with this article shall be deposited
into and credited to Department D, Department of Streets and Public
Improvements.
§ 145-43. Notice by City to owner to perform work. [Amended
1-2-1984 by Ord. No. 1053]
If the property owner fails to construct, pave, curb, reconstruct, repave or
recurb the sidewalks and keep the same in good repair along his property
after notice to do so, the same may be done or caused to be done by the
City, and the cost thereof shall be levied and collected from the property
owner, together with a penalty of 10% of such costs and all charges and
expenses, which amount shall be a lien upon such premises from the time of
completion of the work, which date shall be fixed by certificate of the City
Engineer filed with the Clerk, and may be collected by action in assumpsit,
or such lien may be filed and proceeded in as provided by law in the case of
municipal liens. The notice required herein shall be issued by the Director of
the Department of Streets and Public Improvements or his duly authorized
agent and shall be served upon the property owner, if it can be done within
the county. When it cannot be done so, then the notice shall be served upon
the property owner's agent or the party in possession, and if this cannot
be done, then the notice shall be served by posting conspicuously upon the
premises. The property owner shall be deemed to have failed to comply
with the provisions of the notice if the work required therein has not been
commenced within 30 days after the notice has been served.
§ 145-44. Remedies for violations.
Should any person construct, pave, curb, reconstruct, repave, recurb or
maintain any sidewalk, curb, driveway or related work in any street of
the City in violation of any of the provisions of this article, any or all the
following actions may be taken by the City in addition to any other available
remedies. Upon receipt of oral or written notice from the Code Enforcement
Officer, the permittee shall cease to perform any further work except to
restore the area to a safe condition, and said permittee shall be subject to
any or all of the following:
§ 145-45. Indemnification of City.
The permittee shall fully indemnify and save harmless and defend the City
of and from all liability for damages or injury occurring to any person or
persons or property through or in consequence of any act or omission of
A. Confiscation of the permit.
B. Revocation of the permit.
C. Removal of facilities installed in violation of this article and any or all
equipment or property belonging to the permittee or its contractor(s).
§ 145-42 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 145-45
143:267
any contractor, agent, employee or person engaged or employed in, about
or upon the work, by, at the instance or with the approval or consent of
the permittee; from any failure of the permittee or any such person to
comply with the permit or these regulations; and for a period of one year
after completion of the permitted work, from the failure of the street in
the immediate area of the work performed under the permit where there is
not similar failure of the street beyond the area adjacent to the area of the
permitted work.
§ 145-46. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any provisions of this article shall, upon conviction,
be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $300 and not less than $100
for each separate offense, together with costs of prosecution, and in the
default of the payment of such fine and costs, shall be imprisoned in the
Northumberland County Jail for a period not exceeding 30 days.
§ 145-47. Reimbursement from liquid fuel tax; list of streets
included by reference. [Added 11-26-1990 by Ord. No. 1131]
The streets shall be maintained in the City of Sunbury pursuant to state
regulations for purposes of receiving reimbursement from the liquid fuel
tax. A list of said streets shall be kept on file at the office of the City Clerk
for inspection by the public. Further, said list shall become a part of the City
Code by reference.
§ 145-45 SUNBURY CODE § 145-47
143:268
ARTICLE VII
Exercise of Power to Open and Alter Streets
[Adopted 6-12-2017]
§ 145-48. Vacate and discontinue portion of North Second Street.
The City of Sunbury, pursuant to 11 Pa.C.S.A. § 12915, as amended, and
having duly fulfilled the procedural requirements of 11 Pa.C.S.A. § 12916,
as amended, hereby vacates and discontinues a section of North Second
Street, being a thirty-foot right-of-way from the northern edge of the rightof-
way of Masser Street, running in a northerly direction to the southern
edge of the right-of-way of Greenough Street, more particularly described
and bounded as follows:
Beginning at a point, said point being on the northern right-of-way line of
Masser Street with the intersection of the western right-of-way line of North
Second Street and running,
1. Thence, N 8 degrees 00 minutes 00 seconds E, 327.27 feet, running
along the western right-of-way line of the now vacated North Second
Street, along the lands of Edward L. Mensch and Suzanne M. Mensch,
and Suzanne M. Mensch et al., to a point on the southern right-of-way
line of Greenough Street,
2. Thence, S 82 degrees 36 minutes 44 seconds E, 30 feet, running along
the northern right-of-way line of the now vacated North Second Street,
and the southern right-of-way line of Greenough Street, to a point,
3. Thence, S 8° 00 minutes 00 seconds W, 327.65 feet, along the lands of
ConRail, and Edward L. and Suzanne M. Mensch, to a point,
4. Thence, N 82° 36 minutes 44 seconds W, 30 feet, along the northern
right-of-way line of Masser Street, to the point of beginning.
Being a tract of land containing 0.226 acres.
§ 145-48 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 145-48
143:269
Chapter 148
SUBDIVISION OF LAND
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 33.
Shade Tree Commission — See Ch. 44.
Building construction — See Ch. 68.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 145.
Trees — See Ch. 159.
Zoning — See Ch. 175.
§ 145-48 SUNBURY CODE § 145-48
148:270
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 148-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Sunbury Land
Subdivision Regulations."
§ 148-2. Statutory authority; purpose. [Amended 2-14-1977 by Ord.
No. 965; 5-9-1977 by Ord. No. 974]
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the provisions of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended,64 for the purpose of ensuring
sites suitable for building purposes and human habitation, and to provide
for the harmonious development of the City of Sunbury, Northumberland
County, Pennsylvania, for adequate open spaces, for traffic, recreation, light
and air and for the proper distribution of population, thereby creating
conditions favorable to the health, safety, morals and general welfare of
the citizens of the City; to regulate the subdivision and/or development of
flood-prone land areas; to require that each subdivision lot in flood-prone
areas be provided with a safe building site with adequate access and that
public facilities which serve such uses be designed and installed to preclude
flood damage at the time of initial construction; and to protect individuals
from buying lands which are unsuitable for use because of flood hazards by
prohibiting the subdivision and/or development of unprotected flood-prone
lands.
§ 148-3. Definitions. [Added 2-14-1977 by Ord. No. 965]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION — The one-hundred-year-flood elevation.[Added
5-9-1977 by Ord. No. 974]
BUILDING LINE — A line parallel to the front, side or rear lot line set so as
to provide the required yard.
CARTWAY — The area of a street, road or alley used for vehicular traffic.
CLEAR-SIGHT TRIANGLE — The area of unobstructed vision at street
intersections, defined by lines of sight between points at a given distance
from the intersection of street center lines.
COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of the municipality.
CUL-DE-SAC — A street open at one end for vehicular or pedestrian access,
with the opposite end terminating in a vehicular turnaround.
DWELLING — A building designed for residential purposes and used as the
living quarters for one or more families.
64.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 148-1 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 148-3
148:271
DWELLING, GROUP — A group of two or more single-family, two-family or
multifamily dwellings occupying a lot in one ownership.
DWELLINGS, MULTIFAMILY — A building used by three or more families
living independently of each other and doing their own cooking, including
apartment houses.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED (ROW) — A building used by one
family and having two party walls in common with other buildings.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED — A building used by one family,
having only one dwelling unit and having two side yards.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY SEMIDETACHED — A building used by one
family, having one side yard and one party wall in common with another
building.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY DETACHED — A building used by two families,
with one dwelling unit arranged over the other, and having two side yards.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY SEMIDETACHED — A building used by two
families, with one dwelling unit arranged over the other, having one side
yard and one party wall in common with another building.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms used for living and sleeping
purposes and having a kitchen with fixed cooking facilities arranged for
occupancy by one family.
EASEMENT — A right granted to use certain land area for a special purpose
consistent with the general property rights of the owner.
ENGINEER — A registered engineer retained by the municipality,
authorized to practice engineering as defined by the Registration Act of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.65
ENGINEERING SPECIFICATIONS — The engineering specifications of the
municipality regulating the installation of any required improvements or for
any facility, installed by an owner, subject to public use.66
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes or adjustments to properties and structures, which
reduce or eliminate flood damage to lands, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and contents of buildings.[Added 5-9-1977 by Ord. No. 974]
GOVERNING BODY — The elected officials of the municipality.
HEALTH OFFICIAL — Sanitarian of the State Department of Health, local
Health Officer or other qualified personnel.
LOT — A lot or parcel of land which is, or in the future may be, offered for
sale, conveyance, transfer or improvement.
LOT AREA — Area contained within the property lines, excluding street
area, but including the area of any easement.
65.Editor's Note: See 63 P.S. § 148 et seq.
66.Editor's Note: See Article VI of this chapter.
§ 148-3 SUNBURY CODE § 148-3
148:272
LOT, DOUBLE-FRONTAGE — A lot, the opposite ends of which abut on
streets.
LOT, REVERSE-FRONTAGE — A lot between an arterial street and a minor
street, with vehicular access only from the minor street.
LOT WIDTH — Width of a lot measured at the building setback.
NEW MOBILE HOME PARK OR MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISION — A parcel
or contiguous parcels of land divided into two or more mobile home lots
for rent or sale for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lot
on which the mobile home is to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, either final site grading or the pouring of concrete
pads, and the construction of streets) is completed on or after the effective
date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.[Added
5-9-1977 by Ord. No. 974]
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD — A flood that has one chance in 100 or
a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any year. For the purposes
of this chapter, the one-hundred-year flood (base flood) as defined by the
Federal Insurance Administration, United States Department of Housing
and Urban Development, in the Type 15 Flood Insurance Study for the City
of Sunbury, Pennsylvania.[Added 5-9-1977 by Ord. No. 974]
PERSON — Any individual or group of individuals, partnership,
copartnership or corporation.
RIGHT-OF-WAY, STREET — A strip of land between property lines for use as
a road, street or alley.
SANITARY SEWER — A pipe for conveying sewage, and excludes storm-,
surface and ground water.
STORM SEWER — A pipe for conveying rainwater, surface water,
condensate, cooling water and similar liquid waste, exclusive of sewage or
industrial waste.
STREETS — Public rights-of-way for vehicular or other traffic, whether
designated as streets, highway, thorough-fares, parkways, throughways,
roads, avenues, boulevards, lanes, places or alleys, or however other
designated, and for the purpose of this chapter shall be classed as follows:
PRIMARY STREETS — Streets which traverse through the municipality
and are used primarily for through, fast or heavy traffic.
A.
SECONDARY and COLLECTOR STREETS — Streets which carry traffic
from minor streets to the major system of primary streets, including
principal entrance streets of a residential development and streets for
major circulation within such developments.
B.
MINOR STREETS — Streets used primarily for access to the abutting
properties.
C.
§ 148-3 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 148-3
148:273
STREET WIDTH — The shortest distance between the lines delineating the
right-of-way of a street.
SUBDIVIDER — A person, copartnership or corporation owning land in
the municipality and for which a land subdivision application is filed and
processed under the provisions of this chapter.
SUBDIVISION — The division of a single lot, tract or parcel of land, or part
thereof, into two or more lots, tracts or parcels of land, including changes
in street lines or lot lines, for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of
transfer of ownership or of building development; provided, however, that
divisions of land for agricultural purposes in parcels of more than 10 acres,
not involving any new street or easement of access, shall not be included
within the meaning of "subdivision." The term includes resubdivision and,
when appropriate to the context, shall relate to the process of subdividing
or the land subdivided.
SURVEYOR — A registered surveyor, as defined by the Registration Act of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.67
MARGINAL ACCESS STREETS — Minor streets which are parallel to
and adjacent to primary streets and which provide access to abutting
properties and protection from through traffic.
D.
ALLEYS — Minor ways which are used primarily for vehicular service
access to the back or the side of properties otherwise abutting on a
street.
E.
67.Editor's Note: See 63 P.S. § 148 et seq.
§ 148-3 SUNBURY CODE § 148-3
148:274
ARTICLE II
Application of Regulations
§ 148-4. Approval of final plan required prior to subdivision.
No subdivision of any lot, tract or parcel of land located in the City of
Sunbury shall be effected; and no street, sanitary sewer, storm sewer,
water main or other facilities in connection therewith shall be laid out,
constructed, opened or dedicated for public use or travel or for the common
use of occupants of buildings thereon, unless and until a final subdivision
plan has been approved by the governing body, in the manner prescribed
herein, and recorded; nor otherwise used except in strict accordance with
the provisions of this chapter.
§ 148-5. Sale of lots and construction prohibited prior to approval
of final plat.
No lot in a subdivision may be sold; no permit to erect, alter or repair any
building upon land in a subdivision may be issued; and no building may be
erected in a subdivision, unless and until a final subdivision plat has been
approved by the governing body and recorded, and until construction of the
improvements required in connection therewith has been guaranteed in the
manner prescribed herein.
§ 148-4 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 148-5
148:275

ARTICLE III
Plat Requirements and Processing Procedures
§ 148-6. Preparation and filing of plat.
Whenever a subdivision of land is desired to be effected, a plat of the layout
of such subdivision shall be prepared, filed and processed, according to the
requirements of this chapter.
§ 148-7. Submission of preapplication plans and data; waiver.
§ 148-8. Specifications for preapplication plans and data.
Preapplication plans and data shall include the following:
A. Prior to the preparation and filing of the preliminary plat, the
subdivider shall submit to the Commission the following plans and data,
and shall ascertain from the Commission those elements which should
be considered in the design of the subdivision. These shall include any
features of the municipality's future land use plan, thoroughfare plan or
community facilities plan, or of any plans of the Commission, including,
but not limited to, proposed streets, recreation areas, drainage
reservations, shopping centers, school sites and floodplains.
B. In response to a written request by the subdivider, the Commission may
waive the requirement of preapplication plans and data, provided that
no new streets are involved and that fewer than six lots are proposed in
the total subdivision.
A. General information describing or outlining existing covenants, land
characteristics, community facilities and utilities, and information
describing the proposed subdivision, such as the number of residential
lots, dwelling units per net acre, typical lot width and depth, price
range, business areas, playgrounds, park areas, other public areas,
proposed protective covenants, proposed utilities and street
improvements.
B. A location map showing the relationship of the proposed subdivision to
existing community facilities which serve or influence it, and shall
include development name, location of any existing facilities, traffic
arteries, public or other schools, parks, playgrounds, utilities, churches,
shopping centers, airports, hospitals and principal places of
employment, title, scale, North arrow and date.
C. A topographic map drawn to a scale of one inch equals 100 feet or less,
showing:
(1) The proposed name of the subdivision.
(2) Name of the subdivider.
(3) Name of the registered owner.
§ 148-6 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 148-8
148:277
§ 148-9. Procedure for filing and reviewing preliminary plats.
(4) North point, scale and date.
(5) Name of engineer, surveyor or other qualified person responsible
for the map.
(6) Tract boundaries, with bearings and distances.
(7) Topography, with elevations based on data approved by the
Commission and showing contours at vertical intervals of five feet,
or as required by the Engineer.
(8) Approximate location of watercourses, tree masses, rock outcrops
and existing buildings, and actual location of sewers, inlets, water
mains, easements, fire hydrants, railroads and existing or
confirmed streets and their established grades.
(9) Adjacent streets.
D. A sketch plan drawn on a print of the topographic map, showing in a
simple sketch the proposed layout of streets, lots and other features in
relation to existing conditions.
E. In addition to the information normally required by the City for review
and approval of preliminary plans, the following information, prepared
by a registered engineer or surveyor, shall be required when any part of
the proposed subdivision or other development is within the area of the
Floodplain District: [Added 5-9-1977 by Ord. No. 974]
(1) Name of engineer, surveyor or other qualified person responsible
for providing the information required in this section.
(2) A map showing the location of the proposed subdivision and/or land
development with respect to the municipality's flood-prone areas,
including but not limited to information on the base flood
elevations, boundaries of flood-prone areas, proposed lots and
sites, fills, flood or erosion protective facilities and areas subject to
special deed restrictions.
(3) Where the subdivision and/or land development lies partially or
completely in the flood-prone areas or where the subdivision and/or
land development borders on the flood-prone areas, the
preliminary plan map shall include detailed information giving the
location and elevation of proposed roads, public utilities and
building sites. All such maps shall also identify accurately the
boundaries of the flood-prone areas and shall contain information
showing that adequate drainage will be provided to reduce
exposure to flood hazards.
(4) Copies of all necessary permits from those governmental agencies
from which approval is required by federal or state law.
§ 148-8 SUNBURY CODE § 148-9
148:278
§ 148-10. Specifications for preliminary plats.
A. Filing. The subdivider, 10 days prior to the meeting of the Commission
at which consideration is desired, shall file with the Commission six
copies of a preliminary plat of the proposed layout of the subdivision.
B. Action by Commission.
(1) The Commission shall submit copies of the preliminary plat to the
Engineer, public utilities and other public agencies, and shall
return the plat to the subdivider either approved or with
recommendations for changes necessary for approval. The
Commission shall act on any such preliminary plat within 60 days of
its being received. In the event that any variance from this chapter
is requested by the subdivider or is deemed necessary by the
Commission for approval, the variance and the reasons for its
necessity shall be entered in the records of the Commission.
(2) The Commission shall determine whether the preliminary plat shall
be approved, approved with modifications or disapproved, and
shall notify the subdivider in writing thereof, including, if approved
with modifications or disapproved, a statement or reasons for such
action, and return a copy of the preliminary plat to the subdivider.
C. Engineering data.
(1) Before taking final action on any submitted plat, the Commission
may submit copies of the preliminary plat and accompanying data
to the Engineer, who shall advise the Commission as to the
suitability of all engineering details and specifications; to the
Sanitarian of the State Department of Health, local Health Officer
or other qualified personnel, where septic tanks and/or wells are to
be utilized, who shall determine, on the basis of a percolation test,
the minimum lot size permissible; and to all affected public utilities,
who shall be requested to make recommendations as to the
suitability of the utility easements.
(2) The required percolation tests shall be made in accordance with all
rules and regulations set forth by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, Department of Health, Bureau of Environmental
Health. All costs incurred through the conducting of said tests shall
be the responsibility of the subdivider and/or developer.
D. Approval. Approval of the preliminary plat shall not constitute approval
of the final subdivision plat by the governing body.
A. The preliminary plat shall be drawn on a copy of the topographic map
and shall show:
(1) The layout, names and widths of the right-of-way, cartway and
paving of proposed streets, alleys and easements.
§ 148-9 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 148-10
148:279
§ 148-11. Procedure for filing, reviewing and recording final plats.
(2) The layout of lots, showing dimensions, lot numbers and
approximate area of each lot.
(3) Parcels of land intended to be dedicated or reserved for schools,
parks, playgrounds or other public, semipublic or community
purposes.
B. The preliminary plat shall be accompanied by the following data and
maps:
(1) A profile of each street, including grades.
(2) Location of existing and proposed utility mains.
(3) Location plans of proposed sanitary and/or storm sewers and of any
proposed water distribution system.
A. Filing.
(1) The subdivider shall, not later than six months after the date of
approval of the preliminary plat, file with the Commission a final
plat. Failure to comply with the time limitation herein provided
shall make the approval of the preliminary plat null and void, unless
an extension of time is requested by the subdivider and for good
cause granted by the governing body.
(2) Six copies shall be filed by the subdivider with the Commission 45
days prior to the meeting of the governing body at which
consideration is desired.
B. Conformance with preliminary plat. The final plat shall have
incorporated all the changes and modifications required by the
Commission; otherwise, it shall conform to the approved preliminary
plat, and it may constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary
plat which the subdivider proposes to record and develop at the time,
provided that such portion conforms to all of the requirements of this
chapter.
C. Guaranty. Before approval of a final plat, the governing body must be
assured by means of a proper completion guaranty, in the form of a
bond or the deposit of funds or securities in escrow sufficient to cover
the cost of the required improvements, as estimated by the Engineer,
that all improvements required in Article V will be installed by the
owner in strict accordance with the standards and specifications of the
governing body and within a specified time after approval of the final
plat.
D. Approval. The governing body shall determine whether the final
subdivision plat shall be approved or disapproved and shall give notice
to the subdivider not later than 40 days after such application is filed in
the following manner:
§ 148-10 SUNBURY CODE § 148-11
148:280
§ 148-12. Specifications for final plats.
The final plat shall be drawn in ink on linen or acetate sheets according to
the following size requirements: folded, 8 1/2 inches x 11 inches, 17 inches
x 22 inches, 22 inches x 34 inches or 34 inches x 44 inches, and shall show:
(1) If approved, the governing body and Commission shall sign the
original final subdivision plat and attach thereto a notation that it
has received approval and return it to the subdivider for
compliance with the recording requirements.
(2) If disapproved, the governing body shall attach to the plat a
statement of reasons for such action and return it to the subdivider.
(3) Failure of the governing body to render a decision and
communicate it to the applicant within the time and in the manner
required herein shall be deemed an approval of the application in
terms as presented, unless the applicant has agreed in writing to
an extension of time or change in the prescribed manner of
presentation of communication of the decision, in which case,
failure to meet the extended time or change in manner of
presentation of communication shall have like affect.
E. Changes. No changes, erasures, modifications or revisions shall be
made on any final plat of a subdivision after approval has been given by
the governing body and endorsed in writing on the plat, unless the plat
is first resubmitted to the governing body.
F. Recording.
(1) Within 90 days after the date of approval of the final plat by the
governing body, the owner shall record an approved duplicate copy
thereof in the office of the County Recorder of Deeds, and forthwith
file with the governing body a recorder's certificate that the
approved plat has been recorded, with the deed book and page
numbers indicated and two copies of the recorded plat.
(2) The recording of the plat shall not constitute grounds for
assessment increases until such time as lots are sold or
improvements are installed on the land included within the subject
plat.
G. Effect of plat approval on Official Map. After a plat has been approved
and recorded as provided in this article, all streets and public grounds
on such plat shall be and become a part of the Official Map of the
municipality without public hearing.
A. Primary control points, approved by the Engineer, or description and
"ties" to such control points, to which all dimensions, angles, bearings
and similar data on the plat shall be referred.
§ 148-11 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 148-12
148:281
B. Tract boundary lines, right-of-way lines of streets, easements and other
rights-of-way and property lines of residential lots and other sites, with
accurate dimensions, bearings or deflection angles and radii, arcs and
central angles of all curves.
C. Topography, as required under § 148-8C.
D. Name and right-of-way width of each street or other right-of-way.
E. Location, dimensions and purpose of easements.
F. Number to identify each lot and/or site, and street numbers of lots.
G. Purpose for which sites other than residential lots are dedicated or
reserved.
H. Building lines on all lots and other sites.
I. Location and description of survey monuments. All permanent
reference monuments shall be shown by an "x" on the plat.
J. Names of record owners of adjoining unplatted land.
K. Reference to recorded subdivision plats of adjoining platted land by
record name, date and number.
L. Certification of title, showing that applicant is the owner of the land.
M. Certification by licensed surveyor or licensed engineer certifying to
accuracy of survey and plat.
N. Statement by owner dedicating streets, rights-of-way and any sites for
public uses which are to be dedicated.
O. Proposed protective covenants running with the land, if any.
P. Proposed contours at vertical intervals as required by the Commission.
Q. The exact location and elevation of all proposed buildings, structures,
roads and public utilities to be constructed in flood-prone areas; and
accurate identification of the boundaries of the flood-prone areas.
[Added 5-9-1977 by Ord. No. 97468]
R. Other data. The plat shall be accompanied by the following data in form
prescribed by the engineering specifications.69
(1) Profiles of streets and alleys, showing grades at a minimum scale of
40 feet horizontal and four feet vertical.
68.Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsections Q and R as
Subsections R and S, respectively. Former Subsection S was therefore redesignated as
Subsection T.
69.Editor's Note: See Article VI of this chapter.
§ 148-12 SUNBURY CODE § 148-12
148:282
(2) Cross sections of streets and alleys, showing the width of right-ofway,
width of cartway, location and width of sidewalks and location
and size of utility mains.
(3) Plans and profiles of proposed sanitary and/or stormwater sewers,
with grades and pipe sizes indicated, and a plan of any proposed
water distribution system, showing pipe sizes and location of valves
and fire hydrants.
(4) Location and method of streetlighting facilities.
S. Such certificates, affidavits, endorsements or dedications as may be
required by the Commission or the governing body of the municipality
in the enforcement of these regulations, and at least in the amount and
form of the following:
(1) Adoption, dedication and release of individual.
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS, that (I, we)
__________________ (Name of Individual Owner) of _____________
(Community) ______________ County, Pennsylvania, for (myself,
ourselves) and (my, our) heirs, executors, administrators and
assigns, do hereby adopt this as (my, our) plan of lots for property
owned by (me, us) in ______________(Community) ____________,
____________ (County) _____________, Pennsylvania, and for divers
advantages accruing to (me, us) do hereby dedicate for public use
for highway purposes the streets shown upon this plan with the
same force and effect as if the same had been opened through
legal proceedings, and (I, we) further do hereby covenant and
agree to and by these presents to release and discharge the said
_________________ (Community) ____________, and its successors or
assigns, from liability for damages arising or to arise from the
appropriation of said ground for public highways and the physical
grading thereof and any grades that may be established.
This adoption, dedication and release shall be binding upon (me,
us), (my, our) heirs, executors, administrators and assigns and
purchasers of lots in this plan.
In witness whereof, (I, we) have affixed to these presents (my, our)
hands and seals this _____ day of ___________, 197___
ATTEST:
State of Pennsylvania )
) SS:
County of )
§ 148-12 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 148-12
148:283
Before me, the subscriber, a notary public in and for said state and
county, personally appeared the above-named and acknowledged
the foregoing adoption, dedication and release to be (his, their) act
and deed and desired the same to be recorded as such.
Witness my hand and notarial seal this______ day of _________,
19___
Notary Public
(2) Dedication and release of corporation.
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS, that the
___________________ (Name of Corporation), a corporation,
_______________, by virtue of a resolution of the Board of Directors
thereof, does hereby adopt this as its plan of lots of its property
situate in ___________ (Community) _________________,
_________________ County, Pennsylvania, and for divers advantages
accruing to it does hereby dedicate for public use, for highway
purposes, the streets shown upon this plan, with the same force
and effect as if the same had been opened through legal
proceedings, further does hereby covenant and agree to and by
these presents to release and discharge the said __________________
(Community) ________________, and its successors or assigns, from
liability for damages arising or to arise from the appropriation of
said ground for public highways and the physical grading thereof,
and any grades that may be established.
This dedication and release shall be binding upon
___________________ (Name of Corporation) _________________, its
successors and assigns and purchasers of lots in this plan.
In Witness Whereof, the said corporation has caused its corporate
seal to be affixed by the hand of its president and the same to be
attested by its secretary, this _________day of ___________, 19___
Secretary President
State of
Pennsylvania
)
) SS:
County of )
§ 148-12 SUNBURY CODE § 148-12
148:284
On this _____ day of ___________, 19___, before me, a Notary Public
in and for said county and state, personally appeared
________________(Name and Title of Officer), of the
______________(Name of Corporation) _____________, who being duly
sworn, deposeth and saith that he was personally present at the
execution of the adoption, release and dedication and saw the
common and corporate seal of the said corporation duly affixed,
and that the above release and dedication was duly signed and
sealed by and as for the act and deed of the said _____________
corporation, for the uses and purposes therein mentioned and
that the name of this deponent subscribed to the said release and
dedication as ______________(Title of Officer) _____________ of said
corporation, in attestation of the due execution and delivery of
said release and dedication of this deponent's own and proper and
respective handwriting.
Title of Officer
Sworn to and subscribed before me the day and date abovewritten.
WITNESS MY HAND AND NOTARIAL SEAL
this _______day of ______________, 19___
My Commission expires the _______day of ___________, 19____
Notary Public
(3) Engineer's certificate.
I, _______________________, a registered professional engineer (or
registered surveyor) of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, do
hereby certify that this plan correctly represents the lots, lands,
streets, alleys and highways as surveyed and plotted by me for the
owners or agents.
(Engineer) Registration No.
SEAL:
(4) Approval by governing body.
Approved by the governing body of ___________ (Community)
______________, ______________County, Pennsylvania, by a resolution
adopted this________ day of ____________, 19___
Secretary President
§ 148-12 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 148-12
148:285
The governing body of _________________ (Community) ___________
hereby gives public notice that in approving this plan for recording
purposes only, the municipality assumes no obligations, legal or
otherwise, expressed or implied, either to accept said streets as
official streets or roads, grade, pave and curb the streets in said
plan or construct sewers therein, or to install any other such
service ordinarily installed in official streets or roads.
ATTEST:
Secretary President
State of Pennsylvania )
) SS:
County of )
(5) Approval by the Planning Commission.
Approved by the
City Planning Commission
19___
(6) Certificate of County Recorder of Deeds.
Recorded in the Recorder's Office for the recording of deeds,
plans, etc., in said county, in Plan Book Vol. , Page Given under
my hand and seal this day of , 19
Recorder
T. When the county has a Planning Commission, all final plats shall have
evidence of review by said County Planning Commission, in the form of
a seal or other insignia, prior to submission to the local governing body
for final approval.
§ 148-12 SUNBURY CODE § 148-12
148:286
ARTICLE IV
Design Standards
§ 148-13. Suitability of land.
Land subject to hazards to life, health or property, such as quarry land, open
ditches, etc., shall not be subdivided for residential purposes until such
hazards have been eliminated or unless adequate safeguards against such
hazards are provided by the subdivision plan.
§ 148-14. Street system.
The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all streets
shall conform to the Official Map and to the Community Master Plan, if
one has been adopted, and shall be considered in their relation to existing
and planned streets, to topographical conditions, to public convenience and
safety and in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land
to be served by such streets. Where not shown on the Official Map or
Community Master Plan, the arrangement and other design standards of
streets shall conform to the provisions found herein.
A. The arrangement of streets in new subdivisions shall make provisions
for the continuation of existing streets in adjoining areas.
B. Where adjoining areas are not subdivided, the arrangement of streets
in new subdivisions shall make provision for the proper projection of
streets.
C. When a new subdivision adjoins unsubdivided land appropriate for
subdivision, then the new streets shall be carried to the boundaries of
the tract proposed to be subdivided.
D. Proposed streets shall conform to any local, county and state road or
highway plans which have been prepared, adopted and/or filed, as
required by law.
E. Alleys shall be discouraged in residential districts. In commercial and
industrial areas, adequate alleys or off-street loading and unloading
space, where needed for loading and unloading or access purposes,
shall be provided.
F. Minor streets shall be laid out so as to discourage through traffic.
G. Whenever the proposed subdivision contains or is adjacent to a highway
designated as a "limited access highway" by the appropriate highway
authorities, provision shall be made for a marginal access street at a
distance acceptable for the appropriate use of the land between the
highway and such street. The Commission may also require rear service
alleys, reverse frontage lots or such other treatment which will provide
protection for abutting properties, reduction in the number of
intersections with major streets and separation of local and through
traffic.
§ 148-13 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 148-14
148:287
§ 148-15. Cul-de-sac streets.
H. Names of new streets shall not duplicate existing or platted street
names, or approximate such names by the use of suffixes such as "land,"
"way," "drive," "court" and "avenue." In approving names of streets,
cognizance may be given to existing or platted street names within the
postal delivery district served by the post office. New streets shall bear
the same name as that of existing or platted streets if there is any
continuation or alignment with an existing or platted street.
I. New half or partial streets shall not be permitted, except where
essential to reasonable subdivision of a tract in conformance with the
other requirements and standards of these regulations and where, in
addition, satisfactory assurance for dedication of the remaining part of
the street can be secured.
J. Wherever a tract to be subdivided borders an existing half or partial
street, the other part of the street shall be plotted within such tract.
K. Dead-end streets shall be prohibited, except as stubs to permit future
street extension into adjoining tracts or when designed as culs-de-sac.
L. New reserve strips, including those controlling access to streets, shall
be avoided.
A. Culs-de-sac in residential developments shall be provided at the closed
end with a paved turnaround having a minimum radius to the outer
pavement edge or curbline of 40 feet and a property line radius of 50
feet.
B. Culs-de-sac in commercial and industrial developments shall be
provided with a paved turnaround having a minimum radius to the
outer pavement edge or curbline of 55 feet and a property line radius of
65 feet.
C. Stub streets. When future extension is desirable, the right-of-way shall
be placed adjacent to a property line and a right-of-way of the same
width as the street shall be carried to the property line in such a way as
to permit future extension of the street into the adjoining tract.
D. Temporary dead-end streets, on approved plans, may be used, provided
that the developer, on his own land, constructs a stabilized all-weather
turnaround of the same radius as would be required for a permanent
street, the turnaround to be removed when the street is continued.
E. Permanent cul-de-sac streets should in general not exceed 500 feet,
unless topographic conditions warrant increase, when approved by the
Planning Commission.
§ 148-14 SUNBURY CODE § 148-16
148:288
§ 148-16. Street alignment.
The design of secondary collector and minor streets or roads shall meet
the minimum geometrical design requirements as specified by the American
Association of State Highway Officials Manual.
§ 148-17. Street widths.
§ 148-18. Access drives.
A. Street right-of-way and cartway widths shall be not less than as shown
on the following table:
Street or Road Widths
Type of
Street or
Road
Type of
Department
Minimum Rightof-
Way
(feet)
Minimum Cartway
(feet)
Primary All types Determined by
Pennsylvania
Department of
Highways and
Planning
Commission
Secondary/
collector
Commercial,
industrial or
residential
60-80 38
No
Curbs
Curbs
Local/ minor Residential
lot (15,000
feet or more)
50 24 26
Residential
lot (15,000
feet or less)
50 32 34
B. Provision for additional street width (right-of-way) may be required by
the Planning Commission in specific cases:
(1) For public safety and convenience.
(2) In commercial and industrial areas or in high density residential
development.
(3) For widening of existing streets which do not meet the
requirements of Subsection A.
A. Width. The width of access drives shall be a minimum of 10 feet and a
maximum of 35 feet.
§ 148-16 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 148-18
148:289
§ 148-19. Street grades.
Streets shall be logically related to the topography so as to produce usable
roads and reasonable grades. The grade of streets shall be as follows:
§ 148-20. Street intersections.
B. Number. There may be one drive per 100 feet of frontage.
C. An access drive may not cross a street right-of-way line:
(1) Within 40 feet of the right-of-way line of an intersecting street.
(2) Within five feet of a fire hydrant.
(3) Within 40 feet of another access drive on the same property.
(4) Within three feet of a property line other than at a street
intersection.
D. Unless the distance is greater than 25 feet, no island or curb is
permitted for access drives.
E. The minimum angle between the center line of the access drive and the
street shall be not less than 45°.
A. Center-line grades.
(1) Center-line grades should be not less than 1/2 of 1%.
(2) Center-line grades shall, wherever feasible, not exceed the
following:
(a) Minor street, 10%.
(b) Collector and major traffic street, 6%.
(3) Vertical curves shall be used at changes of grade and shall be
designed in relation to the extent of the grade change.
B. Leveling area. Where the grade of any street at the approach to an
intersection exceeds 7%, a leveling area shall be provided having not
greater than 4% grades for a distance of 25 feet measured from the
nearest right-of-way line of the intersecting street.
A. Intersection design.
(1) Streets shall be laid out to intersect as nearly as possible at right
angles. No street shall intersect another at an angle of less than
60°.
(2) Multiple intersections involving the junction or crossing of more
than two streets shall be prohibited. Where this proves impossible,
such intersections shall be designed with extreme care for both
pedestrian and vehicular safety.
§ 148-18 SUNBURY CODE § 148-20
148:290
§ 148-21. Building lines.
(3) To the fullest extent possible, intersections with major traffic
streets shall be located not less than 800 feet apart, measured from
center line to center line.
(4) Streets entering opposite sides of another street shall be laid out
either directly opposite one another or with a minimum offset of
150 feet between their center lines.
B. Curb radii. Minimum curb radii at street intersections shall be 15 feet
for intersections involving only minor streets, 25 feet for intersections
including other-type streets or such greater radius as is suitable to the
specific intersections. Property line corners shall be rounded with a
similar radius as is provided for the curb.
A. The minimum building line, measured from the required right-of-way
line, shall be as follows:
Right-of-Way
(feet)
Minimum Building Line
(feet)
50 25
60 30
80 40
B. In no case shall the required setback be less than 50% of the right-ofway
or as required by the Zoning Ordinance,70 where subsurface
disposal is indicated the distance from the right-of-way line, the
building line shall be adequate to provide area for the subsurface
drainage field. For other than residential lots, the Planning Commission
may require additional setbacks.
C. When an unimproved lot adjoins an improved lot having a building
thereon, the setback of any building on the unimproved lot may be the
average setback of such adjoining improved lot and the required
setback for the unimproved lot. The adjoining unimproved lot second
from the original improved lot must have the minimum required
setback.
D. Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to street
lines. Side building lines shall be not less than 10 feet from the side lot
line, as required by the Zoning Ordinance.71
E. Rear building lines shall be equal to 20% of the lot depth or as required
by the Zoning Ordinance.72
70.Editor's Note: See Ch. 175, Zoning.
71.Editor's Note: See Ch. 175, Zoning.
72.Editor's Note: See Ch. 175, Zoning.
§ 148-20 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 148-21
148:291
§ 148-22. Lots.
The arrangement and other design standards of lots shall conform to the
following requirements:
F. Corner lots shall have extra width to permit the required building
setback from both streets.
A. Every lot shall abut a street.
B. Double frontage lots shall not be platted, except that where desired
along limited access highways, lots may face on an interior street and
back on such thoroughfares. In that event, a planting strip for a screen,
at least 15 feet in width, shall be provided along the back of the lot.
Where lots back on a railroad, creek or other natural barrier, there may
also be required a fifteen-foot planting screen strip; and interior lots
having frontage on two streets shall be prohibited except where
unusual conditions make them desirable.
C. Lot size shall be controlled by the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance73
or the following minimums:
(1) Where both water supply and sanitary sewage disposal are
provided by off-lot facilities, lots for single-family detached
dwellings shall have a minimum area of 8,000 square feet and a
minimum width at the building line of 80 feet. For lots intended for
use by more than one family, the minimum lot shall be increased by
1,500 square feet for each dwelling unit more than one.
(2) Where both water supply and sanitary sewage disposal are
provided by individual on-lot facilities, lots for single-family
detached dwellings shall have a minimum area of 20,000 square
feet and a minimum width at the building line of 100 feet. For each
additional family to be accommodated on the lot, the minimum lot
size shall be increased by 5,000 square feet for each dwelling unit
over one, provided that an approved sewage disposal and water
supply system are installed to serve the subdivision.
(3) Where either water supply or sanitary sewage disposal, but not
both, are provided by individual on-lot facilities, lots for singlefamily
detached dwellings shall have a minimum area of 12,000
square feet and a minimum width measured at the building line of
80 feet. For each additional dwelling unit, the minimum lot size
shall be increased by 4,000 square feet, provided that an approved
sewage disposal or water supply system is installed to serve the
subdivision.
(4) Where either or both water supply and sanitary sewage disposal
facilities are provided by individual on-lot facilities, the
municipality shall require that the subdivider request that the
73.Editor's Note: See Ch. 175, Zoning.
§ 148-21 SUNBURY CODE § 148-22
148:292
§ 148-23. Storm drainage.
§ 148-24. Easements.
Pennsylvania Department of Health, local Health Officer or other
qualified personnel make the necessary tests to determine the
adequacy of the proposed facilities in relation to the lot size,
existing grade and soil conditions. A certificate by the Sanitarian
of the Pennsylvania Department of Health, local Health Officer or
other approved personnel indicating that the proposed facilities are
adequate shall be required before final approval of the plan.
A. Lot drainage. Lots shall be laid out and graded to provide positive
drainage away from new and existing buildings.
B. Installation of storm sewers. Storm sewers, culverts and related
installations shall be provided:
(1) To permit unimpeded flow of natural watercourses.
(2) To ensure adequate drainage of streets.
(3) To intercept stormwater runoff along streets at intervals
reasonably related to the extent and grade of the area drained.
C. Stormwater runoff. In the design of storm sewerage installations,
special consideration shall be given to avoidance of problems which
may arise from concentration of stormwater runoff over adjacent
properties.
D. Open drainageways. When open drainageways are used for the disposal
of stormwater, the Planning Commission shall review the design of such
open drainageways in relation to the following:
(1) Safety. Steep banks and deep pools shall be avoided.
(2) Erosion. Adequate measures shall be taken, such as seeding,
sodding, paving or other measures, as necessary to prevent the
erosion of banks and the scouring of the channel bottom.
(3) Stagnation. Design of open drainageways shall not create stagnant
pools or swampy areas.
E. Approval. Drainage structures for areas of more than 1/2 mile square
shall be subject to approval by the Pennsylvania Department of Forests
and Waters.
A. Minimum widths. The following minimum widths of easements shall be
observed unless otherwise specified:
(1) Underground public utility facilities, 15 feet.
(2) Overhead public utility facilities, 10 feet.
§ 148-22 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 148-24
148:293
§ 148-25. Obstructions to vision.
(3) Drainage facilities, 20 feet.
B. Location. Easements for public utilities shall, wherever possible, be
centered on side or rear lot lines. Drainageways, channels or stream
easements may be located as necessary to adequately meet the
engineering requirements for the facility.
C. Transmission lines. Where natural gas, petroleum or high tension lines
are located within or adjacent to the subdivision, the subdivider shall
provide the Planning Commission with a statement from the utility
company involved, setting forth any special conditions which it may
require.
A. On any corner lot, no wall, fence or other structure shall be erected or
altered, and no tree, hedge, shrub or other growth shall be maintained,
which may cause danger to traffic on a street or public road by
obscuring the view. A clear-sight triangle, measured along the center
lines of intersecting streets, shall be maintained, within which
vegetation and other visual obstructions shall be limited to a height of
not more than three feet above the street grade.
Street Type
Clear-Sight Triangle
(feet)
Collector and minor 75
Primary 150
B. At each point where a private accessway intersects a public street or
road, a clear-sight triangle of 10 feet, measured from the point of
intersection of the street line and the edge of the accessway, shall be
maintained, within which vegetation and other visual obstructions shall
be limited to a height of not more than three feet above street grade.
C. If not obstructing the view of traffic, posts, columns or trees not
exceeding one foot in diameter shall be permitted in the clear-sight
triangle.
§ 148-24 SUNBURY CODE § 148-25
148:294
ARTICLE V
Improvement and Construction Requirements
§ 148-26. Monuments and markers.
§ 148-27. Streets.
A. Placement; marking. Monuments and markers must so be placed that
the scored or marked point coincides exactly with the point of
intersection of the lines being monumented. They must be set so that
the top of the monument or marker is level with the surface of the
surrounding ground. Monuments must be marked on top with a copper
or brass dowel.
B. Location of Monuments. Monuments shall be located at:
(1) The intersection of lines forming angles in the boundaries of the
subdivision.
(2) The intersection of street lines.
C. Location of lot markers. Lot markers shall be located at:
(1) The beginning and ending of curves along property lines.
(2) Points where lot lines intersect curves, either front or rear.
(3) Angles in property lines of lots.
(4) All other lot corners.
D. Removal. Any monuments or markers that are removed must be
replaced by a registered engineer or surveyor at the expense of the
person removing them.
A. Streets, and alleys where provided, shall be graded, surfaced and
improved in accordance with the plans, profiles and cross sections
prepared by the subdivider, in accordance with municipal
specifications, and approved by the governing body.
B. Subsurface drainage and all utilities shall be installed prior to placing
the street surface.
C. Driveway entrances or aprons within the street right-of-way shall be
surfaced to their full width, the type of surface to be the same as
specified by the engineering specifications for streets.74 Where
sidewalks are installed, the required driveway surfacing shall end at the
street side of the sidewalk.
D. The finished elevation of proposed streets shall be established with due
consideration given to the need for access to developed properties
during times of flooding. The City Council may require, where
74.Editor's Note: See Article VI of this chapter.
§ 148-26 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 148-27
148:295
§ 148-28. Sewer and water systems.
necessary, profiles and elevations of streets to determine compliance
with this requirement. Drainage openings shall be sufficient to
discharge flood flows without unduly increasing flood heights. [Added
5-9-1977 by Ord. No. 974]
A. Sewers.
(1) Where a public sanitary sewer system is within 1,000 feet of, or
where plans approved by the governing body provide for the
installation of such public sanitary sewer facilities to within 1,000
feet of, a proposed subdivision, the subdivider shall provide the
subdivision with a complete sanitary sewer system to be connected
to the existing or proposed sanitary sewer system. The system shall
be designed by a registered engineer and approved by the
Municipal Engineer.
(2) Where installation of a sanitary sewer system is not required, the
subdivider or owner of the lot shall provide for each lot, at the time
improvements are erected thereon, a private sewage disposal
system consisting of a septic tank and tile absorption field or other
approved sewage disposal system. All such individual sewage
disposal systems shall be constructed in accordance with
Pennsylvania Department of Health and approved by the Municipal
Engineer.
(3) All new or replacement sanitary sewer systems located within the
Floodplain District, whether public or private, shall be floodproofed
up to an elevation one foot above the base flood elevation. [Added
5-9-1977 by Ord. No. 974]
B. Water.
(1) Where a water main supply system is within 1,000 feet of, or where
plans approved by the governing body provide for the installation
of such public water facilities to within 1,000 feet, of a proposed
subdivision, the subdivider shall provide the subdivision with a
complete water main supply system to be connected to the existing
or proposed water main supply system.
(2) Where installation of a public water main supply system is not
required, the subdivider or owner of the lot shall provide for each
lot, at the time improvements are erected thereon, an individual
water supply approved by the Board of Health or Health Official.
(3) All new or replacement water systems located in the Floodplain
District, whether public or private, shall be floodproofed to a point
one foot above the base flood elevation. [Added 5-9-1977 by Ord.
No. 974]
§ 148-27 SUNBURY CODE § 148-29
148:296
§ 148-29. Storm drainage.
Whenever the evidence available to the governing body indicates that
natural surface drainage is inadequate, the subdivider shall install a
stormwater sewer system in accordance with approved plans and profiles.
The system shall be designed by a registered engineer and be approved by
the Municipal Engineer.
§ 148-29.1. Floodproofing of utilities. [Added 5-9-1977 by Ord. No.
974]
All new or replacement public and/or private utilities and facilities shall be
elevated or floodproofed to a point one foot above the base flood elevation.
§ 148-29.2. (Reserved)75
§ 148-30. Curbs and gutters.
Wherever the lots in a proposed subdivision will result in a density of five
or more families per net acre, or where multifamily dwellings are provided,
curbs and gutters shall be installed in accordance with the engineering
specifications.76 The governing body may require installation of curbs and/
or gutters in any subdivision where the evidence indicates that such
improvements are necessary for proper drainage.
§ 148-31. Sidewalks.
Wherever the lots in a proposed subdivision will result in a density of
five or more families per net acre, or where multifamily dwellings are
provided, sidewalks shall be installed in accordance with the engineering
specifications.77 The governing body may require installation of sidewalks in
any subdivision where evidence indicates that sidewalks are necessary for
the public safety.
§ 148-32. Street name signs.
The subdivision shall be provided with street name signs at all intersections.
Such signs shall conform to City specifications and shall be installed by the
subdivider in a manner specified by the City Engineer.
§ 148-33. Street trees.
The subdivider shall provide street trees of a caliper not less than 1 1/2
inches and planted 40 to 60 feet apart, and seed the planting strip between
the curb and sidewalk. The type and spacing of trees shall be approved by
75.Editor's Note: Former § 148-29.2, Mobile homes in the Floodplain District, added 5-9-1977
by Ord. No. 974, was repealed 11-8-1982 by Ord. No. 1044.
76.Editor's Note: See Article VI of this chapter.
77.Editor's Note: See Article VI of this chapter.
§ 148-29 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 148-33
148:297
the Planning Commission and the governing body. The following is a list of
acceptable trees:
Acer platanoides Norway Maple
Acer saccharum Sugar Maple
Fraxinus americana White Ash
Fraxinus pennsylvanica laceolata Green Ash
Ginkgo biloba Maidenhair Tree
Gleditsia triacanthos inermis Thornless Honey Locust
Liquidambar styraciflua Sweet Gum
Platanus acerifolia Oriental Plane Tree
Platanus occidentalis American Plane Tree
Quercus alba White Oak
Quercus borealis Red Oak
Quercus coccinea Scarlet Oak
Quercus palustris Pin Oak
Tilia cordata Little Leaf European Linden
Tilia tomentosa Silver Linden
Ulmus americana American Elm
§ 148-34. Changes.
In cases where any of the foregoing requirements are not deemed
appropriate by the governing body to serve in the public interest the
governing body reserves the right to increase, change, alter or substitute
materials, manner and specifications for any utility or street improvements.
§ 148-33 SUNBURY CODE § 148-34
148:298
ARTICLE VI
Engineering Specifications
[Added 2-14-1977 by Ord. No. 965]
§ 148-35. Monuments and markers.
§ 148-36. Curbs and gutters.
§ 148-37. Sidewalks.
§ 148-38. Street pavement.
Street pavement shall conform to standards and specifications of PennDOT
Form 408.
§ 148-39. Storm sewers and surface drainage.
Storm sewers and surface drainage shall be as approved by the Engineer.
§ 148-40. Water systems.
Water systems shall be as approved by the Engineer.
§ 148-41. Sanitary sewers and septic tanks.
A. Monuments shall be cut stone or concrete.
B. The minimum size of monuments shall be six by six by 30 inches.
C. Markers shall be iron or steel bars, or approved equal, 36 inches in
length by 5/8 inch in diameter.
A. Straight cement curb shall be 18 by eight inches, top rolled and
battered to eight inches at the bottom, and shall have eight inches of
face exposed above finish road surface.
B. Curbing may be six inches of ID-2 bituminous curb, where approved by
the Engineer and/or the Pennsylvania Department of Highways.
A. Sidewalks shall be four inches of cement concrete.
B. The minimum width of sidewalks shall be five feet. In multifamily or
commercial areas, the width shall be increased as determined by the
governing body.
A. Sanitary sewers shall meet all the requirements of the Pennsylvania
Department of Health and the Engineer.
B. Septic tanks shall be laid out in accordance with the minimum
standards approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Health and
must be inspected and approved by the Engineer or his authorized
representative.
§ 148-35 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 148-41
148:299

ARTICLE VII
Fees
§ 148-42. Commission fee. [Amended 12-22-2003]
At the time of filing, the preliminary plat shall be accompanied by a fee to
cover the Commission's cost of checking and verifying the proposed plats
and other required maps and data in accordance with the following:
§ 148-43. Engineering fee.
At the time of filing, the final plat shall be accompanied by a check payable
to the municipality in an amount determined by the Council sufficient to
cover the cost of:
A. Minor subdivision (five or fewer lots fronting a public street): $200.
(1) Second review and a report: $100.
B. Major subdivision (more than five lots): $500.
(1) Second review: $100.
(2) Inspections and reports: $200.
C. Land development (five or fewer dwelling units with no new streets):
$150.
(1) Inspection with report: $100.
D. Land development (five or more dwelling units): $500.
(1) Inspection with report: $100.
A. Reviewing the plat's engineering details.
B. Inspecting the site for conformance to survey.
C. Preparing cost estimates of required improvements.
D. Inspection of required improvements during installation.
E. Final inspection on completion of installation of required
improvements.
§ 148-42 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 148-43
148:301

ARTICLE VIII
Variances and Amendments
§ 148-44. Procedures governing variances.
§ 148-45. Amendments.
A. Where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter will result in unreasonable hardship, the
governing body may make such reasonable variances thereto as will not
be contrary to the public interest and so that the spirit of this chapter
shall be observed and substantial justice done.
B. Applications for any variance shall be submitted in writing by the
subdivider at the time the preliminary plat is filed with the Commission.
The application shall state fully the grounds and all the facts relied
upon by the applicant.
C. Whenever a variance is requested by the subdivider or is deemed
necessary by the Commission, the Commission shall submit the
preliminary plat and a copy of its findings to the governing body, which
reserves the right of final approval on any such variance.
D. In granting any variance, the governing body shall record its action and
the grounds for granting any variance in its minutes.
A. Amendments to the subdivision and land development chapter shall
become effective only after a public hearing is held pursuant to public
notice.
B. A brief summary setting forth the principal provisions of the proposed
amendment and a reference to the place within the municipality where
copies of the proposed ordinance amendment may be secured or
examined shall be incorporated in the public notice.
C. In addition, in case of an amendment other than that prepared by the
planning agency, the governing body shall submit each such
amendment to the planning agency for recommendations at least 30
days prior to the date fixed for the public hearing on such proposed
amendment.
§ 148-44 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 148-45
148:303

ARTICLE IX
Enforcement; Penalties
§ 148-46. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector, Zoning Officer or other such
duly authorized representative of the local governing body, and he is hereby
given the power and authority, to enforce the provisions of this chapter. The
Enforcement Officer shall require that the application for a building permit
contain all information necessary to enable him to ascertain whether the
proposed building, alteration or use is located in an approved subdivision.
No building permit shall be issued until the Enforcement Officer has
certified that the site for the proposed building, alteration or use complies
with all the provisions of this chapter and conforms to the site description
as indicated on the approved and recorded final plat.
§ 148-47. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-14-1977 by Ord. No.
965]
Any person, partnership or corporation who or which, being the owner
or agent of the owner of any lot, tract or parcel of land, shall lay out,
construct, open or dedicate any street, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, water
main or other improvements for public use, travel or other purposes or
for the common use of occupants of buildings abutting thereon, or who
sells, transfers or agrees or enters into an agreement to sell any land in a
subdivision or land development, whether by reference to or by other use
of a plat of such subdivision or land development or otherwise, or erects
any building thereon, unless and until a final plat has been prepared in
full compliance with the provisions of this chapter and of the regulations
adopted hereunder, and has been recorded as provided herein, shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, such person, or the
members of such partnership, or the officers of such corporation, or the
agent of any of them, responsible for such violation pay a fine not exceeding
$1,000 per lot or parcel or per dwelling within each lot or parcel. All fines
collected for such violations shall be paid over to the municipality whose
ordinance has been violated. The description by metes and bounds in the
instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of selling or
transferring shall not exempt the seller or transferor from such penalties or
from the remedies herein provided.
§ 148-46 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 148-47
148:305
Chapter 151
TAXATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Accounts and Finance — See
Ch. 3, Art. I.
City Treasurer — See Ch. 28, Art. VI.
Food-handling establishments — See Ch. 94.
Licensed occupations — See Ch. 106.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 124.
Special sales — See Ch. 135.
§ 148-47 SUNBURY CODE § 148-47
148:306
ARTICLE I
Mercantile License Tax
[Adopted 3-27-1958 by Ord. No. 621]
§ 151-1. Short title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Mercantile License Tax
Ordinance of 1958."
§ 151-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CITY — The City of Sunbury.
GROSS VOLUME OF BUSINESS — Includes both cash and credit
transactions.
LICENSE YEAR — The twelve-month period beginning the first day of May
in each and every year.
PERSON — Any individual partnership, limited partnership, association or
corporation; not including nonprofit corporations or associations organized
for religious, charitable or educational purposes, agencies of the
government of the United States or of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
any person vending or disposing of articles of his own manufacture for
shipment or delivery from the place of manufacture thereof or any farmer
vending or disposing of his own produce.
RETAIL DEALER or RETAIL VENDOR — Any person who is principally
a dealer in, or vendor of, goods, wares and merchandise, who is not a
wholesale dealer or vendor; not including nonprofit corporations or
associations organized for religious, charitable or educational purposes,
agencies of the government of the United States or of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania, any person vending or disposing of articles of his own
manufacture for shipment or delivery from the place of manufacture thereof
or any farmer vending or disposing of his own produce.
TEMPORARY, SEASONAL OR ITINERANT BUSINESS — Any business that
is conducted at one location for less than 60 consecutive calendar days.
WHOLESALE DEALER or WHOLESALE VENDOR — Any person who
principally sells to others who are dealers in, or vendors of, goods, wares
and merchandise and to no other persons; not including nonprofit
corporations or associations organized for religious, charitable or
educational purposes, agencies of the government of the United States or
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, any person vending or disposing of
articles of his own manufacture for shipment or delivery from the place of
manufacture thereof or any farmer vending or disposing of his own produce.
§ 151-1 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 151-3
148:307
§ 151-3. Issuance of licenses; imposition of tax.
For the license year beginning May 1, 1958, and for each license year
thereafter, the City shall issue mercantile licenses and hereby imposes an
annual mercantile license tax in the manner and at the fees and rates
hereinafter set forth.
§ 151-4. License required; application; posting; replacement fee.
[Amended 6-9-1975 by Ord. No. 908]
Beginning May 1, 1958, and for each license year thereafter, every person
desiring to continue to engage in, or hereafter to begin to engage in,
the business of wholesale or retail vendor or dealer in goods, wares and
merchandise in the City, whether or not an actual place of business is
maintained therein, and every person conducting a restaurant, hotel, public
inn or any other place of whatsoever nature or description where food,
drink, or refreshments are sold in the City, shall, on or before the first day
of May of each license year, or prior to commencing business in any such
license year, apply for and procure a mercantile license for his place of
business, or if more than one, for each of his places of business, in the
City, from City Treasurer, who shall issue the same for each of his places
of business in the City for each license year. Each application for a license
shall be signed by the applicant, if a natural person, and in the case of an
association or partnership, by a member or partner thereof, and in the case
of a corporation, by an officer thereof. Such licenses shall not be assignable
and shall be conspicuously posted at the place of business or each of the
places of business of every such person at all times. In the case of loss,
defacement or destruction of any license, the person to whom the license
was issued shall apply to the City Treasurer for a new license, for which a
fee of $0.50 shall be charged.
§ 151-5. Payment of tax; rate. [Amended 1-11-1971 by Ord. No. 853]
Every person engaging in any of the following occupations or businesses
in the City shall pay an annual mercantile license tax for the license year
beginning May 1, 1958, and for each license year thereafter at the rate
hereinafter set forth; provided, however, that in no event shall the annual
mercantile license tax herein imposed be less than $10 for each of the
places of business within the City of every such person; and provided,
further, that if any such person has no place of business within the City, then
and in that event the annual mercantile license tax herein imposed shall not
be less than $10 for every such person.
A. Wholesale vendors or dealers in goods, wares and merchandise, at the
rate of 1/2 mill $0.0005 on each $1 of the annual gross volume of
business transacted by him.
B. Retail vendors or dealers in goods, wares and merchandise, at the rate
of one mill $0.001 on each $1 of the annual gross volume of business
transacted by him.
§ 151-3 SUNBURY CODE § 151-5
148:308
§ 151-6. Computation of volume of business.
§ 151-7. Filing of return. [Amended 6-9-1975 by Ord. No. 908]
C. No one person shall pay a tax in a dual capacity as a wholesaler and
retailer, but shall pay in one capacity as established in accordance with
the finding of the City Treasurer. [Amended 6-9-1975 by Ord. No.
908]
A. Every person subject to the payment of the tax hereby imposed, who
has commenced his business at least one full year prior to the beginning
of any license year, shall compute his annual gross volume of business
upon the actual gross amount of business transacted by him during the
preceding calendar year.
B. Every person subject to the payment of the tax hereby imposed, who
has commenced or who commences his business less than one full year
prior to the beginning of any license year, shall compute his annual
gross volume of business for such license year upon the gross volume of
business transacted by him during the first month he engages in
business multiplied by 12.
C. Every person subject to the payment of the tax hereby imposed, who
commences his business subsequent to the beginning of any license
year, shall compute his annual gross volume of business for such license
year upon the gross volume of business transacted by him during the
first month of his engaging in business, multiplied by the number of
months he engages in business in such license year.
D. Every person subject to the payment of the tax hereby imposed, who
engages in a business temporary, seasonal or itinerant by its nature,
shall compute his annual gross volume of business upon the actual
gross amount of business transacted by him during such license year.
A. Every return as hereinafter required by this section shall be made upon
a form furnished and delivered by the City Treasurer and returned to
the City Treasurer on or before April 15 of each calendar year, and the
City Treasurer shall in turn possess said returns, determine the amount
of tax due, file the returns and bill each person subject to tax. Every
person making such return shall certify the correctness thereof by
affidavit. [Amended 2-14-1977 by Ord. No. 966]
B. Every person subject to the tax imposed by this article who has
commenced his business at least one full year prior to the beginning of
any license year shall, on or before the 15th day of June following, file
with the City Treasurer a return setting forth his name, his business
and business address and such other information as may be necessary
in arriving at the actual gross amount of business transacted by him
during the preceding license year and the amount of the tax due.
§ 151-5 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 151-7
148:309
§ 151-8. Tax to be paid upon receipt of bill.
After filing the return, the person making the same shall, upon receipt of a
bill from the City Treasurer, pay the amount of tax shown as due thereon to
the City Treasurer.
§ 151-9. Powers and duties of City Treasurer.
C. Every person subject to the tax imposed by this article who has
commenced his business less than one full year prior to the beginning
of any license year shall, on or before the 15th day of June following, file
with the City Treasurer a return setting forth his name, his business
and business address and such other information as may be necessary
in arriving at the actual gross amount of business transacted by him
during his first month of business and the amount of tax due.
D. Every person subject to the tax imposed by this article who commences
business subsequent to the beginning of any license year shall, within
40 days from the date of commencing such business, file a return with
the City Treasurer setting forth his name, his business and business
address and such information as may be necessary in arriving at the
actual gross amount of business transacted by him during his first
month of business and the amount of tax due.
E. Every person subject to the payment of the tax imposed by this article
who engages in a business temporary, seasonal or itinerant by its
nature shall, within seven days from the day he completes such
business, file a return with the City Treasurer setting forth his name,
his business and business address and such information as may be
necessary in arriving at the actual gross amount of business transacted
by him during such period and the amount of the tax due.
A. It shall be the duty of the City Treasurer to collect and receive the fees,
taxes, fines and penalties imposed by this article. It shall also be his
duty to keep a record showing the amount received by him from each
person paying the tax and the date of such receipt.
B. If the City Treasurer is not satisfied with the return and payment of tax
made by any taxpayer or supposed taxpayer under the provisions of this
article, he is hereby authorized and empowered to make a
determination of the tax due by such person, based upon the facts
contained in the return or upon any information within his possession
or that shall come into his possession, and for this purpose the City
Treasurer is authorized to examine the books, papers and records of
any such person to verify the accuracy of any return or payment made
under the provisions thereof or to ascertain whether the taxes imposed
by this article have been paid. The City Treasurer is hereby authorized
and directed to make and keep such records, prepare such forms, make
such regulations and take such other measures as may be necessary or
convenient to carry this article into effect, and may, in his discretion,
require reasonable deposits to be made by licensees who engage in a
§ 151-7 SUNBURY CODE § 151-9
148:310
§ 151-10. Recovery of unpaid taxes; penalty and interest.
§ 151-11. Disposition of moneys collected.
All taxes, interest and penalties collected or received under the provisions
of this article shall be paid into the treasury of the City for the use and
benefit of the City.
§ 151-12. Construction of provisions.
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to empower the City to
levy and collect the taxes hereby imposed on any person or any business, or
any portion of any business, not within the taxing power of the City under
the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution and laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 151-13. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-11-1974 by Ord. No.
898; 2-14-1977 by Ord. No. 966]
Any person, as defined in this article, or any officer, agent, servant or
employee thereof, who shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any of the
terms or provisions of this article, or of any regulation or requirement made
pursuant thereto and authorized thereby, shall, upon conviction thereof
before a District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $100
nor more than $300 and cost of prosecution for each offense, and in default
of payment of said fine and costs shall be imprisoned for a period not
exceeding 30 days. The fine imposed by this section shall be in addition to
any other penalty imposed by any other section of this article, as well as any
civil liability.
business temporary, seasonal or itinerant by its nature. [Amended
6-9-1975 by Ord. No. 908]
C. If any taxpayer or supposed taxpayer shall neglect or refuse to make
any return and payment of tax required by this article, or if, as a result
of an investigation by the City Treasurer, a return is found to be
incorrect, the City Treasurer shall estimate the tax due by such person
and determine the amount due by him for taxes, penalties and interest
thereon. [Amended 6-9-1975 by Ord. No. 908]
A. All taxes due and unpaid under this article shall be recoverable by the
City Solicitor as other debts due the City are now by law recoverable.
B. All taxes due under this article shall bear interest at the rate of 1/2 of
1% per month, or fractional part of a month, from the day they are due
and payable until paid. If any taxpayer shall neglect or refuse to make
any return or payment as herein required, an additional 5% of the
amount of tax shall be added by the City Treasurer and collected.
[Amended 6-9-1975 by Ord. No. 908]
§ 151-9 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 151-13
148:311

ARTICLE II
Earned Income Tax
[Adopted During Codification 2-14-1977 by Ord. No. 937 (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II)]
§ 151-14. Definitions and word usage.
A. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ASSOCIATION — A partnership or limited partnership or any other
unincorporated group of two or more persons.
BUSINESS — An enterprise, activity, profession or any other
undertaking of an unincorporated nature conducted for profit or
ordinarily conducted for profit, whether by a person, partnership,
association or any other entity.
CORPORATION — A corporation or joint stock association organized
under the laws of the United States, the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or any other state, territory, foreign country or
dependency.
CURRENT YEAR — The calendar year for which the tax is levied.
DOMICILE — The place where one lives and has his permanent home
and to which he has the intention of returning whenever he is absent.
Actual residence is not necessarily domicile, for domicile is the fixed
place of abode which, in the intention of the taxpayer, is permanent
rather than transitory. Domicile is the place in which a man has
voluntarily fixed the habitation of himself and his family, not for a mere
special or limited purpose, but with the present intention of making a
permanent home until some event occurs to induce him to adopt some
other permanent home. In the case of businesses or associations, the
domicile is that place considered as the center of business affairs and
the place where its functions are discharged.
EARNED INCOME — Salaries, wages, commissions, bonuses, incentive
payments, fees, tips and other compensation received by a person or
his personal representative for services rendered, whether directly or
through an agent, and whether in cash or in property, not including,
however, wages or compensation paid to persons on active military
service; periodic payments for sickness and disability other than
regular wages received during a period of sickness, disability or
retirement; payments arising under workmen's compensation acts,
occupational disease acts and similar legislation; payments commonly
recognized as old-age benefits, retirement pay or pensions paid to
persons retired from service after reaching a specific age or after a
stated period of employment; payments commonly known as public
assistance; unemployment compensation payments made by any
governmental agency; payments to reimburse expenses; or payments
made by employers or labor unions for wage and salary supplemental
programs, including, but not limited to, programs covering
§ 151-14 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 151-14
148:313
§ 151-15. Imposition and rate of tax.
hospitalization, sickness, disability or death, supplemental
unemployment benefits, strike benefits, social security and retirement.
EARNED INCOME TAX COLLECTOR or TAX COLLECTOR — The
person, public employee or private agency designated by the City of
Sunbury to collect and administer the tax on earned income and net
profits.
EMPLOYER — A person, partnership, association, corporation,
institution, governmental body or unit or agency, or any other entity,
employing one or more persons for salary, wage, commission or other
compensation.
NET PROFITS — The net income from the operation of the business,
profession or other activity, except corporations, after provision for all
costs and expenses incurred in the conduct thereof, determined either
on a cash or accrual basis, in accordance with the accounting system
used in such business, profession or other activity, without deduction of
taxes based on income.
NONRESIDENT — A person, partnership, association or other entity
domiciled outside of the City of Sunbury.
PERSON or INDIVIDUAL — A natural person.
PRECEDING YEAR — The calendar year before this current year.
RESIDENT — A person, partnership, association or other entity
domiciled in the City of Sunbury.
SUCCEEDING YEAR — The calendar year following the current year.
TAXPAYER — A person, partnership, association or other entity
required hereunder to file a return of earned income or net profits or to
pay a tax thereon.
B. In this article, the singular shall include the plural and the masculine
shall include the feminine and neuter.
A. A tax for general purposes is imposed, in the amount of:
(1) One-half of one percent of all earned income earned on and after
January 1, 1976, by residents and nonresidents of the City of
Sunbury.78
(2) One-half of one percent of the net profits earned on and after
January 1, 1976, of businesses, professions and other activities
conducted by residents and nonresidents of the City of Sunbury.
B. The tax levied under this article shall continue in force on a calendaryear
basis or taxpayer-fiscal-year basis without annual reenactment,
78.Editor's Note: The Shikellamy Area School District also imposes a tax of 1/2 of 1% under
authority of Section 8 of the Local Tax Enabling Act (53 P.S. § 6908).
§ 151-14 SUNBURY CODE § 151-15
148:314
§ 151-16. Declaration and payment of tax.
unless the rate of the tax is subsequently changed by the City of
Sunbury by ordinance. Changes in rate shall become effective on the
date specified in the ordinance. The tax levied under this article shall
be applicable to earned income received and to net profits earned by
residents and nonresidents for the period beginning January 1 and
ending December 31 of the then-current year, or for taxpayer fiscal
years beginning in the then-current year.
A. Tax on net profits.
(1) Every taxpayer who makes any net profits shall, on or before April
15 of the then-current year, make and file with the Tax Collector a
declaration of his estimated net profits during the period beginning
January 1 and ending December 31 of the then-current year. The
taxpayer shall pay to the Tax Collector the total amount of tax
determined to be due under the estimate as follows:
(a) First payment on or before April 15 of the then-current year
with declaration.
(b) Second payment on or before June 15 of the then-current year.
(c) Third payment on or before September 15 of the then-current
year.
(d) Final payment on or before January 15 of the succeeding year.
(2) Any taxpayer who anticipates net profits after April 15 of the thencurrent
year shall make and file a declaration on or before June 15,
September 15 or December 31 of the then-current year, whichever
of these dates next follows the date on which the taxpayer first
anticipates such net profits. The taxpayer shall pay to the Tax
Collector, in equal installments, the amount of tax due thereon, on
or before the quarterly payment dates which remain after the filing
of his first declaration.
(3) On or before April 15 of each succeeding year, every taxpayer shall
file with the Tax Collector a final income tax return showing the
amount of the net profits earned during the period beginning
January 1 of the current year and ending December 31 of the
current year, the total amount of tax due thereon and the total
amount of tax theretofore paid. At the time of filing a final return,
the taxpayer shall pay to the Tax Collector the balance of the tax
due or shall make demand for a refund or credit in the case of any
overpayment. Any taxpayer may, in lieu of paying the fourth
quarterly installment of his estimated tax, elect to make and file
with the Tax Collector his final return on or before January 31 of the
succeeding year and to pay the tax in full at that time.
§ 151-15 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 151-16
148:315
§ 151-17. Collection at source.
(4) The City of Sunbury shall provide by regulation for the making and
filing of adjusted declarations of estimated net profits for the
payments of the estimated tax in cases where a taxpayer who has
filed the declaration hereinabove required anticipates additional
net profits not previously declared or finds that he has
overestimated his anticipated net profits.
(5) Every taxpayer who discontinues business prior to December 31 of
the then-current year shall, within 30 days after the discontinuance
of the business, file his final return as hereinabove required and
pay the tax due or make demand for the refund or credit in the case
of an overpayment.
B. Tax on earned income.
(1) Annual earned income tax return. Every taxpayer shall, on or
before April 15 of the succeeding year, make and file with the Tax
Collector, on a form prescribed, prepared and supplied by the Tax
Collector, a final return showing the total amount of earned income
received during the period beginning January 1 and ending
December 31 of the current year, the amount of the tax paid
thereon, the amount of the tax thereon that has been withheld and
the balance of the tax due. At the time of the filing of the final
return, the taxpayer shall pay the balance of the tax due or may
make a demand for refund or credit in the case of an overpayment.
(2) Every taxpayer who is employed for salary, wage, commission or
other compensation who received any earned income not subject to
the provisions relating to collection at the source shall make and
file with the Tax Collector, on a form prepared, supplied and
prescribed by the Tax Collector, a quarterly return, on or before
April 30 of the current year, July 31 of the current year, October 31
of the current year and January 31 of the succeeding year, setting
forth the aggregate amount of earned income not subject to
withholding by him during the three-month periods ending March
31 of the current year, June 30 of the current year, September 30 of
the current year and December 31 of the current year, respectively,
and subject to the tax, together with such other information as the
Tax Collector shall require. Every taxpayer who makes such a
return shall, at the time of the filing of the return with the Tax
Collector, pay to the Tax Collector the amount of the tax shown as
due thereon.
A. Every employer having an office, factory, workshop, branch, warehouse
or other place of business within the City of Sunbury, who employs one
or more persons other than domestic servants for salary, wage,
commission or other compensation, who has not previously registered,
shall, within 15 days after becoming an employer, register with the Tax
§ 151-16 SUNBURY CODE § 151-17
148:316
Collector his name and address and such other information as the
officer may require.
B. Every employer having an office, factory, workshop, branch, warehouse
or other place of business within the City of Sunbury, who employs one
or more persons other than domestic servants for salary, wage,
commission or other compensation, shall deduct, at the time of payment
thereof, the tax imposed by this article on the earned income due to his
employee or employees and shall, on or before April 30 of the current
year, July 31 of the current year, October 31 of the current year and
January 31 of the succeeding year, file a return and pay to the Tax
Collector the amount of taxes deducted during the preceding threemonth
periods ending March 31 of the current year, June 30 of the
current year, September 30 of the current year and December 31 of the
current year, respectively. Such return, unless otherwise agreed upon
between the Tax Collector and employer, shall show the name and
social security number, or identification number supplied by the Tax
Collector, of each such employee; the earned income of such employee
during such preceding three-month period; the tax deducted therefrom;
the political subdivisions imposing the tax; the total earned income of
all such employees during such preceding three-month period; and the
total tax deducted therefrom and paid with the return.
C. Monthly reporting. Any employer who for two of the preceding four
quarterly periods has failed to deduct the proper tax, or any part
thereof, or has failed to pay over the proper amount of tax to the City of
Sunbury, may be required by the Tax Collector to file his return and pay
the tax monthly. In such cases, payments of tax shall be made to the Tax
Collector on or before the last day of the month succeeding the month
for which the tax was withheld.
D. On or before February 28 of the succeeding year, every employer shall
file with the Tax Collector:
(1) An annual return showing the total amount of earned income paid,
the total amount of tax deducted and the total amount of tax paid to
the Tax Collector for the period beginning January 1 of the current
year and ending December 31 of the current year.
(2) A return withholding statement for each employee employed
during all or any part of the period beginning January 1 of the
current year and ending December 31 of the current year, setting
forth the employee's name, address, social security number or
identification number supplied by the Tax Collector, the amount of
earned income paid to the employee during said period, the amount
of tax deducted, the political subdivisions imposing the tax upon
such employee and the amount of tax paid to the Tax Collector.
Every employer shall furnish two copies of the individual return to
the employee for whom it is filed.
§ 151-17 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 151-17
148:317
§ 151-18. Powers and duties of Tax Collector.
E. Termination of business. Every employer who discontinues business for
any reason prior to December 31 of the current year shall, within 30
days after the discontinuance of business, file the returns and
withholding statements hereinabove required and pay the tax due.
F. Except as otherwise provided in the Local Tax Enabling Act,79 every
employer who willfully or negligently fails or omits to make the
deductions required by this section shall be liable for the payments of
the taxes which he was required to withhold to the extent that such
taxes have not been recovered from the employee.
G. The failure or omission of any employer to make the deductions
required by this section shall not relieve any employee from the
payment of the tax or from complying with the requirements of this
article to the filing of declarations and returns.
A. The Tax Collector shall be bonded according to the provisions of the
Local Tax Enabling Act80 in an amount as the City Council may
determine. Before entering upon his official duties, the Tax Collector
shall give his bond to the City Clerk. Said bond shall be subject to the
approval of the City Solicitor.
B. The Tax Collector shall collect and receive the taxes, fines and penalties
imposed by this article and shall keep a record showing the amount
received by him from each taxpayer under this article, together with the
date of the receipt of such payment.
C. The Tax Collector is hereby empowered to prescribe rules and
regulations relating to any matter or thing pertaining to the
administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article.
However, no rule or regulation shall be enforced unless it has been
approved by the City of Sunbury. A copy of such rules and regulations
currently in force shall be available for public inspection.
D. The Tax Collector and agents designated by him are authorized to
examine any of the books, papers and records of any employer or
taxpayer or person whom the Tax Collector reasonably believes to be an
employer or taxpayer, in order to verify the accuracy of any return or
declaration made or, if no return or declaration is made, to ascertain the
amount of the tax due by any person under this article. Every such
employer or taxpayer or person whom the Tax Collector reasonably
believes to be an employer or taxpayer shall give to the Tax Collector or
such other authorized person the means, facilities and opportunities for
such examination and investigations hereby authorized.
79.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.
80.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.
§ 151-17 SUNBURY CODE § 151-18
148:318
§ 151-19. Suit for collection of tax.
E. The Tax Collector is authorized to examine any person under oath
concerning any income which was, or should have been, returned for
taxation, and shall have the power and is hereby authorized to issue
subpoenas to compel the attendance of persons whom he deems
necessary to examine as witnesses and to compel the production of
books, records and papers relating to any account being examined.
F. The Tax Collector shall have the power to reexamine returns, correct
erroneous returns, consent to make refunds and authorize the
refunding of taxes erroneously or improperly collected from, or paid by,
the taxpayers for any period of time not to exceed six years subsequent
to the date of payment of the sum involved.
G. Any information gained by the Tax Collector or any other official or
agent of the City of Sunbury as a result of any declaration, return,
investigation, hearing or examination required or authorized by this
article shall be confidential, except for official purposes or except in
accordance with proper judicial order or as otherwise provided by law.
Any disclosure of any such information contrary to the provisions of this
section shall constitute a violation of this article.
H. Any person who, except as permitted by the provisions of this article,
divulges any information which is confidential under the provisions of
this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of
not more than $500 for each offense and costs, and in default thereof to
be imprisoned for a period not exceeding 30 days.
A. The Tax Collector may sue in the name of the City of Sunbury for the
recovery of taxes due and unpaid under this article.
B. Any suit brought to recover the tax imposed by this article shall be
begun within three years after such tax is due or within three years
after the declaration or return has been filed, whichever date is later;
provided, however, that this limitation shall not prevent the institution
of a suit for the collection of any tax due or determined to be due in the
following cases:
(1) Where no declaration or return was filed by any person although a
declaration or return was required to be filed by him under
provisions of the article, there shall be no limitation.
(2) Where an examination of the declaration or return filed by any
person or of other evidence relating to such declaration or return in
the possession of the Tax Collector reveals a fraudulent evasion of
taxes, there shall be no limitation.
(3) In the case of substantial understatement of tax liability, 25% or
more, and no fraud, suit shall be begun within six years.
§ 151-18 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 151-19
148:319
§ 151-20. Interest and penalties on unpaid taxes.
If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6%
per annum on the amount of said tax and an additional penalty of 1/2 of 1%
of the amount of the unpaid tax for each month or fraction thereof during
which the tax remains unpaid shall be added and collected. Where suit is
brought for the recovery of any such tax, the person liable therefor shall, in
addition, be liable for legal costs of collection and for interest and penalties
herein imposed.
§ 151-21. Violations and penalties.
(4) Where any person has deducted taxes under the provisions of this
article and has failed to pay the amount so deducted to the Tax
Collector, or where any person has willfully failed or omitted to
make the deductions required by this article, there shall be no
limitation.
(5) This article shall not be construed to limit the City Council from
recovering the delinquent taxes by any other means provided in the
Local Tax Enabling Act.81
C. The Tax Collector may sue for recovery of an erroneous refund,
provided that such suit is begun two years after making such refund,
except that the suit may be brought within five years if it appears that
any part of the refund was induced by fraud or misrepresentation of
material fact.
A. Any person who fails, neglects or refuses to make any declaration or
return required by this article or any employer who fails, neglects or
refuses to register or to pay the taxes deducted from his employees, or
fails, neglects or refuses to deduct withholding taxes from his
employees; or any person who refuses to permit the Tax Collector or
any agent designated by him to examine his books, records and papers;
or any person who knowingly makes any incomplete, false or fraudulent
return, or does anything whatsoever to avoid the full disclosure of the
amount of his net profits or earned income in order to avoid the
payment of the whole or any part of the tax imposed by this article,
shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $500 for each offense and costs and, in default of payment of such
fine and costs, to be imprisoned for a period not exceeding 30 days.
B. The penalties imposed under this section shall be in addition to any
other penalty imposed by any other section of this article.
C. The failure of any person to receive or procure forms required for
making the declaration or returns required by this article shall not
excuse him from making such declaration or return.
81.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.
§ 151-19 SUNBURY CODE § 151-22
148:320
§ 151-22. Construction of provisions.
This article shall not apply to personal property or persons on whom or
which it is beyond the legal power of the City of Sunbury to impose the tax
herein provided or to the net profits of any institution, organization, trust,
association or foundation, operated for public, religious, educational or
charitable purposes, provided that this section shall not operate to relieve
or exempt any such entity from collection at the source of the earned
income of its employees and remittance of such collections to the Tax
Collector.
§ 151-22 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 151-22
148:321

ARTICLE III
Local Services Tax
[Adopted 2-23-1970 by Ord. No. 835; amended in its entirety
11-26-2007 by Ord. No. 1256]
§ 151-23. Definitions and word usage.
A. The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
or language clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
COLLECTOR — The person, public employee or private agency
designated by the political subdivision to collect and administer the tax
herein imposed.
DCED — The Department of Community and Economic Development of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
EARNED INCOME — Compensation, as this term is defined in Section
13 (relating to earned income taxes) of the Local Tax Enabling Act, the
Act of December 31, 1965, P.L. 1257, § 13, as amended, 53 P.S. § 6913,
as amended.
EMPLOYER — An individual, partnership, association, limited liability
corporation, limited liability partnership, corporation, governmental
body, agency or other entity employing one or more persons on a
salary, wage, commission or other compensation basis, including a selfemployed
person.
INDIVIDUAL — Any person, male or female, engaged in any occupation,
trade or profession within the corporate limits of the political
subdivision.
NET PROFITS — The net income from the operation of a business,
profession, or other activity, as this term is defined in Section 13
(relating to earned income taxes) of the Local Tax Enabling Act, the Act
of December 31, 1965, P.L. 1251, § 13, as amended, 53 P.S. § 6913, as
amended.
OCCUPATION — Any trade, profession, business or undertaking of any
type, kind or character, including services, domestic or other, earned
on or performed within the corporate limits of the political subdivision
for which compensation is charged or received, whether by means of
salary, wages, commission or fees for services rendered.
POLITICAL SUBDIVISION — The area within the corporate limits of the
City of Sunbury.
TAX — The local services tax at the rate fixed in § 151-24 of this article.
TAX YEAR — The period from January 1 until December 31 in any year;
a calendar year.
B. "He," "his" or "him" indicates the singular and plural number, as well as
male, female and neuter genders.
§ 151-23 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 151-24
148:323
§ 151-24. Levy of tax.
For specific revenue purposes, an annual tax is hereby levied and assessed,
commencing January 1, 2008, upon the privilege of engaging in an
occupation with a primary place of employment within the City of Sunbury
during the tax year. Each natural person who exercises such privilege for
any length of time during any tax year shall pay the tax for that year in
the amount of $52, assessed on a pro rata basis, in accordance with the
provisions of this article. This tax may be used solely for the following
purposes as the same may be allocated by the City of Sunbury from time to
time: emergency services, which shall include emergency medical services,
police services and/or fire services; road construction and/or maintenance;
reduction of property taxes; or property tax relief through implementation
of a homestead and farmstead exclusion in accordance with 53 Pa.C.S.A.
Ch. 85, Subch. F (relating to homestead property exclusion). The political
subdivision shall use no less than 25% of the funds derived from the tax
for emergency services. This tax is in addition to all other taxes of any kind
or nature heretofore levied by the political subdivision. The tax shall be no
more than $52 on each person for each calendar year, irrespective of the
number of political subdivisions within which a person maybe employed.
§ 151-25. Exemptions; refunds.
A. Exemption. Any person whose total earned income and net profits from
all sources within the political subdivision is less than $12,000 for any
calendar year in which the tax is levied is exempt from the payment of
the tax for that calendar year. In addition, the following persons are
exempt from payment of the tax:
(1) Any person who has served in any war or armed conflict in which
the United States was engaged and is honorably discharged or
released under honorable circumstances from active service if, as a
result of military service, the person is blind, paraplegic or a double
or quadruple amputee or has a service-connected disability
declared by the United States Veterans' Administration or its
successor to be a total one-hundred-percent disability.
(2) Any person who serves as a member of a reserve component of the
armed forces and is called to active duty at any time during the
taxable year. For the purposes of this subsection, "reserve
component of the armed forces" shall mean the United States Army
Reserve, United States Navy Reserve, United States Marine Corps
Reserve, United States Coast Guard Reserve, United States Air
Force Reserve, the Pennsylvania Army National Guard or the
Pennsylvania Air National Guard.
B. Procedure to claim exemption.
(1) A person seeking to claim an exemption from the local services tax
may annually file an exemption certificate with the political
subdivision and with the person's employer affirming that the
§ 151-24 SUNBURY CODE § 151-25
148:324
person reasonably expects to receive earned income and net profits
from all sources within the political subdivision of less than
$12,000 in the calendar year for which the exemption certificate is
filed. In the event the political subdivision utilizes a tax collection
officer, it shall provide a copy of the exemption certificate to that
officer. The exemption certificate shall have attached to it a copy
of all the employee's last pay stubs or W-2 forms from employment
within the political subdivision for the year prior to the fiscal year
for which the employee is requesting to be exempted from the
tax. Upon receipt of the exemption certificate and until otherwise
instructed by the political subdivision or except as required by
Subsection B(2), the employer shall not withhold the tax from the
person during the calendar year or the remainder of the calendar
year for which the exemption certificate applies. Employers shall
ensure that the exemption certificate forms are readily available to
employees at all times and shall furnish each new employee with a
form at the time of hiring. The exemption certificate form shall be
the uniform form provided by the political subdivision.
(2) With respect to a person who claimed an exemption for a given
calendar year from the tax, upon notification to an employer by the
person or by the political subdivision that the person has received
earned income and net profits from all sources within the political
subdivision equal to or in excess of $12,000 in that calendar year or
that the person is otherwise ineligible for the tax exemption for that
calendar year, or upon an employer's payment to the person of
earned income within the municipality in an amount equal to or in
excess of $12,000 in that calendar year, an employer shall withhold
the local services tax from the person under Subsection B(3).
(3) If a person who claimed an exemption for a given calendar year
from the tax becomes subject to the tax for the calendar year under
Subsection B(2), the employer shall withhold the tax for the
remainder of that calendar year. The employer shall withhold from
the person, for the first payroll period after receipt of the
notification under Subsection B(2), a lump sum equal to the amount
of tax that was not withheld from the person due to the exemption
claimed by the person under this subsection, plus the per payroll
amount due for that first payroll period. The amount of tax withheld
per payroll period for the remaining payroll periods in that
calendar year shall be the same amount withheld for other
employees. In the event the employment of a person subject to
withholding of the tax under this subsection is subsequently
severed in that calendar year, the person shall be liable for any
outstanding balance of tax due, and the political subdivision may
pursue collection under this article.
(4) Except as provided in Subsection B(2), it is the intent of this
subsection that employers shall not be responsible for investigating
§ 151-25 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 151-25
148:325
§ 151-26. Duty of employers to collect.
exemption certificates, monitoring tax exemption eligibility or
exempting any employee from the local services tax.
C. Refunds. The City of Sunbury, in consultation with the Collector and
DCED, shall establish procedures for the processing of refund claims
for any tax paid by any person who is eligible for exemption, which
procedures shall be in accord with provisions of the general municipal
law relating to refunds of overpayments and interest on overpayments.
Refunds made within 75 days of a refund request or 75 days after the
last day the employer is required to remit the tax for the last quarter of
the calendar year, whichever is later, shall not be subject to interest. No
refunds shall be made for amounts overpaid in a calendar year that do
not exceed $1. The City of Sunbury or the Collector shall determine
eligibility for exemption and provide refunds to exempt persons.
A. Each employer within the political subdivision, as well as those
employers situated outside the political subdivision but who engage in
business within the political subdivision, is hereby charged with the
duty of collecting the tax from each of his employees engaged by him or
performing for him within the political subdivision and making a return
and payment thereof to the Collector. Further, each employer is hereby
authorized to deduct this tax for each employee in his or her employ,
whether said employee is paid by salary, wage or commission and
whether or not all such services are performed within the political
subdivision.
B. A person subject to the tax shall be assessed by the employer a pro rata
share of the tax for each payroll period in which the person is engaging
in an occupation. The pro rata share of the tax assessed on the person
for a payroll period shall be determined by dividing the rate of the tax
levied for the calendar year by the number of payroll periods
established by the employer for the calendar year. For purposes of
determining the pro rata share, an employer shall round down the
amount of the tax collected each payroll period to the nearest 1/100 of a
dollar. Collection of the tax shall be made on a payroll period basis for
each payroll period in which the person is engaging in an occupation,
except as provided in Subsection D of this section. For purposes of this
subsection, "combined rate" shall mean the aggregate annual rate of
the tax levied by the school district and the municipality.
C. No person shall be subject to the payment of the local services tax by
more than one political subdivision during each payroll period.
D. In the case of concurrent employment, an employer shall refrain from
withholding the tax if the employee provides a recent pay statement
from a principal employer that includes the name of the employer, the
length of the payroll period and the amount of the tax withheld and a
statement from the employee that the pay statement is from the
employee's principal employer and the employee will notify other
§ 151-25 SUNBURY CODE § 151-26
148:326
§ 151-27. Duty of employer to prepare and file returns.
Each employer shall prepare and file a return showing a computation of the
tax on forms to be supplied to the employer by the Collector. If an employer
fails to file the return and pay the tax, whether or not the employer makes
collection thereof from the salary, wages or commissions paid by him or her
to an employee, except as provided hereafter in this article, the employer
shall be responsible for the payment of the tax in full as though the tax had
been originally levied against the employer.
§ 151-28. Dates for determining tax liability and payment.
In each tax year, each employer shall use his or her employment records to
determine the number of employees from whom such tax shall be deducted
and paid over to the Collector on or before the 30th day following the end
of each calendar quarter of each such tax year.
§ 151-29. Self-employed individuals.
Each self-employed individual who performs services of any type or kind
or engages in any occupation or profession within a primary place of
employment within the political subdivision shall be required to comply with
this article and pay the pro rata portion of the tax due to the Collector on or
before the 30th day following the end of each quarter.
§ 151-30. Individuals engaged in more than one occupation or
employed in more than one political subdivision.
employers of a change in principal place of employment within two
weeks of its occurrence. The employee's statement shall be provided on
the form approved by DCED.
E. The tax shall be no more than $52 on each person for each calendar
year, irrespective of the number of political subdivisions within which a
person maybe employed. The political subdivision shall provide a
taxpayer a receipt of payment upon request by the taxpayer.
F. No employer shall be held liable for failure to withhold the tax or for the
payment of the withheld tax money to the political subdivision if the
failure to withhold taxes arises from incorrect information submitted by
the employee as to the employee's place or places of employment, the
employee's principal office or where the employee is principally
employed. Further, an employer shall not be liable for payment of the
local services tax in an amount exceeding the amount withheld by the
employer if the employer complies with the provisions of § 151-25B of
this article and this section and remits the amount so withheld in
accordance with this article.
G. Employers shall be required to remit the local services taxes 30 days
after the end of each quarter of a calendar year.
§ 151-26 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 151-30
148:327
§ 151-31. Nonresidents subject to tax.
All employers and self-employed individuals residing or having their places
of business outside of the political subdivision but who perform services
of any type or kind or engage in any occupation or profession within the
political subdivision do, by virtue thereof, agree to be bound by and subject
themselves to the provisions, penalties and regulations promulgated under
this article with the same force and effect as though they were residents of
the political subdivision. Further, any individual engaged in an occupation
within the political subdivision and an employee of a nonresidential
employer may, for the purpose of this article, be considered a self-employed
person and, in the event his or her tax is not paid, the political subdivision
shall have the option of proceeding against either the employer or employee
for the collection of this tax as hereinafter provided.
§ 151-32. Administration of tax.
A. The status of the tax shall be the place of employment on the first day
the person becomes subject to the tax during each payroll period. In the
event a person is engaged in more than one occupation, that is,
concurrent employment, or an occupation which requires the person
working in more than one political subdivision during a payroll period,
the priority of claim to collect the local services tax shall be in the
following order:
(1) First, the political subdivision in which a person maintains his or
her principal office or is principally employed.
(2) Second, the political subdivision in which the person resides and
works if the tax is levied by that political subdivision.
(3) Third, the political subdivision in which a person is employed and
which imposes the tax nearest in miles to the person's home.
B. In case of dispute, a tax receipt of the taxing authority for that calendar
year declaring that the taxpayer has made prior payment constitutes
prima facie certification of payment to all other political subdivisions.
A. The Collector shall be appointed by resolution of the political
subdivision. It shall be the duty of the Collector to accept and receive
payments of this tax and to keep a record thereof showing the amount
received by him from each employer of self-employed person, together
with the date the tax was received.
B. The Collector is hereby charged with the administration and
enforcement of this article and is hereby charged and empowered,
subject to municipal approval, to prescribe, adopt and promulgate rules
and regulations relating to any matter pertaining to the administration
and enforcement of this article, including provisions for the
examination of payroll records of any employer subject to this article,
the examination and correction of any return made in compliance with
§ 151-30 SUNBURY CODE § 151-32
148:328
§ 151-33. Suits for collection.
§ 151-34. Violations and penalties.
Whoever makes any false or untrue statement on any return required by
this article, or whoever refuses inspection of the books, records or accounts
in his or her custody and control setting forth the number of employees
subject to this tax who are in his or her employment, or whoever fails or
refuses to file any return required by this article shall be guilty of a violation
and, upon conviction thereof, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $600 and costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such
fine and costs, to imprisonment for not more than 30 days. The action to
enforce the penalty herein prescribed may be instituted against any person
in charge of the business of any employer who shall have failed or who
refuses to file a return required by this article.
§ 151-34.1. Interpretation of provisions.
this article and any payment alleged or found to be incorrect or as to
which overpayment is claimed or found to have occurred. Any person
aggrieved by any decision of the Collector shall have the right to appeal
consistent with the Local Taxpayers Bill of Rights under Act 50 of 1998.
C. The Collector is hereby authorized to examine the books and payroll
records of any employer in order to verify the accuracy of any return
made by an employer or, if no return was made, to ascertain the tax
due. Each employer is hereby directed and required to give the
Collector the means, facilities and opportunity for such examination.
A. In the event that any tax under this article remains due or unpaid 30
days after the due dates above set forth, the Collector may sue for the
recovery of any such tax due or unpaid under this article, together with
interest and penalty.
B. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6%
on the amount of such tax shall be calculated beginning with the due
date of the tax and a penalty of 5% shall be added to the flat rate of such
tax for nonpayment thereof. Where suit is brought for the recovery of
this tax or other appropriate remedy undertaken, the individual liable
therefor shall, in addition, be responsible and liable for the costs of
collection.
A. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to empower the
political subdivision to levy and collect the tax hereby imposed on any
occupation not within the taxing power of the political subdivision
under the Constitution of the United States and the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. If the tax hereby imposed under the provisions of this article shall be
held by any court of competent jurisdiction to be in violation of the
Constitution of the United States or of the laws of the Commonwealth of
§ 151-32 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 151-34.1
148:329
Pennsylvania as to any individual, the decision of the court shall not
affect or impair the right to impose or collect said tax or the validity of
the tax so imposed on other persons or individuals as herein provided.
§ 151-34.1 SUNBURY CODE § 151-34.1
148:330
ARTICLE IV
Occupation Tax
[Adopted 12-28-1987 by Ord. No. 1092]
§ 151-35. Definitions and word usage.
§ 151-36. Levy of tax.
The City of Sunbury hereby levies and imposes an occupation tax on each
individual residing in the City of Sunbury and engaged in an occupation
during the effective term of this article. This tax is in addition to all other
taxes of any kind or nature heretofore levied by the City of Sunbury and
shall continue from year to year until duly repealed.
§ 151-37. Amount of tax.
Beginning with the effective date of this article, each individual residing in
the City of Sunbury and engaged in an occupation during the effective term
of this article shall pay an occupation tax in the amount of $10 per year, on a
calendar-year basis, to the receiver of taxes. The taxpayer shall pay the face
amount of the tax between May 1 and June 30. A two-percent discount will
be granted if the tax is paid between March 1 and April 30. A ten-percent
penalty will be added if the tax is paid after June 30.
§ 151-38. Construal of provisions.
A. The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
or language clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
CITY OF SUNBURY — The area within the City limits of the City of
Sunbury, Pennsylvania.
INDIVIDUAL — Any person, male or female, residing in the City of
Sunbury.
OCCUPATION — Any trade, profession, business or undertaking of any
type, kind or character, including services, domestic or other, carried on
or performed for which compensation is charged or received, whether
by means of salary, wages, commissions or fees for services rendered.
RECEIVER OF TAXES — The Tax Collector selected by the City of
Sunbury to receive and collect this tax.
TAX — The occupation tax in the amount of $10 per year levied by this
article.
B. "He," "his" or "him" shall mean and indicate the singular and plural
number as well as male and female gender.
A. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to empower the City
of Sunbury to levy and collect the tax hereby imposed on any
occupation not within the taxing power of the City of Sunbury under the
§ 151-35 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 151-38
148:331
§ 151-39. Statutory authorization.
This article and the tax imposed hereby is adopted and enacted under
and by virtue of the authority contained in the Local Tax Enabling Act of
December 31, 1965, P.L. 1257, as amended.82
Constitution of the United States and the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
B. If the tax hereby imposed under the provisions of this article shall be
held by any court of competent jurisdiction to be in violation of the
Constitution of the United States or of the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania as to any individual, the decision of the court shall not
affect or impair the right to impose said tax on other individuals and
collect the same therefrom or the validity of the tax so imposed on other
individuals, as herein provided.
82.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.
§ 151-38 SUNBURY CODE § 151-39
148:332
ARTICLE V
Realty Transfer Tax
[Adopted 12-27-2006]
§ 151-40. Imposition of tax.
The City of Sunbury adopts the provisions of Article XI-D of the Tax Reform
Code of 1971 and imposes a realty transfer tax as authorized under that
article subject to the rate limitations therein. The tax imposed under this
section shall be at the rate of 1%.
§ 151-41. Administration; collection of enforcement.
The tax imposed under § 151-40 and all applicable interest and penalties
shall be administered, collected and enforced under the Act of December
31, 1965 (P.L. 1257, No. 511), as amended, known as the "Local Tax
Enabling Act," provided that if the correct amount of the tax is not paid by
the last date prescribed for timely payment, the City of Sunbury, pursuant
to Section 1102-D of the Tax Reform Code of 1971 (72 P.S. § 8102-D),
authorizes and directs the Department of Revenue of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania, to determine, collect and enforce the tax, interest and
penalties.
§ 151-42. Interest on delinquent taxes.
Any tax imposed under § 151-41 that is not paid by the date the tax is
due shall bear interest as prescribed for interest on delinquent municipal
claims under the Act of May 16, 1923 (P.L. 207, No. 153) (53 P.S. § 7101,
et seq.), as amended, known as the "Municipal Claims and Tax Liens Act."
The interest rate shall be the lesser of the interest rate imposed upon
delinquent, commonwealth taxes as provided in Section 806 of the Act of
April 9, 1929 (P.L. 343, No. 176) (72 P.S. § 806), as amended, known as the
"Fiscal Code," or the maximum interest rate permitted under the Municipal
Claims and Tax Liens Act for tax claims.83
83.Editor's Note: Former Art. VI, Professional Services Tax, adopted 8-11-2008, and which
immediately followed this article, was repealed 12-26-2011.
§ 151-40 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 151-42
148:333
Chapter 157
TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Food-handling establishments — See Ch. 94.
Licensed occupations — See Ch. 106.
Curbstone market — See Ch. 109.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 124.
Special sales — See Ch. 135.
§ 157-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meaning
indicated:
PERSON, OWNER, MERCHANT AND PROPRIETOR — Include individuals,
partnerships, corporations and all other entities or forms of business,
principals and agents.
TRANSIENT RETAIL MERCHANT — Subject to further definition contained
in this definition, any person conducting or proposing to conduct a retail
business in the City of Sunbury who shall not for a period of one year
immediately preceding the commencement of said business have been
either a bona fide resident of and taxpayer in the City of Sunbury or a
corporation or other entity with its principal place of business therein,
or the sole owner of real estate therein of an assessed valuation of not
less than $1,000, including persons conducting (except as auctioneer) sales
at auction, but it shall not include or apply to farmers selling their own
produce; commercial travelers or sales agents selling to dealers in the usual
course of business; persons selling goods donated by the owners thereof,
the proceeds of which are to be applied exclusively to any charitable or
philanthropic purpose; persons conducting judicial or other sales under
legal proceedings; persons selling by sample for future delivery; persons
selling at circuses, street carnivals or other places of amusement duly
licensed and approved by the City; or any manufacturer of producer in the
sale of bread and bakery products, meat and meat products or milk or milk
products; nor shall the term include any merchant who has been doing
business continuously in the City of Sunbury for a period of one year.
§ 157-2. License, payment of fee, surety deposit and disclosure
statement required.
Hereafter no person shall enter into or begin business as a transient retail
merchant and as such sell, offer or exhibit for immediate sale any goods,
wares, services or merchandise whatsoever in any building or part thereof,
railroad car, motor or other vehicle, open lot or other place or structure in
the City of Sunbury unless and until:
§ 151-42 SUNBURY CODE § 157-2
157:334
§ 157-3. Refund of deposit; City not liable for loss thereof.
A. Said person has paid to the City Treasurer a license fee of $500, the
receipt for which shall constitute the license, and which receipt shall be
exhibited to anyone upon request. [Amended 2-28-2005]
B. Said person has deposited with the City Clerk cash securities or other
collateral approved by the City Clerk in the sum or of the clear value of
$500, to secure payment to the City of Sunbury in case any statements
or information in said person's application are untrue or in case said
person has defrauded or made material misrepresentations to this
customers or in case said person has violated any provision of this
chapter.
C. Said person has filed with the City Clerk a statement under oath setting
forth:
(1) The full name and permanent home and business address of the
owner or proprietor of said proposed business or any local
representative in charge thereof.
(2) Whether said owner or proprietor is an individual, partnership,
corporation or other entity.
(3) If said owner or proprietor is a corporation, the state of
incorporation and the principal place of business.
(4) The nature of the business: the kinds of goods, wares and
merchandise to be sold and/or the kinds of services to be
performed, the method of distribution and the location and the type
of building or structure in which the business will be conducted.
(5) The date said business will be commenced and the length of time it
will be conducted.
(6) The full address at which said business is to be conducted.
(7) A notarized statement of character reference from two business
firms, other than those owned or operated by relatives of said
person.
(8) A notarized statement of credit rating from a bank or finance
company.
A. Any transient retail merchant who shall have deposited with the City
cash, securities or other collateral as provided by this chapter shall, if
the statements and information in the application for permit are not
untrue and said merchant has not defrauded or made material
misrepresentations to any of his customers, and has complied with the
provisions of this chapter, have said deposit returned to him three
months after the termination of his business or after the expiration of
one year from the commencement of his business, whichever first
occurs. However, no merchant shall be entitled to a refund of his
§ 157-2 TRANSIENT MERCHANTS § 157-3
157:335
§ 157-4. No exemption by temporary association with local
business.
No person who would otherwise be a transient retail merchant subject
to this chapter shall be exempted from the provisions hereof by reason
of being temporarily associated with any local dealer, trader, merchant or
auctioneer, or by conducting a transient retail business in connection with
or as a part of the business of any such local person.
§ 157-5. Conduct regulations for licensees.
A licensed transient retail merchant shall:
§ 157-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction,
be fined the sum of $200 for each month or part thereof during which said
business is continued in violation hereof, and in default of the payment of
said fine, shall be imprisoned for not more than 30 days. The continuation
of an offense against the provisions of this chapter shall constitute, for each
day the offense is continued, a separate and distinct offense hereunder.
§ 157-7. Construction of provisions.
Nothing here contained shall be construed to exempt any person from
securing any other license, from paying any other license fee or from paying
any other license tax which may be authorized and imposed by statute or
other City ordinance.
Chapter 159
transient retail merchant license fee because of continuing in business
for a period longer than one year.
B. There shall be no liability on the part of the City for any loss of or
diminution in the deposit because of the failure, insolvency, larceny or
robbery of or from any bank or safe or other depository in which the
same may have been placed or deposited, or because of the negligence
or misappropriation or any other act or conduct of any official or
employee of the City.
A. Not falsely or fraudulently misrepresent the quantity, character or
quality of any article offered for sale, or offer for sale any unwholesome,
tainted or diseased provisions or merchandise.
B. Not blow a horn, ring a bell or use any other noisy device to attract
public attention to his wares.
C. Not create or maintain any booth or stand, or place any barrels, boxes,
crates or other obstructions, upon any street or public place for the
purpose of selling or exposing for sale any goods, wares or
merchandise.
§ 157-3 SUNBURY CODE § 157-7
159:336
TREES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Parks and Public
Property — See Ch. 3, Art. I.
Shade Tree Commission — See Ch. 44.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 148.
§ 159-1. Definitions and word usage.
§ 159-2. Custody and control of shade trees vested in Commission.
The Commission shall have exclusive custody and control of the shade trees
in the City of Sunbury and is authorized to plant, maintain and protect
shade trees on the public highways in the City.
§ 159-3. Permit: application; duration; revocation; filing of bond.
The application for any permit required hereunder shall be made in writing
to the Secretary. It shall specify the particular kind of work or operation the
applicant desires to perform thereunder and shall state the exact location
and the species of any tree affected. It shall be the duty of the Secretary
to submit every such application promptly to the Commission for approval
or disapproval. The permit shall be effective for such length of time as the
Commission shall in each case determine, and such time shall be indicated
on the permit. Any such permit may be revoked at any time upon proof
satisfactory to the Commission that any of the terms or conditions upon
which such permit was issued are or have been violated. The Commission,
in its discretion, may, as a condition precedent to the issuance of the
permit, require the applicant to file a bond satisfactory to the Commission
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMMISSION — The Shade Tree Commission of the City of Sunbury.
PERMIT — Any permit in writing as issued by the Secretary of the
Shade Tree Commission.
PERSON — Any natural person, firm, association, partnership or
corporation.
PUBLIC HIGHWAY — The street, sidewalk or alley open to the public.
SECRETARY — The City Clerk, in his capacity of Secretary of the Shade
Tree Commission.
SHADE TREE — Any tree, shrub or other woody plant on any public
highway in the City of Sunbury, or that part of any tree, shrub or other
woody plant which extends within the lines of any public highway.
B. Word usage. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural and the
masculine shall include the feminine.
§ 157-7 TREES § 159-3
159:337
or to deposit security satisfactory to it to guarantee the compliance by the
applicant with the terms and conditions upon which such permit is issued.
§ 159-4. Permit required for planting along highways.
No person shall plant any shade tree, shrub or other woody plant on any
public highway or plant any tree, shrub or other woody plant which extends
within the lines of any public highway within the City of Sunbury, until such
a permit therefor is granted, such permit to designate where such tree is to
be planted. The Commission may refuse a permit to plant any species of tree
which in its opinion is not suited to the location. All shade trees planted shall
be in accordance with the regulations herein set forth and with all rules and
regulations that may from time to time be adopted by the Commission and
approved by City Council.
§ 159-5. Specifications for planting along highways.
All shade trees planted in and among any of the public highways in the City
of Sunbury shall be set so as to form as nearly as possible a straight and
uniform line with the other shade trees growing upon the same highway.
Said trees shall be planted or set from 25 feet to 30 feet apart, where
practicable, and shall be sound, straight and symmetrical. Where
practicable, every such tree shall be planted in a pit three feet square
filled with good topsoil otherwise enriched, and shall have an open space
of ground outside the trunk of said tree, with an area of not less than four
square feet, for the free entrance of water and air to the roots thereof; no
departure from these dimensions shall be made without specific approval of
the Commission.
§ 159-6. Trimming of trees required.
A. All shade trees shall be kept trimmed by the owner of the property on or
in front of which they are located:
(1) So as not to interfere with the proper lighting of public highways by
the streetlights.
(2) So that the minimum clearance of any public highway of any
overhanging foliage thereof shall be 14 feet, provided that the
Commission shall have the authority to designate a higher
clearance on any public highway, where heavy traffic or other
conditions make it expedient. [Amended 2-14-1977 by Ord. No.
968]
B. No person shall trim any shade tree in such a manner to cause such
shade tree to die. [Amended 2-14-1977 by Ord. No. 968]
C. If any property owner shall neglect or refuse to trim any shade tree as
required by this section, upon notice in writing by the Commission,
within the time limit specified in such notice, the Commission may
cause such trimming to be done at the expense of such owner, and the
§ 159-3 SUNBURY CODE § 159-6
159:338
§ 159-7. Interference with shade trees prohibited without permit.
No person shall, without first obtaining a permit therefor, cut down, break,
climb with spurs, injure in any manner or remove any shade tree; or cut
or interfere in any way with the main roots of any shade tree; or place any
rope, guy wire, cable, sign or poster or any other fixture on any shade tree
or guard for any shade tree; or injure, misuse or remove any device placed
to protect any shade tree, except in case of immediate necessity for the
protection of life and property.
§ 159-8. Maintenance or placement of materials near trees
restricted.
No person shall, without first obtaining a permit, place or hereafter
maintain any stone, cement or any other substance which shall impede the
passage of water and air to the roots of any shade tree unless such person
shall have an open space of ground surrounding the trunk of such tree, such
space to be not less than four square feet.
§ 159-9. Guards for shade trees.
In connection with any building operation or the performance of any work
whatsoever in the City in the vicinity of any shade tree, before any work
shall be commenced, guards shall be placed at all shade trees which might
be affected by such work, so as to effectually prevent injury to them.
§ 159-10. Placement of injurious materials near shade trees
prohibited.
No person shall put salt, oil or any other material at any place in such a
manner that injury might result to any shade tree.
§ 159-11. Attachment of electrical wires to trees prohibited without
permit.
No person shall, without first having obtained a permit therefor, attach any
electric wire, insulator or device for the holding of an electric wire to any
shade tree.
§ 159-12. Shielding of electric wires required.
Every person having any wire charged with electricity running along or
through a public highway shall securely fasten such wire or place an
adequate shield thereon, so that such wire shall not come into contact with
any shade tree, so as not to injure the same.
entire cost thereof shall be a lien upon said premises, and a claim
therefor shall be filed and collected by the City Solicitor in the same
manner as municipal claims are filed and collected.
§ 159-6 TREES § 159-13
159:339
§ 159-13. Removal or disconnection of wires for tree maintenance.
Whenever, in order to take down or prune any shade tree in any public
highway or having branches extending over any public highway, it shall be
deemed necessary to remove any wire running through or along such public
highway, the owner of such wire shall temporarily remove the same or cut
off the flow of current therefrom within 24 hours after service of written
notice from the Commission to do so.
§ 159-14. Replacement of trees; collection of costs; disposition of
moneys received.
All trees removed from City property, such as highway spaces and parks,
shall be replaced with other trees by the Shade Tree Commission, whenever
this is practical and conditions are suitable to so do. Trees lost to the City by
accidents, construction mishaps, utility line failures, etc., shall be replaced
by the Shade Tree Commission, and the cost of such tree and replacement
work shall be billed and collected from the person, company, corporation
or utility responsible for such loss. Moneys derived from this source or any
other source, such as the sale of wood from dead or destroyed trees, or
living trees removed by permit or any other reason, shall be credited to the
Budget Account of the Shade Tree Commission for use in the maintenance
and upkeep of the shade tree expansion program in this City.
§ 159-15. Enforcement.
These regulations shall be enforced by the Commission in conjunction with
the Mayor and the Police Force.
§ 159-16. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate or fail to comply with any of the provisions of
these regulations shall be liable to a fine not exceeding $200 for every such
violation.
Chapter 163
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
§ 159-13 SUNBURY CODE § 159-16
159:340
ARTICLE I
General Regulations
§ 163-1. Definitions and interpretation.
§ 163-2. Manner of adopting permanent traffic and parking
regulations.
All traffic and parking regulations of a permanent nature shall be enacted
as ordinances or parts of ordinances or as amendments to ordinances of the
City of Sunbury.
§ 163-3. Temporary and emergency regulations.
A. Words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in the Vehicle Code of Pennsylvania, as now in force or
as hereafter amended, enacted or reenacted, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning.
B. The term "legal holidays" as used in this chapter shall mean and
include: New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day,
Thanksgiving Day and Christmas, or days celebrated as such.
C. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall
include the singular and the masculine shall include the feminine and
the neuter.
A. The Mayor shall have the following powers to regulate traffic and
parking temporarily and in time of emergency:
(1) In the case of fire, flood, storm or other emergency, to establish
temporary traffic and/or parking regulations.
(2) In the case of emergency or to facilitate public works, or in the
conduct of parades, processions or public events, to restrict or
prohibit traffic and/or parking in limited areas for periods of not
more than 72 hours.
B. Such temporary and emergency regulations shall be enforced by the
Mayor and Police Department in the same manner as permanent
regulations. Any person who shall operate or park a vehicle or tractor in
violation of any such regulation, or who shall move, remove, destroy,
injure or deface any sign or marking erected, posted or made to give
notice of any such regulation, shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to
the penalty set forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter for a
violation of such nature.
C. The Mayor shall have the authority to regulate traffic and parking in the
conduct of a parade, processing or public event (referred to collectively
as a "parade"). [Added 11-9-1992 by Ord. No. 1168]
§ 163-1 TREES § 163-3
159:341
§ 163-4. Experimental regulations.
(1) A "parade" is defined as a procession or moving assembly upon any
street or public thoroughfare other than routine vehicular traffic.
(2) No person or organization shall engage in, participate in, aid, form
or conduct a parade without first obtaining a permit from the
Mayor or Chief of Police.
(3) Organizations conducting the following events shall be exempt
from payment of the permit fee:
(a) Funeral processions.
(b) Governmental agency conducting a parade.
(c) Student organizations under the direct supervision of proper
school authorities conducting a parade.
(d) Short-notice situations that could arise, including but not
limited to high school championship recognition or the
visitation of a notable person.
(e) Christmas parade, Halloween parade, memorial service or
firemen's parades.
(4) The person or organization conducting a parade shall follow all
federal, state and local laws, including but not limited to road
closure permits and noise restrictions.
(5) Permit; fee.
(a) The person or organization shall apply for a permit and pay a
minimum permit fee of $100 to the City of Sunbury. This
amount may be increased in the future through a resolution of
Council at a public meeting.
(b) The Mayor shall have the authority to increase the permit fee
if, in his sole discretion or through a vote of Council, it is
deemed appropriate to cover the cost associated with cleanup
or safety requirements associated with the parade.
A. The Mayor may, from time to time, designate places upon and along the
highways in the City where, for a period of not more than 90 days,
specific traffic and/or parking regulations, prohibitions and restrictions
shall be in force and effect, and shall designate such locations by proper
signs and markings. Such regulations, prohibitions and restrictions
shall be effective just as if they had been specified in this chapter. No
person shall operate or park a vehicle or tractor in violation of any such
regulation, prohibition or restriction, and no person shall move,
remove, destroy or deface any sign or marking erected, posted or made
by authority of this section.
§ 163-3 SUNBURY CODE § 163-4
159:342
§ 163-5. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the police officers of the City of Sunbury,
who are hereby given authority to direct traffic on the highways and
intersections of the City in accordance with the provisions of this chapter
and the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. The purpose of this section is to allow for the test and experimental
determination of the feasibility and desirability of permanent changes
in the ordinances of the City relative to traffic and parking.
§ 163-4 TREES § 163-5
159:343

ARTICLE II
Traffic Regulations
§ 163-6. Use of sidewalks by motor vehicles.
No person shall operate a motor vehicle or tractor upon any sidewalk in
the City; nor shall any person operate a motor vehicle upon or across any
sidewalk except in order to gain access to or egress from a driveway or alley
at such locations where the curb, if such sidewalk is curbed, shall have been
properly cut down for the purpose.
§ 163-7. Speed limits established.
The speed limit for both directions of traffic along the highways or parts
thereof described below is hereby established at the rate of speed indicated:
Name of Highway
Speed Limit
(miles per
hour) Location
Front Street 35 Entire length
§ 163-8. Traffic control signals.
Traffic control signals shall be installed and operated at the intersection of
those highways described below:
Intersection
(Reserved)
§ 163-9. One-way highways established.
The highways or parts of highways described below are hereby designated
as one-way streets in the direction indicated:
Name of Highway
Direction of
Travel Limits
Arch Street West From Fifth Street to Front Street
Catawissa Avenue South From Reagan Street to Market
Street
Center Street North From Chestnut Street to
Pennsylvania Avenue
Chestnut Street East From Front Street to Wolverton
Street
Court Street East From Eleventh Street to East
Market Street
Eighth Street North From Market Street to Race
Street
§ 163-6 TREES § 163-9
159:345
Name of Highway
Direction of
Travel Limits
Fairmount Avenue North From Market Street to Reagan
Street
Fifth Street [Repealed 4-13-1981 by Ord. No. 1023]
Highland Avenue West From Ridge Avenue to Market
Street
Linden Street West From South Third Street to South
Fourth Street
Market Street, south
of Cameron Park
East From Second Street to Third
Street
Market Street, north
of Cameron Park
West From Second Street to Third
Street
Penn Street West From South Third Street to South
Fourth Street
Pennsylvania Avenue East From North Second Street to
Fourth Street
Race Street West From Highland Avenue to Twelfth
Street
South Third Street South From Market Street to Spruce
Street
Twelfth Street North From Market Street to Line Street
Wolverton Street East From Chestnut Street to Tenth
Street
Woodlawn Avenue East From Fourth Street to Fifth Street
§ 163-10. U-turns.
It shall be unlawful for the operator of a motor vehicle or tractor to make a
U-turn on any of the highways or parts thereof described below:
Name of Highway Location
(Reserved)
§ 163-11. Turns at intersections.
No person shall make a turn of the kind designated (left, right, all) at any of
the intersections described below:
Name of
Highway
Direction of
Travel
Prohibited Turn At Intersection
of
(Reserved)
§ 163-9 SUNBURY CODE § 163-12
159:346
§ 163-12. Center structures at intersections.
All vehicular traffic shall keep to the right of the following structures or
barriers located in the center of the specified intersections:
Structure on
(name of highway) At Intersection of
Market Street Third Street
§ 163-13. Through highways.
The highways described below are hereby established as through highways,
and the operator of every vehicle or tractor upon approaching any such
highway at any intersection thereof (except for such intersections where
there are now or shall hereafter be located official traffic signals) shall
come to a full stop, within a reasonable distance, before entering any such
through highway:
Name of Highway Limits
Catawissa Avenue From Market Street to the north City line
Eleventh Street From Market Street to the north City line
Front Street From the north City line to Bainbridge
Street
Market Street From Front Street to the east City line
§ 163-14. Stop intersections.
The intersections described below are hereby established as stop
intersections, and official stop signs shall be erected in such a position upon
the first-named highway as to face traffic approaching the second-named
highway in the direction or directions indicated. All vehicles and tractors
approaching any such intersection upon the first-named highway, in the
direction or directions indicated in each case, shall come to a full stop,
within a reasonable distance, before entering any such intersection:
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Fifth Street [Added
11-14-1988 by Ord. No.
1107]
Both Packer Street
Packer Street [Added
11-14-1988 by Ord. No.
1107]
Both Fifth Street
§ 163-15. Yield-right-of-way intersections.
The intersections described below are hereby established as yield-right-ofway
intersections, and official yield signs shall be erected in such a position
§ 163-12 TREES § 163-15
159:347
upon the first-named highway as to face traffic approaching the secondnamed
highway in the direction or directions indicated. All vehicles and
tractors approaching any such intersection upon the first-named highway,
in the direction or directions indicated, shall yield the right-of-way to any
vehicle in the intersection or approaching on the second-named highway
so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time that the
operator of such vehicle or tractor is moving across or within such
intersection:
Yield Sign on Direction of Travel At Intersection of
(Reserved)
§ 163-16. No-passing zones.
The zones described below are hereby established as no-passing zones, and
it shall be unlawful for any person driving a vehicle to pass any other vehicle
which is proceeding in the same direction:
Name of Highway Limits
(Reserved)
§ 163-17. Closing of certain highways to certain vehicles.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle or tractor except
a passenger vehicle (but not including any passenger vehicle drawing any
trailer or towing any other vehicle) upon any of the highways or portions
of the highways described below; provided, however, that nothing herein
shall prohibit the operation of any commercial vehicle or tractor upon any
highway or portion thereof listed below where such operation thereon shall
be necessary in order to pick up or deliver any goods, wares, merchandise
or material from or to any premises located upon any such highway or
portion thereof:
Name of Highway Limits
(Reserved)
§ 163-18. Vehicle weight limits established.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any commercial vehicle or
other tractor, trailer or tractor-trailer combination having a gross weight
in excess of that herein respectively prescribed upon any of the highways
or portions thereof described below, except for the purpose of making local
deliveries on that highway:
Name of Highway
Maximum Gross
Weight
(pounds) Location
(Reserved)
§ 163-15 SUNBURY CODE § 163-19
159:348
§ 163-19. Operation of vehicles on closed highways.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle or tractor upon
any highway in the City that is under construction, resurfacing or repair, in
disregard of any official sign, barricade or notice that the same is closed to
vehicular traffic.
§ 163-20. Play highways.
§ 163-21. Accident reports.
The operator of any motor vehicle involved in an accident in the City and
required by law to report such accident to any department or agency of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or any other person required to make
such report, shall, at the time of making such report to the commonwealth,
make a written report to the Chief of Police of the City containing the same
information.
A. The Mayor is hereby authorized to designate as play highways,
whenever he shall deem such action advisable and for whatever period
of time directed by him, any portion of any highway in the City whereon
sledding and coasting shall be permitted. Such highway shall be set
apart for the purpose under the direction of the Police Department.
B. No person shall operate any motor vehicle or tractor upon any play
highway at any time when such highway shall be so designated, except
in case of emergency and with special permission of the Mayor or of the
police officer in charge, who shall first clear such play highway of all
persons using such highway for the purpose for which it was set aside.
C. The portions of highways described below are hereby established as
play highways during the time designated:
Name of Highway Days Hours Location
(Reserved)
§ 163-19 TREES § 163-21
159:349

ARTICLE III
Parking Regulations
§ 163-22. Parking without lights authorized.
The boundary limits of the City of Sunbury are hereby established as a
zone in which motor vehicles may remain standing without lights, and all
highways within such boundary limits are hereby designated as highways
where motor vehicles may remain standing without lights.
§ 163-23. Vehicles to be parked within marked spaces.
Wherever a space shall be marked off on any highway for the parking of
an individual vehicle, every vehicle there parked shall be parked within the
lines bounding such space.
§ 163-24. Angle parking.
No person shall park a vehicle upon any of the highways or parts thereof
described below except at the angle designated and only within the painted
stall lines. On all highways or portions thereof where angle parking is now
or shall hereafter be authorized, all vehicles parked thereon shall be parked
with the front thereof nearest the curb:
Name of Highway Side
Angle From
Curbline
(degrees) Location
Market Street
[Added 6-9-1980
by Ord. No. 1009]
North 60 Third Street to
Wolverton Street
Market Street
[Added 6-9-1980
by Ord. No. 1009]
South 60 Third Street to Seventh
Street
§ 163-25. Parking prohibited at all times.
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the highways or parts
thereof described below:
Name of Highway Side Location
Adam Street Both From Fort Augusta Avenue to
Susquehanna Avenue
Amy Street North From Front Street to Edison
Avenue
Arch Street South From North Fifth Street to North
Fourth Street
Awl Street West From Walnut Street to Fawn Lane
§ 163-22 TREES § 163-25
159:351
Name of Highway Side Location
Awl Street East From Chestnut Street to Walnut
Street
Bainbridge Street Both From South Front Street to South
Second Street
Cameron Park West East end thereof
Catawissa Avenue East From Market Street to Reagan
Street
Center Street East From Chestnut Street to
Pennsylvania Avenue
Center Street West From Market Street to Woodlawn
Avenue (except Sundays)
Court Street Both From Fifth Street to Second Street
Depot Alley Both From Pennsylvania Avenue to Arch
Street
Edison Avenue East From Reagan Street to John Street
Eighth Street West From Market Street to Race Street
Eleventh Street West From Line Street to Reagan Street
Fairmount Avenue West From Market Street to the
northeast City line
Fifth Street East From Arch Street to Race Street
Fourth Street West From Chestnut Street to Lincoln
Street
Greenough Street North From Catawissa Avenue to North
Eighth Street
John Street Both From Susquehanna Avenue to the
North Second Street Extension
John Street North From Front Street to Susquehanna
Avenue
Joseph Street North From Fort Augusta Avenue to the
North Second Street Extension
Lombard Street North From South Front Street to South
Second Street
Masser Street North From Front Street to North Second
Street
Masser Street North From Catawissa Avenue to Ninth
Street
Miller Street South From Lenker Avenue to the
Susquehanna Mills, Inc.
North Center Street Both From Market Street to Woodlawn
Avenue
§ 163-25 SUNBURY CODE § 163-25
159:352
Name of Highway Side Location
North Center Street Both From Arch Street to Pennsylvania
Avenue
North Front Street West From the Reading Railroad
Company right-of-way to the north
City line
North Second Street West From Race Street to Reagan Street
North Second Street
Extension
Both From Packer Street to John Street
North Third Street
[Added 1-8-1979 by
Ord. No. 990]
West From Reagan Street to Packer
Street
Pennsylvania Avenue North From North Second Street to
Fourth Street
Pine Street North From South Front Street to South
Third Street
Race Street North From Fourth Street to Sixth Street
Reagan Street Both From North Front Street to
Eleventh Street
Sixth Street West From Market Street to Race Street
South Fourth Street West From Spruce Street south to its
termination (from November 1 of
each year to April 1 of the
following year)
South Front Street East From the Reading Railroad to the
south City line
South River Avenue Both From Market Street to Chestnut
Street
Tenth Street East From Market Street to Walnut
Street
Third Street [Amended
1-8-1979 by Ord. No.
990]
East From Race Street to Spruce Street
Vine Street North From Fourth Street to Fifth Street
Walnut Street North From Tenth Street to South Front
Street
Washington Avenue
[Added 8-17-1981 by
Ord. No. 1028]
Both From Line Street north to hospital
parking lot
Woodlawn Avenue Both From North Fifth Street to North
Sixth Street
Woodlawn Avenue South From Third Street to Fourth Street
§ 163-25 TREES § 163-26
159:353
§ 163-26. Parking prohibited during certain hours.
No person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified below on any
day, except Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, upon any of the highways or
parts of highways described below:
Name of Highway Side Hours Location
All paved streets Both 2:00 a.m. to 6:00
a.m., except on
permit granted,
including
Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays
Entire length
Depot Alley East 6:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m.
From Race Street to
Pennsylvania Avenue
§ 163-27. Parking time limited.
No person shall park a vehicle or allow the same to remain parked upon any
of the highways or parts of highways described below between the hours
specified, for longer than the time indicated below:
Name of
Highway Side Hours
Time
Limit Location
All unpaved
streets
Both 12:00
midnight to
5:00 a.m.,
except on
permit
1 hr. Entire length
Center Street West 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
2 hrs. From Woodlawn
Avenue to Arch
Street
Edison Avenue Both 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
2 hrs. From Julia Street
to John Street
Fort Augusta
Avenue
Both 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
2 hrs. From Julia Street
to Front Street
Front Street East 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
2 hrs. From Julia Street
to the north City
line
John Street South 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
2 hrs. From Front Street
to Susquehanna
Avenue
Joseph Street South 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
2 hrs. From Fort
Augusta Avenue to
the North Second
Street Extension
§ 163-26 SUNBURY CODE § 163-27
159:354
Name of
Highway Side Hours
Time
Limit Location
Julia Street Both 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
2 hrs. From Front Street
to the North
Second Street
Extension
Market Street
[Added
7-13-1987 by
Ord. No.
1085;
amended
5-13-1991 by
Ord. No.
1150]
South 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
15 min. The 8 parking
spaces west of
Center Street in
front of City Hall
North River
Avenue
Both 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
2 hrs. From Julia Street
to John Street
North Third
Street
West All 15 min. From
Pennsylvania
Avenue to Race
Street
Race Street Both 7:00 a.m. to
11:00 p.m.
2 hrs. From North
Second Street to
North Fourth
Street
South Second
Street
Both 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
15 min. From Chestnut
Street to Penn
Street
Susquehanna
Avenue
Both 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
2 hrs. From Julia Street
to Front Street
§ 163-28. Special purpose parking zones.
The following are hereby established as special purpose parking zones, and
it shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle or tractor or to allow
the same to remain parked in any such zone except as specifically provided
for such zone:
§ 163-27 TREES § 163-28
159:355
Name of Highway Side
Authorized
Purpose or
Vehicle Location
Arch Street Parking
Lot [Added
4-8-1985 by Ord.
No. 1067]
East Handicap
parking
Adjacent to Woodlawn
Avenue at Stroh Alley
Mall
Fourth Street
[Added 4-8-1985 by
Ord. No. 1067]
East Handicap
parking
At Market Street
intersection adjacent to
Edison Hotel
Fourth Street
[Added 4-8-1985 by
Ord. No. 1067]
East Handicap
parking
At Market Street
intersection adjacent to
First National Trust
Bank
Linden Street Loading zone From South Front Street
to South Second Street
Market Street
[Added 4-8-1985 by
Ord. No. 1067]
North Handicap
parking
In front of 430 Market
Street
Market Street
[Added 4-8-1985 by
Ord. No. 1067]
South Handicap
parking
In front of Senior
Citizen Center, 235
Market Street
Second Street
[Added 4-8-1985 by
Ord. No. 1067]
East Handicap
parking
At Market Street
intersection adjacent to
Court House
Woodlawn Avenue South Loading zone From Fourth Street to
Fifth Street
§ 163-28.1. Parking prohibited in specified places. [Added 1-8-1979
by Ord. No. 990]
A. Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or to protect
the safety of any person or vehicle or in compliance with law or the
directions of a police officer or official traffic control device, no person
shall:
(1) Stop, stand or park a vehicle:
(a) On the roadway side of a vehicle stopped or parked at the edge
or curb of a street, except that a pedalcycle may be parked on
the roadway abreast of another pedalcycle or pedalcycles near
the side of a roadway at any location where parking is allowed,
provided that no pedalcycle shall park on a roadway in such
manner as to obstruct the movement of a legally parked motor
vehicle.
§ 163-28 SUNBURY CODE § 163-28.1
159:356
(b) On the sidewalk, except that a pedalcycle may be parked
thereon unless prohibited or restricted by an official traffic
control device, and provided that said pedalcycle shall not
impede the normal and reasonable movement of pedestrian or
other traffic.
(c) Within an intersection.
(d) On a crosswalk.
(e) Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb within 30 feet of
points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety
zone, unless a different length is indicated by official traffic
control devices.
(f) Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction
when stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic.
(g) Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or
within a highway tunnel.
(h) On any railroad tracks.
(i) In the area between roadways of a divided highway, including
crossovers.
(j) At any place where official signs prohibit stopping.
(2) Stand or park a vehicle:
(a) In front of a public or private driveway or garage entrance.
(b) In front of a theater entrance or exit.
(c) Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant.
(d) Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection.
(e) Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing signal, stop
sign, yield sign or traffic control signal located at the side of a
roadway.
(f) Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station or,
when properly signposted, on the side of a street opposite the
entrance to any fire station within 75 feet of the entrance.
(g) On a limited access highway unless authorized by official
traffic control devices.
(h) At any place where official signs prohibit standing.
(3) Park a vehicle:
(a) Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing.
(b) At any place where official signs prohibit parking.
§ 163-28.1 TREES § 163-28.1
159:357
§ 163-28.2. Additional parking regulations. [Added 1-8-1979 by
Ord. No. 990]
B. No person shall park or leave unattended a vehicle on private property
without the consent of the owner or other person in control or
possession of the property except in the case of emergency or
disablement of the vehicle, in which case the operator shall arrange for
the removal of the vehicle as soon as possible.
A. Two-way highways. Except where angle parking is permitted, every
vehicle standing or parked upon a two-way highway shall be positioned
parallel to and with the right-hand wheels within 12 inches of the righthand
curb or, in the absence of a curb, as close as practicable to the
right edge of the right-hand shoulder.
B. One-way highways. Except where angle parking is permitted, every
vehicle standing or parked upon a one-way highway shall be positioned
parallel to the curb or edge of the highway in the direction of authorized
traffic movement with its right-hand wheels within 12 inches of the
right-hand curb or, in the absence of a curb, as close as practicable to
the right edge of the right-hand shoulder, or with its left-hand wheels
within 12 inches of the left-hand curb or, in the absence of a curb, as
close as practicable to the left edge of the left-hand shoulder.
C. Handicapped plate and placard. [Added 7-21-1988 by Ord. No.
1104]
(1) Handicapped plate. On the application of any person who does not
have full use of a leg or both legs or an arm or both arms, is blind, is
in loco parentis of a person specified above or is physically limited
by a cardiopulmonary condition restricting substantially his
movements, the department shall issue a special registration plate
for one passenger car or other vehicle with a registered gross
weight of not more than 9,000 pounds, designating the vehicle so
licensed as being used by a handicapped person. Special plates for
handicapped persons may also be issued for vehicles operated
exclusively for the use and benefit of handicapped persons.
(2) Handicapped parking placard. On the application of any person
who meets the qualifications of Subsection C(1), the department
shall issue one special parking placard of such size and design as
the department shall specify, designating the vehicle in which it is
displayed as being used for the transportation of a handicapped
person. Such placard shall be prominently displayed on the right
front dash of the vehicle when it is in use for the transportation of
such person.
(3) It shall be unlawful for individuals to park a vehicle in a
handicapped-designated parking space without displaying a
handicapped parking placard or similar notation on the license
plate. The designated agents of City Council have the authority to
§ 163-28.1 SUNBURY CODE § 163-28.2
159:358
§ 163-28.3. Parking of over-size vehicles in residential districts.
[Added 6-14-1982 by Ord. No. 1038; amended 3-24-2003;
8-28-2018]
issue a fine of $25, along with the following statement: "You are
illegally parked in a handicapped space. This space is necessary
for individuals who require special access to parking." [Added
9-10-1990 by Ord. No. 1126; amended 1-28-2002]
D. It shall be unlawful for individuals to park any vehicle on any marked
yellow curbline as established by the City. [Added 9-9-1991 by Ord.
No. 1154]
E. It shall be unlawful for individuals to park any vehicle on any street
where official City "No Parking" or "Temporary Parking Restriction"
signs have been erected. Said parking signs shall include but not be
limited to parking restrictions in the front of City Hall indicating time
limitation for parking. [Added 9-9-1991 by Ord. No. 1154]
A. Definitions and interpretation. Words and phrases, when used in this
chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in the Pennsylvania
Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq., as now in force or as hereafter
amended, enacted or reenacted, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning. In this chapter, the singular shall include
the plural, the plural shall include the singular, and the masculine shall
include the feminine and the neuter.
B. No person or organization shall park a truck tractor or a truck tractortrailer
or a truck tractor semitrailer or a combination truck tractor and
truck tractor-trailer or a combination truck trailer and truck tractor
semitrailer or a truck classified by the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code as
Class 4 or higher on any public street, public alley or public way in any
district in the City of Sunbury designated Residential-1, Residential-2,
Neighborhood Business, Central Business, or Open Space
Conservation.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person or organization to park or cause to be
parked any bus, boat, trailer or camper/motor home or other
commercial vehicle (defined as any vehicle with a registered gross
weight exceeding 11,000 pounds or an overall width exceeding eight
feet or overall height exceeding eight feet or overall length exceeding
20 feet) upon any street, avenue, alley, roadway or public way in any
district in the City of Sunbury designated Residential-1, Residential-2,
Neighborhood Business, Central Business, or Open Space
Conservation, with the exception of loading and/or unloading.
D. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $50 nor more
than $300, plus costs, and upon failure to pay the fine and costs, shall
undergo imprisonment for not more than 30 days.
§ 163-28.2 TREES § 163-28.4
159:359
§ 163-28.4. Municipal parking permits. [Added 12-28-1987 by Ord.
No. 1088; amended 11-12-1990 by Ord. No. 1130]
Upon receipt of the fee set by resolution of the Sunbury City Council, the
City Clerk may issue the following types of municipal parking permits:
A. Monthly permit: a permit that will allow the holder to park any
registered vehicle pursuant to and in conformity with the provisions of
this chapter during the month designated on said permit in the
following areas, provided that the permit is placed in the area of the
windshield of the vehicle in such a manner that it can be read by
persons enforcing the City's parking provisions:
(1) All municipal parking lots, excluding the Court Street Parking Lot
located behind the Sunbury Municipal Building.
(2) The monthly parking permit shall not entitle the holder to park a
vehicle on metered streets in conformity with the provisions of this
chapter.
B. Annual permit: a permit that will allow the holder to park any
registered vehicle listed on the permit pursuant to and in conformity
with the provisions of this chapter during the annual period designated
on said permit in all municipal parking lots and in all metered streets;
provided, however, that the permit is placed in the area of the
windshield of the vehicle in such a manner that it can be read by
persons enforcing the City's parking provisions.
C. Daily permit: a permit that will allow the holder to park any registered
vehicle listed on the permit pursuant to and in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter during the daily period designated on said
permit in all municipal parking lots, provided that the permit is in a
visible area of the windshield. Said permit shall not include the
authority to park in the Court Street Parking Lot unless the individual
using the permit is actively serving as a juror or involved with an
activity at the Senior Action Center. The daily permit shall also be
available to individuals acting directly or indirectly in a Court or Senior
Action Center activity, based upon the discretion of the City Clerk. The
individual applying for the permit shall set forth the reason for the
permit for the City Clerk to determine if the applicant is involved
directly or indirectly with an activity at the Court House or Senior
Action Center. [Amended 6-14-1993 by Ord. No. 1179]
§ 163-28.4 SUNBURY CODE § 163-28.4
159:360
ARTICLE IV
Metered Parking
§ 163-29. Designation of parking spaces. [Amended 1-8-1979 by
Ord. No. 990]
The Police Department is hereby authorized to provide for the marking off
of individual parking spaces in the parking zones and areas designated and
described in § 163-37, said parking spaces to be designated by lines painted
or marked on the curbing or surface of the highway or area. At each space
so marked off, it shall be unlawful to park any vehicle in such a way that said
vehicle shall not be entirely within the limits of the space so designated. At
each space so marked off in the off-highway parking zones established in
§ 163-37B, it shall be unlawful to back into said parking space.
§ 163-30. Installation of meters; operation.
§ 163-31. Manner of parking.
A. In said parking meter zones, parking meters shall be installed upon the
curb, sidewalk or pavement immediately adjacent to the parking spaces
provided in § 163-37 of this article. The Police Department shall be
responsible for the regulation, control, operation, maintenance and use
of such parking meters.
B. Each device shall be so set as to display a signal showing legal parking
upon the deposit of the appropriate coin for the period of time
hereinafter prescribed. Each device shall be so arranged that upon the
expiration of the lawful time limit it will indicate by a proper, visible
signal that the lawful parking period has expired, and in such case the
right of such vehicle to occupy such space shall cease and the operator,
owner, possessor or manager thereof shall be subject to the penalties
hereinafter provided.
A. When a parking space in any parking meter zone is parallel to the
adjacent curb or sidewalk, any vehicle parked in such parking space
shall be parked so that the foremost part of such vehicle shall be
nearest to the parking meter; provided, however, that where double
parking meters are installed upon one standard so as to serve two
parking spaces, any vehicle parked in the space just beyond the parking
meters shall be parked so that the rear bumper of such vehicle shall be
nearest to the parking meters. When a parking space in any parking
meter zone is diagonal to the curb or sidewalk, any vehicle parked in
such parking space shall be parked with the foremost part of such
vehicle nearest to such meter.
B. Where lines or markings are painted or placed upon the curb, sidewalk,
highway and/or paved surface adjacent to each parking meter providing
for parking at an angle and not parallel or perpendicular to the curb, it
shall be unlawful for the operator of any motor vehicle to cross the
center line of the highway to enter or leave said parking area.
§ 163-29 TREES § 163-32
159:361
§ 163-32. Deposit of coins.
When any vehicle shall be parked in any space adjacent to which a parking
meter is located in accordance with the provisions of this article, the
operator shall, upon entering the said parking space, immediately deposit
or cause to be deposited such coin or coins of the United States as is
required for such parking meter and as is designated by proper instructions
on the parking meter, and failure to deposit such coin or coins shall
constitute a breach of this article and shall subject such person to the
penalty prescribed hereafter. Upon the deposit of such coin or coins and
placing said meter in operation, the parking space may be lawfully occupied
by such vehicle during the period of parking time which has been
prescribed for the zone in which said parking space is located and for which
a coin or coins is or are deposited as indicated on the parking meter. If
said vehicle shall remain parked in any such parking space beyond the
parking time limit so fixed for such parking space, the parking meter shall,
by its violation signal, dial or pointer, indicate such illegal parking, and in
that event such vehicle shall be considered as parked overtime and beyond
the period of legal parking time. The parking of a vehicle overtime or
beyond the period of legal parking time in any such space where any such
parking meter is located shall be a violation of this article and punishable
as hereinafter set forth.
§ 163-33. Violations.
It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this article for any
person:
A. To cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in the name of or
operated by such person to be parked overtime or beyond the period of
legal parking time established for any parking meter zone as herein
described, or to deposit in any parking meter any coin for the purpose
of parking beyond the maximum legal parking time for the particular
parking meter zone.
B. To permit any vehicle to remain or be placed in any parking space
adjacent to any parking meter while said meter is displaying a signal
indicating that the vehicle occupying such parking space has already
been parked beyond the period prescribed for such parking space.
C. To park any vehicle across any line or marking of a parking meter space
or in such position that the vehicle shall not be entirely within the area
designated by such lines or markings.
D. To deface, injure, tamper with, open or willfully break, destroy or impair
the usefulness of any parking meter installed under the provisions of
this article.
E. To deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter any slug,
device or metal substance or other substitute for lawful coins.
§ 163-32 SUNBURY CODE § 163-33
159:362
§ 163-34. Report of violations; citations.
It shall be the duty of the police officers of the City of Sunbury and such
other persons as may be designated and authorized by the Chief of Police,
acting in accordance with instructions issued by the Chief of Police, to
report:
§ 163-35. Collection of coins from meters.
It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to designate some proper person or
persons to make regular collections of the moneys deposited in said meters.
§ 163-36. General provisions.
§ 163-37. Parking meter zones established. [Amended 6-9-1980 by
Ord. No. 1009; 5-13-1991 by Ord. No. 1149; 1-11-1993 by Ord. No.
1173]
F. To park or permit the parking of any vehicle in any parking meter space
where the meter does not register lawful parking.
A. The number of each parking meter which indicates that the vehicle
occupying the parking space and adjacent to such parking meter is or
has been parked in violation of any of the provisions of this article.
B. The state license number of such vehicle.
C. The length of time during which such vehicle is parked in violation of
any of the provisions of this article at the time of his inspection.
D. Any other facts, a knowledge of which is necessary to a thorough
understanding of the circumstances attending such violation.
A. Temporary suspension of provisions. The provisions of this article may
be temporarily suspended by the Mayor, and he may prescribe
temporarily such other rules and regulations as traffic conditions may
require.
B. Suspension of provisions on designated holidays. The use of parking
meters throughout the City of Sunbury is hereby dispensed with on the
following holidays: New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day,
Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas.
C. Erection of signs. The Mayor is authorized to erect or cause to be
erected appropriate signs notifying the operators of motor vehicles of
the provisions of this article.
D. Tokens. Where the deposit of any coin or coins is required under the
provisions of this article, it shall be permissible to use such token or
tokens for that deposit as shall be designated and approved by the
Mayor.
§ 163-33 TREES § 163-37
159:363
A. On-highway parking zones. Parking meter zones are hereby established
upon the highways or parts of highways described below, with
maximum parking time period being Mondays through Fridays, during
the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.:
Name of Highway Side Time Limit Location
Arch Street
[Added 2-13-1995
by Ord. No. 1199]
Both 2 hrs. From Third Street to
Fourth Street
Fifth Street Both 2 hrs. From Woodlawn Avenue
to Chestnut Street
Fourth Street Both 2 hrs. From Woodlawn Avenue
to Chestnut Street
Market Street Both 2 hrs. From Front Street to
Tenth Street
North Second
Street
Both 9 hrs. From Arch Street to
Market Street
North Sixth Street East 2 hrs. From Woodlawn Avenue
to Market Street
North Third Street West 9 hrs. From Market Street to
Arch Street
South Second
Street
Both 9 hrs. From Court Street to
Chestnut Street
South Second
Street
East 9 hrs. From Market Street to
Court Street
South Second
Street
West 30 min. From Market Street to
Court Street
South Third Street West 2 hrs. From Market Street to
Chestnut Street
B. Off-highway parking zones. Off-highway parking meter areas are
hereby established as described below, with maximum parking time
periods as indicated on all days, except Saturdays, Sundays and the
following holidays: New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day,
Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day. During the hours of
9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., the use of meters in such parking areas shall be
subject to the provisions of this article governing the use of meters
generally. [Amended 8-9-1993 by Ord. No. 1181]
§ 163-37 SUNBURY CODE § 163-37
159:364
§ 163-38. Parking meter rates. [Amended 2-12-1990 by Ord. No.
1120; 10-8-1990 by Ord. No. 1129]
Parking Lot Time Limit Location
Arch Street Parking
Lot
9 hrs. Bordered by Arch Street to the
north, Woodlawn Avenue to the
south, North Fourth Street to the
west and North Fifth Street to
the east (rental of space available
at rates set by Council)
Chestnut Street 9 hrs. Bordered by Court Street to the
north and Chestnut Street to the
south (rental of space available at
rates set by Council)
Court Street Parking
Area
9 hrs. Bordered on the south by
Chestnut Street and on the north
by Court Street. The lot shall
have a time limit of two (2) hours,
and there will be no monthly
parking permits allowed.
Fifth Street Parking
Lot
9 hrs. Bordered on the west by Fifth
Street and between Market
Street on the north and Chestnut
Street on the south (rental of
space available at rates set by
Council)
North Third Street
Parking Area
9 hrs. Bordered on the east by Third
Street and on the south by
Woodlawn Avenue (rental of
space available at rates set by
Council)
South Third Street
Parking Lot
9 hrs. Bordered by Third Street to the
west, Court Street to the north
and Chestnut Street to the south
(rental of space available at rates
set by Council)
Woodlawn Avenue
Parking Lot
9 hrs. Bordered by Arch Street to the
north, Woodlawn Avenue to the
south and Third Street to the
west (rental of space available at
rates set by Council)
A. In parking meter spaces with a time limit of two hours, the charge shall
be $0.05 for each 15 minutes; $0.10 for each 30 minutes; and $0.25 for
each 60 minutes.
§ 163-37 TREES § 163-38
159:365
B. In parking meter spaces with a time limit of nine hours, the charge shall
be $0.25 for three hours, with a maximum time limit of nine hours.
§ 163-38 SUNBURY CODE § 163-38
159:366
ARTICLE V
Snow and Ice Emergencies
§ 163-39. Declaration of emergency.
In order to facilitate the movement of traffic and to combat the hazards of
excessive snow and ice on the highways or portions of highways named in
§ 163-40 below, the Commissioner of Streets, in his discretion, may declare
an emergency due to such hazards.
§ 163-40. Parking prohibited on certain streets.
§ 163-41. Placement of signs.
A. After any such emergency shall have been declared, it shall be unlawful
during the period of such emergency for any person to park a motor
vehicle or tractor or to allow the same to remain parked on any highway
or portion thereof named in Subsection B below or to operate any motor
vehicle or tractor on any such highway or portion thereof unless such
vehicle or tractor shall be equipped with adequate equipment to
provide sufficient traction to keep such vehicle or tractor in motion so
that other traffic on such highways will not be blocked or seriously
impeded.
B. The highways or portions thereof to which the provisions of this article
shall be applicable during all periods of emergency declared as
provided in § 163-39 above shall be as described below:
Name of Highway Limits
Catawissa Avenue Entire length
Chestnut Street Entire length
Edison Avenue Entire length
Eleventh Street Entire length
Fairmount Avenue Entire length
Fourth Street Entire length
Front Street Entire length
Market Street Entire length
Race Street Entire length
Reagan Street Entire length
Second Street Entire length
Susquehanna Avenue Entire length
Walnut Street Entire length
Wolverton Street Entire length
A. In order to assist the operators of motor vehicles and tractors in
determining the highways affected by this article, the Commissioner of
§ 163-39 TREES § 163-41
159:367
§ 163-42. Violations.
Streets or the Chief of Police shall place around the utility poles, on
the highways or portions thereof designated in § 163-40B above, signs
reading as follows:
SNOW EMERGENCY ROUTE
SNOW TIRES OR
CHAINS REQUIRED
NO PARKING DURING EMERGENCY
VEHICLES TOWED AWAY
B. The Commissioner of Streets or the Chief of Police shall also, through
radio, newspaper or other available media, disseminate information as
to the existence of such emergency.
A. Any person who shall park a motor vehicle or tractor upon or along any
of the highways or portions thereof listed in § 163-40B at any time
during a period of emergency declared as provided in § 163-39 shall be
guilty of a violation of this article.
B. Any person who shall operate a vehicle or tractor upon any highway or
portion thereof listed in § 163-40B, which vehicle or tractor shall
become stalled upon any of such highways during a period of
emergency declared as provided in § 163-39 of this article, and such
stalling shall have been by reason of the failure to have such vehicle or
tractor equipped with the equipment hereinabove prescribed, shall be
guilty of a violation of this article.
§ 163-41 SUNBURY CODE § 163-42
159:368
ARTICLE VI
Removal and Impounding of Illegally Parked Vehicles
§ 163-43. Authorization for removal and impoundment.
The Chief of Police of the City is hereby authorized to remove and impound
or to order the removal and impounding of any vehicle parked on any of the
streets, highways or public property in the City in violation of any provision
of the law or of any ordinance of the City; provided, however, that no such
vehicle shall be removed or impounded except in strict adherence to the
provisions of this article.
§ 163-44. Approved storage garages designated.
The following garages located in the City are hereby designated as
approved storage garages, as pounds for the storage of such impounded
vehicles:
Name of Garage Address
(Reserved)
§ 163-45. Bonding of garages.
Every such approved storage garage or pound shall be bonded in the
amount of $5,000 for the indemnifying of the owner of every such
impounded vehicle against the loss thereof or injury or damage thereto
while in the custody of such poundkeeper.
§ 163-46. Towing and storage charges.
The towing charge to be collected by every such poundkeeper shall be not
more than $20, and the storage charge shall be not more than $5 for the
first day and $3 for each additional day.
§ 163-47. Notification of removal and impounding.
Within 12 hours from the time of removal of any vehicle under authority
granted by this article, notice of the fact that such vehicle has been
impounded shall be sent by the Chief of Police of the City to the owner of
record of such vehicle. Such notice shall designate the place from which
such vehicle was removed, the reason for its removal and impounding and
the pound in which it shall have been impounded.
§ 163-48. Payment of charges; protests.
A. The payment of any towing and impounding charges authorized by this
article shall, unless such payment shall have been made "under
protest," be final and conclusive and shall constitute a waiver of any
right to recover the money so paid.
§ 163-43 TREES § 163-48
159:369
§ 163-49. Records of vehicles removed and impounded.
The Chief of Police shall keep a record of all vehicles impounded and shall
be able at all reasonable times to furnish the owners or the agents of the
owners thereof with information as to the place of storage of such vehicles.
§ 163-50. Liability of owner or operator for fine or penalty.
The payment of towing and storage charges authorized by this article shall
not operate to relieve the owner or operator of any vehicle from liability for
any fine or penalty for violation of any law or ordinance on account of which
such vehicle was removed and impounded.
§ 163-51. Restrictions upon removal of vehicles.
No vehicle shall be removed under the authority of this article if, at the time
of the intended removal thereof, the owner or person for the time being in
charge of such vehicle is present and expresses a willingness and intention
to remove such vehicle immediately.
B. In the event that any towing and impounding charges so imposed shall
be paid "under protest," the offender shall be entitled to a hearing
before a magistrate or court of record having jurisdiction, in which case
such defendant shall be proceeded against and shall receive such notice
as is provided in the Vehicle Code in other cases of summary offenses
and shall have the same rights as to appeal and waiver of hearing.
§ 163-48 SUNBURY CODE § 163-51
159:370
ARTICLE VII
Interpretation and Repeal; Penalties
§ 163-52. Severability.
The provisions of this chapter shall be severable, and if any of its provisions
shall be held to be unconstitutional, illegal or otherwise invalid, such
decision shall not affect the validity of any of the remaining provisions of
this chapter. It is hereby declared as a legislative intent that this chapter
would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or otherwise
invalid provision not been included herein.
§ 163-53. Repeal of previous ordinances; effect.
§ 163-54. Violations and penalties. [Amended 1-8-1979 by Ord. No.
990]
A. All previous ordinances of the City of Sunbury pertaining to the
regulation of traffic and parking are hereby repealed.
B. The repeal of ordinances provided for in Subsection A above shall not
affect or prevent the prosecution or punishment of any person for any
act done or liability incurred in violation of any ordinance or regulation
in force immediately prior to the taking effect of this chapter.
C. The provisions of this chapter, insofar as they are the same as those of
ordinances and regulations in force immediately prior to the enactment
of this chapter, are intended as a continuation of such ordinances and
regulations and not as new enactments.
A. Unless another penalty is specifically provided for in Subsection B
below, any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall,
upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $50 and
costs of prosecution and, in the event of nonpayment of such fine and
costs of prosecution, such person shall be subject to imprisonment for a
period not exceeding 10 days.
B. Any person who shall violate any provision of a section listed below
shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than that
specified for violation of said section, and in the event of nonpayment of
such fine and costs of prosecution, such person shall be subject to
imprisonment for a period not exceeding that indicated for said section.
Article/Section Maximum Fine
Maximum
Imprisonment
(days)
Article I (§§ 163-3 and 163-4) $10.00 5
Article II (§§ 163-7, 163-9,
163-10, 163-11, 163-12, 163-20
and 163-21)
$10.00 5
§ 163-52 TREES § 163-54
159:371
Article/Section Maximum Fine
Maximum
Imprisonment
(days)
Article III [Amended 9-10-1990
by Ord. No. 1126; 9-9-1991 by
Ord. No. 1154; 3-10-1997 by
Ord. No. 990]
(§§ 163-23 through 163-28.1) $10.00 5
(§ 163-28.2A through C) $25.00 5
(§ 163-28.2D and E) $5.00
Article IV [Amended 1-11-1993
by Ord. No. 1173; 3-10-1997
by Ord. No. 990]
(§§ 163-29 and 163-33C) $10.00 5
(§ 163-33A, B and F) $5.00 1
Article V
(§ 163-42A and B) $25.00 10
C. A notice of any violation of the provisions of §§ 163-23 through
163-28.2, 163-29 and 163-33C shall be placed upon the vehicle parked,
stopped or standing in violation thereof. Such notice shall provide that
the violator can save himself from payment of the maximum fine and the
costs of prosecution if, within 72 hours after the time of said notice, he
shall pay to the City of Sunbury the sum of $5, if he shall place such sum
in any of the special boxes installed in various places in the City of
Sunbury within 72 hours after the time of such notice and if he shall
mail such sum to the Police Department of the City of Sunbury so that it
is received by said Department within 72 hours after the time of such
notice. [Amended 6-9-1980 by Ord. No. 1009; 1-11-1993 by Ord.
No. 1173]
D. A notice of any violation of the provisions of § 163-33A, B and F shall be
placed upon the vehicle parked in violation thereof. Such notice shall
provide that the violator can save himself from payment of the
maximum fine and costs of prosecution if, within 72 hours after the time
of said notice, he shall pay to the City of Sunbury the sum of $5 and if he
shall place such sum in any of the special boxes installed in various
places in the City of Sunbury within 72 hours after the time of such
notice or if he shall mail such sum to the City of Sunbury so that it is
received within 72 hours after the time of such notice. If the fine is not
paid within 72 hours, the fine will double to $15, if incurred, and the
violator shall be responsible for costs related to collection. [Amended
6-9-1980 by Ord. No. 1009; 12-12-1988 by Ord. No. 1108;
4-19-1990 by Ord. No. 1123; 1-11-1993 by Ord. No. 1173;
3-10-1997 by Ord. No. 990]
§ 163-54 SUNBURY CODE § 163-54
159:372
E. A notice of any violation of the provisions of § 163-42A and B shall be
placed upon the vehicle parked, stopped, standing or stalled in violation
thereof. Such notice shall provide that the violator can save himself
from payment of the maximum fine and costs of prosecution if, within
72 hours of the time of said notice, he shall pay to the City of Sunbury
the sum of $10, if he shall place such sum in any of the special boxes
installed in various places in the City of Sunbury within 72 hours after
the time of such notice and if he shall mail such sum to the Police
Department of the City of Sunbury so that it is received by said
Department within 72 hours after the time of such notice. [Amended
6-9-1980 by Ord. No. 1009; 1-11-1993 by Ord. No. 1173]
F. Parking violations. [Added 3-10-1997 by Ord. No. 990; amended
5-11-2009]
New After 72 Hours
Parking meter $10.00 $20.00
Parking on private property $10.00 $20.00
Handicap parking $50.00 $100.00
No parking zone $10.00 $20.00
Street sweeping $20.00 $40.00
Parking over white line $5.00 $15.00
Other $5.00 $15.00
§ 163-54 TREES § 163-54
159:373
Chapter 166
VEHICLES, INOPERABLE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 130.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 163.
Zoning — See Ch. 175.
§ 166-1. Definitions and interpretation.
§ 166-2. Parking of inoperable vehicles on public streets prohibited.
No person or organization shall park or stand upon any street, alley, public
thoroughfare, highway, municipally owned parking area or other public
property, any unlicensed or uninspected, wrecked, scrapped, ruined,
dismantled, nonrepairable, salvage or abandoned motor vehicles or
automobiles, truck-campers, trailers, or parts thereof.
§ 166-3. Parking of inoperable vehicles in the open on private
property prohibited.
No person or organization, excluding licensed motor vehicle dealers, shall
park or permit another person to park or stand any unlicensed or
uninspected, wrecked, scrapped, ruined, dismantled, nonrepairable,
salvage or abandoned motor vehicles or automobiles, truck-campers,
trailers, or parts thereof, in the open on private property in the City of
Sunbury, except as provided in this chapter.
§ 166-4. through § 166-6. (Reserved)
§ 166-7. Removal and impounding of vehicles by City.
A. Words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et
seq., as now in force or as hereafter amended, enacted or reenacted,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning.
B. "Inoperable vehicles" shall mean any unlicensed or uninspected,
wrecked, scrapped, ruined, dismantled, nonrepairable, salvage or
abandoned motor vehicles or automobiles, truck-campers, trailers, or
parts thereof, as defined under the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code, 75
Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq., as now in force or as hereafter amended,
enacted or reenacted.
C. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall
include the singular, and the masculine shall include the feminine and
the neuter.
§ 163-54 SUNBURY CODE § 166-7
159:374
§ 166-8. Surety bond required of storage garages.
Any designated storage garage, prior to engaging in any towing away and/
or storing of any vehicle hereunder, shall file a surety bond with the City of
Sunbury, said bond to indemnify the City of Sunbury and the owner of any
impounded vehicle against loss thereof or injury or damage thereto while
any vehicle is in custody of such garage.
§ 166-9. Towing and storage charges.
Specific towing and storage charges to be made under this chapter shall
be fixed from time to time by the Director of Public Safety in accordance
with the prevailing rates in the City, and such charges shall be posted in the
Municipal Building.
§ 166-10. Notice of removal.
Within 12 hours after any vehicle has been removed and impounded, the
City of Sunbury shall notify the owner of record or the operator of any
such vehicle, either by personal service or by certified mail, or the owner
or occupant of the property from which any such vehicle has been removed,
in like manner, of the fact that such vehicle has been impounded, the place
from which it was removed, the reason for its removal and impounding and
the place where the vehicle has been impounded.
§ 166-11. Recovery of possession of impounded vehicles.
The owner or operator of any impounded vehicle shall be entitled to recover
possession of such vehicle upon the payment to the City of Sunbury of the
towing and storage charges as above set forth.
§ 166-12. Payment of charges; protest; hearing.
The payment of such towing and storage charges, unless made under
protest, shall be final and conclusive and shall constitute a waiver of any
right to recover the money so paid. In the event that the towing and
A. The Police Force of the City of Sunbury may remove or cause to be
removed any vehicle parked or allowed to stand in violation of this
chapter if the owner or operator of said vehicle has failed to remove the
same within 48 hours after receiving notice from the City of Sunbury
Code Office to remove the same, such notice having been given by
personal service or by certified mail to the owner or operator of the
vehicle or to the owner or occupant of the private property upon which
said vehicle is found.
B. In removing any such vehicles, the Police Force of the City of Sunbury
shall cause the same to be towed and stored by the City of Sunbury or
by such garages or towing services as are designated by the Director of
Public Safety to be approved storage garages or pounds for the storage
of such vehicles.
§ 166-7 TREES § 166-12
159:375
impounding charges are paid under protest, the offender shall be entitled to
a hearing before a District Justice or a court of record having jurisdiction,
as in the case of prosecution of other cases of summary offenses under the
Vehicle Code.84
§ 166-13. Removal by property owner or occupant.
In the event that the Police Force of the City of Sunbury shall be unable
to ascertain the ownership of a vehicle found upon private property in
violation of this chapter, the City of Sunbury, within 12 hours after the
vehicle has been found by the police, may notify the owner or occupant
of the private property, by certified mail, that such vehicle exists, and
thereafter the said owner or occupant of the private property shall cause
said vehicle to be removed to an authorized junk or scrap yard within 48
hours.
§ 166-14. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate the terms of this chapter shall, upon conviction
therefor, pay a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $300. Each day that
a vehicle remains upon any street, alley, public thoroughfare, municipally
owned parking area, public property or private property in violation of this
chapter shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 169
WASTE MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Municipal Authority — See Ch. 24.
Dumping — See Ch. 79.
Handbills and littering — See Ch. 99.
Municipal Authority regulations — See Ch.
111.
§ 169-1. Regulations of Municipal Authority incorporated by
reference.
The regulations of the Authority85 in connection with the management of
solid waste, as may from time to time be duly amended, are incorporated
herein by reference and made a part of this chapter.
§ 169-2. Enforcement. [Amended 3-22-2004]
The Authority shall be an agent of the City for the enforcement of this
chapter and the regulations of the Authority in connection with solid waste
management in the City of Sunbury.
84.Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
85.Editor's Note: "The Authority" refers to the Municipal Authority of the City of Sunbury.
§ 166-12 SUNBURY CODE § 169-3
169:376
§ 169-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-11-1991 by Ord. No.
1143; 3-22-2004]
Any person who violates the regulations of the Authority shall, for each
offense, upon summary conviction, pay a fine of not less than $100 and
not more than $1,000, together with the costs of prosecution, and, in the
event of failure to pay such fine and costs, shall undergo imprisonment for
not more than 30 days. Every violator shall be deemed guilty of a separate
offense for each and every day such violation shall continue and shall be
subject to the penalty imposed by this section for each and every such
separate offense.
Chapter 172
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Municipal Authority regulations — See Ch.
111.
Plumbing — See Ch. 127.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 130.
Sewers — See Ch. 139.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 143.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 145.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 148.
§ 169-3 WATER § 169-3
172:377

ARTICLE I
Connection to Water System Required
[Adopted 12-14-1998 by Ord. No. 1214]
§ 172-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
AUTHORITY — The Municipal Authority of the City of Sunbury, County of
Northumberland, Pennsylvania.
CITY — The City of Sunbury, County of Northumberland, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
IMPROVED PROPERTY — Any property within the City upon which there
is erected a structure intended for continuous or periodic habitation,
occupancy or use by human beings or animals.
OWNER — Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or
partial, of any improved property.
PERSON — Any individual partnership, company, association, society, trust,
corporation, municipality, municipal authority or other group or entity.
WATER SYSTEM — All facilities, as of any particular time, for production,
transmission, storage and distribution of water in the City owned by the
Authority.
§ 172-2. Connection required; notice; connection by City.
A. The owner of any improved property abutting upon the water system
shall connect such improved property with and shall use such water
system in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Authority,
within 90 days after notice to such owner from the City to make such
connection.
B. The notice by the City to make a connection to a main referred to in
Subsection A shall consist of a copy of the article, including any
amendments and/or supplement at the time in effect, or a summary of
this article in letter form specifying that such connections shall be made
within 90 days after the date such notice is given or served. Such notice
may be given or served at any time after a main is in place which can
deliver water to a particular improved property.
C. If the owner of any improved property located within the City and
abutting upon the water system, after 90 days' notice from the City,
shall fail to connect such improved property to the water system, the
City or Authority may construct such connection and collect from such
owner the costs and expenses thereof in any manner permitted by law.
§ 172-1 WATER § 172-3
172:379
§ 172-3. Restrictions on use of well water.
The use of well water for human consumption or in any product containing
water shall be prohibited. Water from wells shall also not be permitted for
other human uses such as cooking, bathing, cleaning, etc. The drilling of a
well shall require a building permit, and the use of the water from the well
for any purpose shall be first approved by the Code Enforcement Office of
the City and any other federal, state or local regulatory authorities.
§ 172-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who or which shall violate any provision
of this article, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine of not
more than $1,000 and/or imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day a
violation of this article continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 172-3 SUNBURY CODE § 172-4
172:380
Chapter 175
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Committee — See Ch. 33.
Shade Tree Commission — See Ch. 44.
Building construction — See Ch. 68.
Flood control property — See Ch. 91.
Food-handling establishments — See Ch. 94.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 130.
Rental property — See Ch. 134.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 143.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 145.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 148.
Trees — See Ch. 159.
§ 172-4 WATER § 172-4
172:381

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 175-1. Purpose.
This chapter is enacted for the following purposes: to promote the health,
safety, morals and general welfare of the inhabitants of the City of Sunbury
by lessening congestion in the roads and streets; securing safety from
fire, panic and other dangers; providing adequate light and air; preventing
the overcrowding of land; avoiding undue concentration of population;
facilitating the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage,
schools, parks and other public requirements; conserving the value of
buildings; encouraging the most appropriate use of land; preventing or
minimizing flood damage in the future; protecting water supply, sanitary
sewage disposal and natural drainage; and preventing the unwise design
and construction of development in areas subject to flooding. Furthermore,
it is the intent of this chapter to establish a precise and detailed plan for the
use of the land in the City of Sunbury based on the City's Comprehensive
Plan and subsequent amendments or additions, including but not limited to
those aspects of the plan relating to land use, density of population, location
and function of streets and other community facilities and utilities.
§ 175-2. Interpretation.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall be held
to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of health, safety, morals
and the general welfare of the City and its citizens. It is not intended by
this chapter to interfere with or abrogate or annul any rules or regulations
previously adopted or permits previously issued by the City which are not in
conflict with any provisions of this chapter, nor is it intended by this chapter
to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easements, covenants, building
restrictions or other agreements between parties; provided, however, that
where this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon the use of the
buildings or premises or upon the height of the building or requires a
larger open space than is imposed or required by such ordinances, rules,
regulations or permits or by easements, covenants, building restrictions or
agreements, the provisions of this chapter shall apply.
§ 175-3. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Sunbury Zoning
Ordinance."
§ 175-4. Definitions and word usage.
A. The following words are defined in order to facilitate the interpretation
of this chapter for administrative purposes and in the carrying out of
duties by appropriate officers and by the Zoning Hearing Board.
B. Word usage.
§ 175-1 WATER § 175-4
172:383
(1) Words used in the present tense include the future tense.
(2) The singular includes the plural.
(3) The word "person" includes a corporation and/or partnership as
well as an individual.
(4) The word "lot" includes the word "plot" or "parcel."
(5) The term "shall" is always mandatory.
(6) The word "used" or "occupied," as applied to any land or building,
shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged or
designed to be used or occupied."
C. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words shall, for the
purpose of this chapter, have the meanings herein indicated:
ABANDONED VEHICLE — A vehicle, other than a pedalcycle, shall
be presumed to be abandoned if, as defined under the Pennsylvania
Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 102, it is unable to be moved under its
own power or is left unattended on or along a public right-of-way or
other public property for more than 48 hours and does not bear valid
registration, a current certificate of inspection, and an ascertainable
vehicle identification number.[Added 4-10-2017]
ACCESS DRIVE — A paved surface, other than a street or alley, which
provides vehicular access from a street or private road or a lot.
ACCESSORY BUILDING — A building subordinate to and detached
from the main building on the same lot and used for purposes
customarily incidental to the main building.
ACCESSORY USE — A use customarily incidental and subordinate to
the principal use or the main building and located on the same lot with
such principal use or main building.
ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESS — A business or club which engages in
one or more of the following areas of sales, services or entertainment:
ADULT BOOKSTORE — Any establishment or place:
Which has a substantial or significant portion of its stock-intrade
consisting of the following items:
Books, magazines or other periodicals, films or other forms
of audio or visual representation which are distinguished
or characterized by an emphasis on depiction, description
or display of sexual activities or conduct or uncovered
male or female genital areas; and/or
[1]
Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed
primarily for use in connection with sexual activities or
conduct.
[2]
(a)
(1)
§ 175-4 SUNBURY CODE § 175-4
172:384
AGRICULTURE — The tilling of the soil, the raising of crops,
horticulture and gardening.
ALLEY — A narrow thoroughfare through a block giving access
primarily to the rear of buildings or properties.
ALTERATIONS — As applied to a building or structure, any change or
rearrangement in the total floor area, or an enlargement, whether by
extending on a side or by increasing in height, or the moving from one
location or position to another.
To which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin or slug
operated or electronically or mechanically controlled still or
motion-picture machines, projectors or other image producing
devices are maintained to show images, with or without sound,
where the images so displayed are distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on depiction, description or
display of sexual activities or conduct or uncovered male or
female genital areas.
(b)
ADULT THEATER — Any theater, auditorium, concert hall or other
place of assembly presenting any form of audio and/or visual
material and in which a substantial portion of the total presentation
time measured over any consecutive twelve-month period is or
will be devoted to the showing of material which is distinguished
or characterized by emphasis on depiction, description or display
of sexual activities or uncovered male or female genital areas,
or featuring live performances on a regular basis which are
distinguished or characterized by emphasis on depiction,
description or display of sexual activities or by exposure of
uncovered male or female genital areas for observation by patrons.
(2)
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment or business
which provides the services of massage and body manipulation,
including exercises, heat and light treatments of the body, and all
forms and methods of physiotherapy, unless operated by a medical
practitioner, chiropractor or professional physical therapist
licensed by the commonwealth. This definition does not include an
athletic club, health club, school, gymnasium, reducing salon, spa
or similar establishment where massage or similar manipulation of
the human body is offered as an incidental or accessory service.
(3)
OTHER ADULT-ORIENTED RETAIL, COMMERCIAL SERVICE OR
ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT — Any other business or
club which primarily offers its patrons or members retail goods,
commercial services or entertainment which is characterized by an
emphasis on matter or activities relating to, depicting, describing
or displaying sexual activity or conduct or uncovered male or
female genital areas.
(4)
§ 175-4 WATER § 175-4
172:385
ALTERATIONS, STRUCTURAL — Any change in the supporting
members of a building or structure, such as bearing walls, columns,
beams or girders.
AMENDMENT — A change in use in a district which includes revisions
to the zoning text and/or the official Zoning Map. The authority for any
amendment lies solely with the City Council.
ANIMAL HOSPITAL — A building used for the treatment, housing or
boarding of small domestic animals, such as dogs, cats, rabbits and
birds or fowl, by a veterinarian.
APARTMENT — A dwelling unit for rent or lease, other than a singlefamily
detached dwelling.
APARTMENT CONVERSION — A dwelling constructed by converting
an existing building into apartments for one or more families, without
substantially altering the exterior of the building.
APARTMENT HOUSE — A multifamily dwelling containing three or
more apartments.
AREA, BUILDING — The total area taken on a horizontal plane at
the mean level of the ground surrounding the main building and all
accessory buildings, exclusive of uncovered porches, terraces and
steps.
AUTOMOBILE — See "vehicle."[Amended 4-10-2017]
AUTOMOBILE AND/OR MOBILE HOME SALES GARAGE — A building
on a lot designed and used primarily for the display or sale of new and
used cars and mobile homes, where mechanical repairs and body work
may be conducted as an accessory use incidental to the primary use.
AUTOMOBILE AND/OR TRAILER SALES LOT — An open lot used for
the outdoor display or sales of new or used automobiles or trailers,
where minor and incidental repair work, other than body and fender,
may be done.
AUTOMOBILE BODY SHOP — A building on a lot that is used for the
repair or painting of bodies, chassis, wheels, fenders, bumpers and/or
accessories of automobiles and other vehicles for conveyance.
AUTOMOBILE GARAGE, MAJOR — A building on a lot designed and/
or used primarily for mechanical and/or body repairs, storage, rental,
servicing or supplying of gasoline or oil to automobiles, trucks or other
motor vehicles.
AUTOMOBILE GARAGE, MINOR — A building for the storage of one
or more automobiles and/or other vehicles, provided that no business,
occupation or service is conducted for profit therein other than the
leasing of space for the storage of automobiles and/or other vehicles.
AUTOMOBILE OR GASOLINE SERVICE STATION — A building on a
lot or part thereof that is used primarily for the retail sale of gasoline,
oil and other fuel and which may include facilities used for polishing,
§ 175-4 SUNBURY CODE § 175-4
172:386
greasing, washing, dry cleaning or otherwise cleaning or servicing
automobiles and other vehicles.
AUTOMOBILE WASHING (CAR WASH) — A building on a lot designed
and used primarily for the washing and polishing of automobiles, which
may provide accessory services as set forth herein for automobile
service stations.
AUTOMOBILE WRECKING — See "junkyard."
BASE FLOOD — The flood which has been selected to serve as the basis
upon which the floodplain management provisions of this and other
chapters have been prepared; for purposes of this chapter, the onehundred-
year flood.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION — The one-hundred-year-flood elevation.
BASEMENT — A story partly underground but having 1/2 or more of its
height above the average level of the adjoining ground.
BOARDINGHOUSE — A building where, for compensation, provisions
are made for lodging and meals for at least three but not more than 15
persons.
BOARDINGHOUSE, ADULT PERSONAL CARE — A building in which
food, shelter and personal assistance or supervision are provided for
a period exceeding 24 consecutive hours for more than three, but
not more than six, adults who are not relatives of the operator and
who require assistance or supervision in such matters as dressing,
bathing, diet or medication prescribed for self-administration but do not
require hospitalization or care in a skilled nursing or intermediate care
facility.[Added 8-13-1984 by Ord. No. 1060]
BUILDING — Any structure having a roof supported by columns, piers
or walls and intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of persons,
animals or chattels.
BUILDING, DETACHED — A building surrounded by open space on the
same lot.
BUILDING LINE — A line parallel to the front, side or rear lot line, set
so as to provide the required yard.
BUILDING, MAIN — A building in which is conducted the principal use
of the lot on which it is located.
CARPORT — A building open on at least three sides which is primarily
designed or used for parking automobiles.
CELLAR — A story partly underground and having more than 1/2 of its
clear height below the average level of the adjoining ground. A "cellar"
shall not be considered in determining the required number of stories.
COURT — An unoccupied open space, other than a yard, on the same
lot with a building, which is bounded on two or more sides by the walls
of such building.
§ 175-4 WATER § 175-4
172:387
COURT, INNER — A court which does not extend to a street, alley, yard
or outer court.
COURT, OUTER — A court which extends to a street, alley, yard or other
outer court.
COVERAGE — The percentage of the plot or lot area covered by the
building area.
CURB LEVEL — The officially established grade of the curb in front of
the midpoint of the lot.
DAIRY — An industrial establishment for the manufacture or processing
of dairy products.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures,
mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling
operations.
DOG KENNEL — The sheltering of three or more dogs that are more
than six months old.
DWELLING — A building designed for living quarters containing one or
more dwelling units.
DWELLING, GROUP — A group of two or more single-family, two-family
or multifamily dwellings occupying a lot in one ownership.
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY — A dwelling used by three or more
families living independently of each other and doing their own
cooking, including apartment houses, row houses or townhouses.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED (ROW) — A dwelling used by
one family, having two party walls in common with other dwellings,
such as row houses and townhouses.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED — A dwelling used by one
family, having only one dwelling unit and having two side yards.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY SEMIDETACHED — A dwelling used by
one family, having a side yard and having a party wall in common with
another dwelling or building.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY ATTACHED (ROW) — A dwelling used by two
families, with one dwelling unit arranged over the other and having
two party walls in common with other dwellings, such as row houses or
townhouses.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY DETACHED — A dwelling used by two
families, with one dwelling unit arranged over the other and having two
side yards.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY SEMIDETACHED — A dwelling used by two
families, with one dwelling unit arranged over the other, having a side
yard and having a party wall in common with another dwelling or
building.
§ 175-4 SUNBURY CODE § 175-4
172:388
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms providing living and sanitary
facilities for one family and with facilities for sleeping, cooking and
eating.
FAMILY — One or more persons who live in one dwelling unit and
maintain a common household. It may consist of a single person or
two or more persons, whether or not related by blood, marriage or
adoption. It may also include domestic servants and gratuitous guests,
but not occupants of a club, fraternal lodging or boardinghouse.
FENCE — Any combination of materials creating an enclosure or
barrier to prevent intrusion from outside or straying from within.
FLOOD — A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
FLOODPLAIN — A relatively flat or low land area adjoining a river,
stream or watercourse which is subject to partial or complete
inundation, or an area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation
or runoff of surface waters from any source. For the purpose of this
chapter, it is the one-hundred-year floodplain as delineated by the Type
15 Flood Insurance Study for the City of Sunbury.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural or nonstructural
additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or
eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water
and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOOR AREA, HABITABLE — The sum of the horizontal areas of all
rooms used for habitation, such as living room, dining room, kitchen or
bedroom, but not including hallways, stairways, cellars, attics, service
rooms or utility rooms, bathrooms or closets; nor unheated areas such
as enclosed porches; nor rooms without at least one window or skylight
opening onto an outside yard or court.
FLOOR AREA OF A BUILDING — The sum of the gross horizontal areas
of several floors of a building and its accessory buildings on the same
lot, excluding cellar and basement floor areas not devoted to residential
use but including the area of roofed porches and roofed terraces. All
dimensions shall be measured between exterior faces of walls.
GARAGE — See "automobile garage, major" and "automobile garage,
minor."
GARDENING — The cultivation of herbs, fruits, flowers or vegetables,
excluding the keeping of livestock.
GRADE, FINISHED — The complete surfaces of lawns, walks and roads
brought to grades as shown on official plans or designs relating thereto.
HEIGHT OF BUILDING — The vertical distance measured from the
mean level of the ground surrounding the building to the point of the
roof, but not including chimneys, towers, spires, elevator penthouses,
tanks and similar projections.
HOME OCCUPATION — See Article XI, Supplementary Regulations.
§ 175-4 WATER § 175-4
172:389
HOSPITAL — Any premises, other than a mental health establishment,
as defined herein, whether or not operated for profit, having an
organized medical staff and providing equipment and services primarily
for inpatient care of individuals who require definitive medical
diagnosis and/or treatment and care for illness, injury or other
disability, or during or after pregnancy, and which also makes available
at least clinical laboratory services, diagnostic X-ray services, definitive
clinical treatment services, surgical services and outpatient emergency
services.
HOTEL — A building designed for occupancy primarily as the
temporary abiding place for individuals who are lodged with or without
meals, in which building:
INDUSTRIAL PARK — A tract of land laid out in accordance with
an overall plan for a group of industries with separate building sites
designed and arranged on streets with utility services, setbacks, side
yards, landscaped yards and covenants controlling the architecture and
uses.
JUNK — Wastepaper, scrap, copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries, paper,
trash, rubber debris, waste, iron, steel, appliances, drums, scrap wood
(excluding firewood), and other old or scrap ferrous or nonferrous
material, including wrecked, scrapped, ruined, dismantled,
nonrepairable, salvage or abandoned motor vehicles or automobiles,
truck-campers, trailers, or parts thereof.[Added 4-10-2017]
JUNKYARD — Any lot, land or open structure, or part thereof, used
primarily for the collection, storage, salvaging or selling of junk or
discarded material. "Open structure," as defined herein, shall include,
but not be limited to, carports, tarps, or any other types of temporary
coverings used to cover or store junk or discarded material. The term
"junkyard" shall not be applicable to recycling centers, vehicle salvage
dealers, and repair or towing businesses, as defined herein.[Amended
4-10-2017]
LOT — A measured parcel of land having fixed boundaries and
designated on a plot plan, survey or map.
LOT, CORNER — A lot at the junction of and abutting on two or more
intersecting streets or private roads or at the point of abrupt change
of a single street or private road, where the interior angle is less than
(1) There are more than 10 sleeping rooms.
Fifty percent or more of the gross floor area shall be devoted to
residential use.
(2)
(3) Business may be conducted when accessory and incidental.
(4) There may be club rooms, ballrooms and common dining facilities.
Such hotel services as maid, telephone and postal services are
provided.
(5)
§ 175-4 SUNBURY CODE § 175-4
172:390
135° and the radius of the street or private road line is less than 100
feet.
LOT, INTERIOR — A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT LINES — The lines bounding a lot as defined herein.
MEDICAL CENTER — The office of more than one practitioner of the
profession of medicine, which for the purpose of this chapter shall
include dentistry, chiropractic and podiatry.
MENTAL HEALTH ESTABLISHMENT — Any premises, whether or not
operated for profit, for the care of individuals who require care because
of mental illness, intellectual disability or inebriety. The private home of
a person who is rendering such care to a relative shall not be deemed
to be a mental health establishment.86[Amended 1-11-2016]
MOBILE HOME PARK — A lot upon which two or more mobile homes,
occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes, are located.
MOTEL — A group of attached or detached buildings containing
sleeping rooms or living units with accessory facilities designed for
temporary use by automobile tourists or transients, including auto
courts, motels, motor lodges and similar establishments.
MOTOR VEHICLE SALESROOM — A building designed and used
primarily for the display or sale of new or used automobiles and/
or other vehicles where mechanical repairs may be conducted as an
accessory use.
NONCONFORMING BUILDING — A building or structure which does
not conform to all the height, area, court and yard regulations of a
district in which it is located.
NONCONFORMING SIGN — A sign which does not conform to the
regulations of a district in which it is located.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use which does not conform to the
regulations of a district in which it is located.
NONREPAIRABLE VEHICLE — A vehicle shall be presumed to be
nonrepairable if, as defined under the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code, 75
Pa.C.S.A. § 102, it is incapable of safe operation for use on roadways or
highways and has no resale value except as a source of parts or scrap
only; a salvage vehicle issued a nonrepariable or nonrebuildable vehicle
document by another state; or a vehicle which a salvor or vehicle
salvage dealer designates as a source for parts or scrap or which the
owner irreversibly designates as a source for parts or scrap.[Added
4-10-2017]
NURSERY, HORTICULTURE — Any lot or parcel of land used to
cultivate, propagate and grow trees, shrubs, vines and other plants,
86.Editor’s Note: The former definition of “mobile home,” which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 1-11-2016.
§ 175-4 WATER § 175-4
172:391
including the buildings, structures and equipment customarily
incidental and accessory to the primary use.
NURSING OR CONVALESCENT HOME — Any premises, whether or
not operated for profit, primarily engaged in providing skilled nursing
care and related services and/or intermediate nursing care and related
services and/or rehabilitation services for the patients who are not
acutely ill and not in need of hospitalization, but who, because of age,
illness, disease, injury, convalescence or physical infirmity, need such
care or services.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD — A flood that has one chance in 100 or
a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any year.
OPEN SPACE — The unoccupied space open to the sky on the same lot
with the building.
PARKING SPACE — The space, located off of the public right-of-way, for
the parking of one automobile.
PAVED — Covered with crushed limestone, concrete, macadam or other
material making a firm surface for travel.
PERSONAL SERVICE SHOP — A business which provides a service
which is personal in nature, such as barber and beauty shops, dry
cleaners, dressmakers, tailors and so forth.
PET GROOMING — The grooming of domesticated animals. Pets and
animals shall not include farm animals and the like. Animals shall be
maintained inside the business. The boarding of animals shall not be
permitted. Pet grooming shall only be permitted in H-C, I-P, N-B and CB
zoned areas.[Added 6-10-2002; amended 8-26-2002]
PLAT — A map, plan or layout showing the subdivision of land and
indicating the location and boundaries of individual properties.
PREMANUFACTURED HOUSING (MOBILE HOME) — A transportable,
single-family dwelling intended for permanent occupancy, office or
place of assembly contained in one unit, or in two units designed
to be joined into one integral unit capable of again being separated
for repeated towing, which arrives at a site complete and ready for
occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly
operations, and constructed so that it may be used without a permanent
foundation.[Added 1-11-2016]
PREMISES — Any lot, parcel or tract of land and any building
constructed thereon.
PRIVATE — Not publicly owned, operated or controlled.
PRIVATE ROAD — A right-of-way, other than a street, which provides
vehicular access to two or more lots.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — The office of a sole practitioner of the
traditional professions of theology, medicine and law, or the practitioner
§ 175-4 SUNBURY CODE § 175-4
172:392
of a profession other than theology, medicine and law when allowed by
the Zoning Hearing Board according to the provisions of § 175-88.
PUBLIC — Owned, operated or controlled by a government agency,
federal, state or local, including a corporation created by law for the
performance of certain specialized governmental functions and the
Board of Public Education.
QUARRY, SAND PIT, GRAVEL PIT, BORROW PIT or TOPSOIL
STRIPPING — A lot or land or part thereof used for the purpose of
extracting stone, sand, clay, gravel or topsoil for sale, excluding the
grading of a lot preparatory to the construction of a building for which
application for a building permit has been made.
RECYCLING — The collection, separation, recovery and sale or reuse
of metals, glass, paper, leaf waste, plastics and other materials which
would otherwise be disposed or processed as municipal waste or the
mechanized separation and treatment of municipal waste (other than
through combustion) and creation and recovery of reusable materials
other than a fuel for the operation of energy.[Added 4-10-2017]
RECYCLING CENTER — An individual or business primarily and
actively engaged in the business of recycling.[Added 4-10-2017]
REPAIR OR TOWING BUSINESS — An individual or business, as
defined under the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 1337(c)
(relating to use of "miscellaneous motor vehicle business" registration
plates), who is primarily and actively engaged in the business of
mechanical or body repairs or towing for direct compensation of motor
vehicles owned and operated by other persons.[Added 4-10-2017]
RIDING ACADEMY — An establishment where horses are kept for
riding or driving or are stabled for compensation or incidental to the
operation of any club, association, ranch or similar establishment.
ROOMING HOUSE — A building where, for compensation, provisions
are made for lodging for at least three but not more than 15 persons.
ROW HOUSES (TOWNHOUSES) — A combination of attached and
semidetached dwellings totaling three or more.
SALVAGE VEHICLE — A vehicle shall be presumed to be salvage if,
as defined under the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 102,
it is inoperable or unable to meet vehicle equipment and inspection
standards to the extent that the cost of repairs would exceed the value
of the repaired vehicle. The term does not include a vehicle that would
qualify as an antique or classic vehicle except for its lack of restoration
or maintenance.[Added 4-10-2017]
SCHOOL, PRIVATE — Any place offering instruction in any branch of
knowledge which is operated by a nongovernmental agency.
SCHOOL, PUBLIC — Any place offering instruction in any branch of
knowledge which is operated by a governmental agency.
§ 175-4 WATER § 175-4
172:393
SCREEN PLANTING — A vegetative material of sufficient height and
density to conceal from the view of property owners in adjoining
districts the structures and uses on the premises on which the screen
planting is located.
SCREENING — The use of any natural objects, plantings,
embankments, fencing, walls or structures, or a combination of any of
these, which will effectively create a complete visible screen.[Added
4-10-2017]
SHOPPING CENTER — A group of stores planned and designed to
function as a unit for the lot on which it is located with off-street
parking provided as an integral part of the unit.
SIGN — Any surface, fabric, device or structure, including billboards or
poster panel, bearing lettered, pictorial or sculptured matter designed
for visual communication and used for the purpose of bringing the
subject thereof to the attention of the public, but not including any flag,
badge or insignia of any government.
SPECIAL EXCEPTION — A use which the Zoning Hearing Board is
permitted to authorize in specific instances listed in this chapter, under
the terms, procedures and conditions prescribed in this chapter.
SPECIAL SALES — The sale of goods in a building or on a lot normally
used for residential purposes, such as porch sales, garage sales, yard
sales and all similar sales.
STABLE — A building in which horses are kept.
STORY — That portion of a building included between the surface of
any floor and the surface of the floor next above it or, if there is no floor
above it, then the space between any floor and the ceiling immediately
above it.
STREET — A thoroughfare along the perimeter of a block, which
primarily affords access to the front of buildings or properties.
STREET GRADE — The officially established grade of the street upon
which a lot fronts or, in its absence, the established grade of other
streets upon which the lot abuts, at the midway of the frontage of the
lot thereon. If there is no officially established grade, the existing grade
of the street at such midpoint shall be taken as the street grade.
STREET LINE — The dividing line between the street and lot, also
shown as the right-of-way line.
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object having an ascertainable
stationary location on or in land or water, whether or not affixed to land.
SUBDIVISION — An area of land divided by the owner or agent, either
by lots or by metes and bounds, into lots or parcels, two or more
in number, for the purpose of conveyance, transfer, improvements or
sale. The appurtenant roads, streets and ways dedicated or intended
to be dedicated to public uses, or the use of purchasers or owners of
§ 175-4 SUNBURY CODE § 175-4
172:394
lots fronting thereon are included. The word "subdivision" includes the
word "resubdivision," "plat," "replat," "plan" or "replan."
TELEPHONE CENTRAL OFFICE — A building and its equipment
erected and used for the purpose of facilitating the transmission and
exchange of telephone and radio messages among subscribers, and
other business of a telephone central office. It shall not include storage
of materials, trucks or repair facilities or housing of repair crews.
THEATER — A building or part of a building devoted to the showing of
moving pictures or theatrical productions on a commercial basis.
TOURIST COURT — See "motel."
TOURIST HOME — A dwelling in which overnight accommodations are
used by a transient guest for compensation.
TRAILER — A vehicle designed to be towed by a motor vehicle.[Added
4-10-2017]
TRAILER COACH — See "mobile home."
TRAILER PARK — See "mobile home park."
TRUCK-CAMPER — A structure designed, used or maintained primarily
to be loaded or affixed to a motor vehicle to provide a mobile dwelling,
sleeping place, office or commercial space.[Added 4-10-2017]
USE — The specific purpose for which land or a building is designed,
arranged or intended or for which it is or may be occupied or
maintained. The term "permitted use" or its equivalent shall not be
deemed to include any nonconforming use.
VARIANCE — A variation or modification of the provisions of this
chapter which the Zoning Hearing Board is permitted to authorize,
in specific instances, under the terms, procedures and conditions
prescribed in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code and this
chapter.
VEHICLE — As defined under the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code, 75
Pa.C.S.A. § 102, every device in, upon or by which any person or
property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, except
devices used exclusively upon rails or tracks. The term does not include
a self-propelled wheelchair or an electrical mobility device operated by
and designed for the exclusive use of a person with a mobility-related
disability.[Added 4-10-2017]
VEHICLE SALVAGE DEALER — Any individual or business, as defined
under the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 1337(c) (relating
to use of "miscellaneous motor vehicle business" registration plates),
who is primarily and actively engaged in the business of acquiring and
dismantling used, wrecked, damaged, abandoned or salvage vehicles
for the purpose of selling the usable parts and selling the remaining
vehicle hulk materials for recycling or processing.[Added 4-10-2017]
§ 175-4 WATER § 175-4
172:395
WINDOW — An opening to the outside, other than a door, which
provides all or part of the required natural ventilation or natural light,
or both, to an interior space.
YARD — A space open to the sky and unoccupied by any building,
structure or merchandise for display or sale, located on the same lot
with a building or structure.
YARD, FRONT — A yard on the same lot with a main building, extending
the full width of the lot and situated between the street line and the
front line of the building projected to the side lines of the lot. The depth
of the front yard shall be measured between the required setback line
and the street line.
YARD, REAR — A yard on the same lot with a main building, extending
the full width of the lot and situated between the rear line of the lot and
the rear line of the building projected to the side lines of the lot. The
depth of the rear yard shall be measured between the rear line of the
lot and the rear line of the building.
YARD, SIDE — A yard on the same lot with the building, situated
between the required setback line and the side line of the lot and
extending from the front yard to the rear yard. Any lot line not a rear
line or a front line shall be deemed a side line.
§ 175-4 SUNBURY CODE § 175-4
172:396
ARTICLE II
Zoning Districts; Map; Boundaries
§ 175-5. Districts enumerated.
For the purpose of this chapter, the City of Sunbury is hereby divided into
districts which shall be designated as follows:
F-1 Floodplain District (Floodway)
F-2 Floodplain District (Floodway Fringe)
OS Open Space District
R-1 Residential District
R-2 Residential District
HC Highway Commercial District
CB Central Business District
NB Neighborhood Business District
IP Industrial Park District
§ 175-6. Zoning Map.
The boundaries of said districts shall be shown upon the map attached to
and made a part of this chapter, which shall be designated as the "Zoning
Map."87 The said map and all the notations, references and other data
shown thereon are hereby incorporated by reference into this chapter as if
all were fully described herein. The zoning district boundaries are described
in § 175-115.
§ 175-7. Rules for interpretation of district boundaries.
Where uncertainty exists as to boundaries of any district as shown on said
Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:
A. District boundary lines are intended to follow or be parallel to the
center line of streets, streams and railroads and lot or property lines as
they exist on plans on record at the time of the adoption of this chapter,
unless such district boundary lines are fixed by dimensions as shown on
the Zoning Map.
B. Where a district boundary is not fixed by dimensions and where it
approximately follows lot lines or approved subdivision plans and where
it does not scale more than 10 feet therefrom, such lot lines shall be
construed to be such boundaries, unless specifically shown otherwise.
C. In unsubdivided land or where a district boundary divides a lot, the
location of such boundary, unless the same is indicated by dimensions,
87.Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the office of the City Clerk and is available
during regular office hours.
§ 175-5 WATER § 175-7
172:397
§ 175-8. Interpretation of boundaries by Zoning Hearing Board.
In case of any uncertainty, the Zoning Hearing Board shall interpret the
intent of the map as to location of district boundaries.
§ 175-9. Lots divided by district boundaries.
In unsubdivided land where a district boundary line divides a lot held in
single and separate ownership, the following rules shall apply:
§ 175-10. Degree of restrictiveness.
The phrase "more restrictive uses" as employed in this chapter shall mean
the following:
shall be determined by the use of the scale appearing on the Zoning
Map.
A. The use in a less restricted district may extend over the portion of the
lot in the more restricted district a distance of not more than 50 feet
beyond the district boundary line, provided that such extension does
not extend the frontage of the less restricted district along a street.
B. The frontage of the less restricted district may extend over the portion
of the lot in the more restricted district a distance of not more than 50
feet beyond the district line, provided that a special exception is
granted by the Zoning Hearing Board.
A. Those permitted in an F-1 District are the more restrictive.
B. All other uses are less restrictive in the order they are permitted in the
districts shown: F-2, OS, R-1, R-2, HC, CB, NB and IP.
C. Where a use in specifically enumerated in a less restrictive district,
such use shall not be permitted in a more restrictive district unless it is
a specifically enumerated and permitted use therein, except as
provided in § 175-9.
§ 175-7 SUNBURY CODE § 175-10
172:398
ARTICLE III
(Reserved)88
§ 175-11. through § 175-15.27 (Reserved)
88.Editor’s Note: Former Art. III, Flood Damage Prevention, as amended, was superseded
7-25-2016. See now Ch. 92, Floodplain Management.
§ 175-11 WATER § 175-11
172:399

ARTICLE IV
OS Open Space District
§ 175-16. Purpose.
The purpose of the OS Open Space District is to preserve and protect
natural amenities; to encourage the development of land for recreation and
conservation purposes; to prevent intensive use of the City's waterfront
properties that are subject to periodic flooding and poor drainage; to
protect watershed areas, natural drainage channels and watercourses; and
to create conditions conducive to carrying out the purpose of this chapter.
§ 175-17. Permitted uses.
A building may be used, erected or altered and a lot may be used for any of
the following purposes:
§ 175-18. Area regulations.
§ 175-19. Building height.
No building shall be erected to a height in excess of 35 feet; provided,
however, that this height may be increased one foot for each additional foot
that the width of each yard exceeds the minimum required.
A. Public parks, playgrounds, playfields, swimming facilities and other
similar recreational facilities, including refreshment stands for the
seasonal distribution of food and drink.
B. Facilities for conserving natural resources and protecting waterways,
channels and drainageways.
C. Public utility structures and uses, including substations and water
pumping stations.
D. Identification signs, when erected and maintained in accordance with
the provisions of Article XIII.
A. Lot area and width. There shall be no limit to lot area and width.
B. Lot coverage. The principal and accessory buildings shall not cover
more than 20% of the lot.
C. Yards. Each lot shall have front, side and rear yards of not less than the
following minimum requirements:
(1) Front: 50 feet.
(2) Side: 50 feet.
(3) Rear: none, except as required by § 175-82.
§ 175-16 WATER § 175-20
172:401
§ 175-20. Off-street parking and loading spaces.
Off-street parking and loading areas shall be provided in accordance with
Articles XIV and XV.
§ 175-21. Special exception uses.
The following uses shall be permitted only when authorized by the Zoning
Hearing Board in accordance with the procedures established in Article
XVI: private recreation facilities associated with boating activities, such as
marinas, boat docks, moorings and necessary appurtenances.
§ 175-22. Prohibited uses.
No building, structure or portion thereof shall be erected, altered or
converted to any of the following uses:
§ 175-23. Obstructions to waterways.
For obstruction to waterways provisions, see Article XI, § 175-82.
A. Residential uses.
B. Private recreation uses for financial gain, such as amusement parks,
concessions, cartways, racetracks, miniature golf courses, outdoor
theaters, pool halls and other similar uses.
§ 175-20 SUNBURY CODE § 175-23
172:402
ARTICLE V
R-1 Residential District
§ 175-24. Purpose.
The purpose of the R-1 Residential District is to protect, insofar as possible,
the existing and future investment and to promote development in
accordance with acceptable density standards; to prevent the overcrowding
of land; to facilitate the provision of public facilities necessary to the health,
welfare and general convenience of the public; to preserve public open
space; to exclude incompatible uses; to reduce congestion on streets and
highways; and to create conditions conducive to carrying out the purpose of
this chapter.
§ 175-25. Permitted uses.
A building may be used, erected or altered and a lot may be used for any of
the following purposes:
§ 175-26. Area regulations.
A. Single-family detached dwellings.
B. (Reserved)89
C. Public parks, playgrounds and swimming pools, schools, museums,
libraries and hospitals.
D. Firehalls.
E. Signs, when erected and maintained in accordance with the provisions
of Article XIII.
F. Uses and buildings accessory to the permitted uses in this district.
A. Lot area shall be not less than 5,000 square feet.
B. Lot coverage. The total land area occupied by main and accessory
buildings shall not exceed 40% of the lot area.
C. Yards.
(1) The front yard (building line) shall be 25 feet.
(2) The side yard shall be five feet.
(3) The rear yard shall be 20 feet.
D. Lot width. Each lot shall have a width of at least 40 feet at the building
line. Corner lots shall be at least 20% wider than interior lots.
89.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, Home occupations, was repealed 8-26-2002.
§ 175-24 WATER § 175-27
172:403
§ 175-27. Building height.
Maximum building height shall be 35 feet; provided, however, that the
height may be increased one foot for each additional foot by which the side
yard exceeds the minimum and for each six inches by which the front and
rear yards exceed the minimum required.
§ 175-28. Off-street parking.
For off-street parking provisions, see Article XIV.
§ 175-29. Special exception uses.
The following special exceptions shall be permitted when authorized as
provided in Article XVI and the outward appearances of which are
residential in character or are in keeping with the character of the
neighborhood in which they are located:
§ 175-30. Area regulations for special exception uses.
For special exception uses, for residential structures other than singlefamily
detached dwellings, the minimum lot area shall be not less than
3,000 square feet per dwelling unit.
A. Churches, parish houses and convents.
B. Private recreation areas, playgrounds and swimming pools, when not
operated for gain or profit, whether or not open to the public.
C. Single-family semidetached dwelling and single-family attached
dwelling. [Amended 11-11-1985 by Ord. No. 1070]
D. Minor automobile garages when not an accessory use.
E. Home occupations. [Added 8-26-2002]
§ 175-27 SUNBURY CODE § 175-30
172:404
ARTICLE VI
R-2 Residential District
§ 175-31. Purpose.
The purpose and intent of the establishment of the R-2 Residential District
is to preserve existing residential development in the City; to permit orderly
development, redevelopment and expansion of residential structures; to
prevent overcrowding of the land by controlling density; to provide public
facilities necessary for the health, welfare and general convenience of the
population; to preserve public open space; to exclude those activities not
compatible with the residential environment; to reduce undue congestion
on streets and highways; and to create conditions conducive to carrying out
the purpose of this chapter.
§ 175-32. Permitted uses.
A building may be used, erected or altered and a lot may be used for any of
the following purposes:
§ 175-33. Area regulations.
A. Any use permitted in R-1 Residential Districts in §§ 175-25 and
175-29A, B and C of Article V, except home occupation. [Amended
11-11-1985 by Ord. No. 1070; 8-26-2002]
B. Boardinghouses, adult personal care boardinghouses and rooming
houses. [Amended 8-13-1984 by Ord. No. 1060]
C. (Reserved)90
D. Signs, when erected and maintained in accordance with the provisions
of Article XIII.
E. Uses and buildings accessory to the permitted uses in this district.
A. Lot area.
(1) Each one-family detached dwelling shall be located on a lot of not
less than 3,000 square feet in area and having a lot width of not less
than 30 feet at the building line, when served by both public water
and sanitary sewers.
(2) Each two-family dwelling shall be located on a lot of not less than
5,000 square feet in area and having a lot width of not less than 30
feet at the building line, when served by both public water and
sanitary sewers.
(3) All multiple-family dwellings, including apartments and group
dwellings, shall have a lot area of not less than 6,000 square feet or
90.Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, concerning multifamily and two-family dwellings and
conversion apartments, was repealed 8-26-2002.
§ 175-31 WATER § 175-33
172:405
§ 175-34. Building height.
No building shall be erected to a height in excess of 35 feet; provided,
however, that this height may be increased by one foot for each additional
foot by which the side yard exceeds the minimum and for each six inches by
which the front and rear yards exceed the minimum required.
§ 175-35. Off-street parking.
For off-street parking provisions, see Article XIV.
§ 175-36. Special exception uses.
The following special exceptions shall be permitted when authorized as
provided in Article XVI and the appearance of which are residential in
character or are in keeping with the character of the neighborhood in which
they are located:
1,500 square feet per dwelling unit, whichever is the greater, when
served by both public water and sanitary sewers.
B. Lot coverage. The total land area occupied by main and accessory
buildings shall not exceed 60% of the lot area.
C. Yards.
(1) The front yard (building line) shall be 15 feet.
(2) Each side yard shall be five feet.
(3) The rear yard shall be 20 feet.
A. Group dwellings.
B. Mortuaries and undertaking establishments.
C. Clubs, lodges and fraternal organizations.
D. Professional offices.
E. Minor automobile garages when not an accessory use.
F. Mobile home parks.
G. Home occupations. [Added 8-26-2002]
§ 175-33 SUNBURY CODE § 175-36
172:406
ARTICLE VII
HC Highway Commercial District
§ 175-37. Purpose.
The purpose of the HC Highway Commercial District is to establish
reasonable standards for the development of a commercial district oriented
to use by shoppers arriving and leaving by means of automobile. Permitted
uses should reflect transient services. Standards are designed to minimize
traffic congestion and promote the health, safety and welfare of the public.
§ 175-38. Permitted uses.
A. A residential use shall be permitted only when accessory and incidental
to one or more of the following permitted uses.
B. Automobile or gasoline service stations, motor vehicle salesrooms,
major automobile garages, hotels, motels, restaurants, drive-in
restaurants, miniature golf courses, supermarkets, theaters,
laundromats, drugstores and other uses similar in character.
C. Signs, when erected and maintained in accordance with the provisions
of Article XIII.
D. Accessory uses and buildings customarily incidental to the above
permitted uses. The above specified stores, shops and businesses shall
be retail establishments exclusively and shall be permitted only under
the following conditions:
(1) Such uses, operations or products shall not be objectionable due to
odor, dust, smoke, noise, vibration or other similar causes.
(2) There shall be no manufacture, compounding, processing or
treatment of products other than that which is clearly incidental
and essential to a retail store or business and when all such
products are sold at retail on the premises.
E. Recycling centers, subject to the following provisions: [Added
4-10-2017]
(1) Lot area and width. Each lot shall not be less than 25,000 square
feet.
(2) Storage of recycling materials. All recycling materials shall be
contained in an enclosed building or enclosed structure.
(3) Screening. Each lot shall be completely obscured from surrounding
property and the street by solid screening and subject to the
following:
(a) Plant materials used in the screen planting shall be of such
species and size as will produce a complete visual screen at
least six feet in height. Screen planting shall be permanently
§ 175-37 WATER § 175-38
172:407
§ 175-39. Area regulations.
maintained, and any plant material which does not live shall be
replaced.
(b) A fence, when erected as a screen, shall be not less than six
feet in height and produce a complete visual screen of the area
fenced.
(c) All screening shall be subject to controls as deemed necessary
to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the citizenry.
(4) Grandfathering clause. This subsection, Article VII, § 175-38E,
shall not be applicable to existing recycling centers located within
the City of Sunbury as of the effective date of this subsection.
F. Vehicle salvage dealer and repair or towing businesses, subject to the
following provisions:
(1) Lot area. Each lot shall not be less than 25,000 square feet.
(2) Compliance with Pennsylvania Law. All vehicle salvage dealers and
repair or towing businesses shall comply with all applicable
provisions of the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et
seq., and all applicable PennDOT regulations.
(3) Screening. Lot shall be completely obscured from surrounding
property and the street by solid screening and subject to the
following:
(a) Plant materials used in the screen planting shall be of such
species and size as will produce a complete visual screen at
least six feet in height. Screen planting shall be permanently
maintained, and any plant material which does not live shall be
replaced.
(b) A fence, when erected as a screen, shall be not less than six
feet in height and produce a complete visual screen of the area
fenced.
(c) All screening shall be subject to controls as deemed necessary
to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the citizenry.
(4) Grandfathering clause. This subsection, Article VII, § 175-38F,
shall not be applicable to existing vehicle salvage dealers and
repair or towing businesses located within the City of Sunbury as of
the effective date of this subsection, provided that said vehicle
salvage dealers and repair or towing businesses are in compliance
with all applicable provisions of the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code, 75
Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq., and all applicable PennDOT regulations.
A. Lot area and width. There shall be no limit to lot area and width.
§ 175-38 SUNBURY CODE § 175-39
172:408
§ 175-40. Building height.
The height of a building shall be no greater than 35 feet.
§ 175-41. Off-street parking and loading spaces.
Off-street parking and loading space shall be provided in accordance with
Articles XIV and XV.
B. Lot coverage. The coverage shall be no more than 60%.
C. Yards. Each lot shall have front, side and rear yards of not less than the
depth or width indicated below:
(1) Front yard: not required.
(2) Side yards, two: width, 10 feet each side of a principal building,
provided that commercial structures do not abut side by side;
however, no side yard shall be required where two or more
commercial uses abut side to side. In the case of a series of
abutting structures abutting and paralleling a public right-of-way,
an open and unobstructed passage for vehicles and pedestrians, of
at least 20 feet in width, shall be provided at grade level at
intervals of not more than 400 feet.
(3) Rear yard depth: 20 feet.
(4) Buffer yard. Along any residential district boundary line, a buffer
yard shall be provided which shall be not less than 25 feet in width,
measured from such boundary line, except where such boundary
line is a street line. No buffer shall be required when a street
separates the commercial district from a residential district. All
buffer yards shall be developed and maintained in accordance with
the provisions of Article XI, § 175-75, hereof. Notwithstanding the
provisions of Article XI, the requirement of a screen planting shall
be at the discretion of the Zoning Hearing Board.
§ 175-39 WATER § 175-41
172:409

ARTICLE VIII
CB Central Business District
§ 175-42. Purpose.
The purpose of the CB Central Business District is to identify and to
preserve the central business district; to encourage the orderly
development of commercial and personal service uses normally associated
with a central business district; to establish standards designed to promote
commercial activity; to reduce congestion on the streets; to reduce fire and
safety hazards and otherwise to create conditions conducive to the carrying
out of the overall purposes and intent of this chapter.
§ 175-43. Permitted uses.
A building may be used, erected or altered and a lot may be used for any of
the following purposes:
A. Retail stores, personal service shops and department stores, bed-andbreakfasts,
hotels and motels, but excluding adult-oriented businesses.
[Amended 6-25-2007]
B. Banks, offices, studios, medical centers and uses of a similar character.
C. Specialty shops for custom work and articles to be sold at retail on the
premises, such as baking, confectionary, dressmaking, printing,
tailoring and similar shops and services.
D. Restaurants, cafes, tearooms and other places serving food and drink.
E. Radio and television studios.
F. Assembly halls, post offices, firehalls, libraries, City halls, parks,
museums and similar uses.
G. Indoor recreation facilities, such as theaters, billiard or pool parlors
and bowling alleys.
H. Private schools.
I. Churches, parish houses and convents.
J. Clubs, lodges and fraternal organizations.
K. (Reserved)91
L. Signs, when erected and maintained in accordance with the provisions
of Article XIII.
M. Uses and buildings accessory to the permitted uses in this district.
91.Editor's Note: Former Subsection K, concerning multifamily dwellings and apartments,
was repealed 8-26-2002.
§ 175-42 WATER § 175-44
172:411
§ 175-44. Area regulations.
§ 175-45. Building height.
No building shall be erected to a height in excess of 110 feet.
§ 175-46. Off-street parking and loading spaces.
§ 175-47. Special exception uses.
The following uses may be approved as a special exception by the Zoning
Hearing Board in accordance with the procedures outlined in Article XVI:
A. Lot area and width. There shall be no limit to lot area and width.
B. Lot coverage. There shall be no limit to lot coverage.
C. Yards. Yard areas are not required.
A. Off-street parking facilities are required for hotel, bed-and-breakfast,
residential and similar lodging uses according to the provisions of
Article XIV. However, there are no off-street parking requirements for
the other uses permitted in this district. [Amended 2-13-2017]
B. Loading space shall be provided for all new construction according to
the provisions of Article XV.
A. Bus passenger stations.
B. Mortuaries and undertaking establishments.
C. Hotels and motels.
§ 175-44 SUNBURY CODE § 175-47
172:412
ARTICLE IX
NB Neighborhood Business District
§ 175-48. Purpose.
The purpose of the NB Neighborhood Business District is to provide a
transitional zone between the CB Central Business District and all other
districts; to encourage the orderly development of commercial and personal
service uses normally associated with a commercial district; to establish
standards designed to promote commercial activity; to reduce congestion
on the streets; to reduce fire and safety hazards; and otherwise to create
conditions conducive to the carrying out of the overall purposes and intent
of this chapter.
§ 175-49. Permitted uses.
A building may be used, erected or altered and a lot may be used for any of
the following purposes:
A. All uses or special exceptions in any residential district except
multifamily dwelling conversion apartments. [Amended 8-26-2002]
B. Retail stores, personal service shops and convenience stores, but
excluding adult-oriented businesses and department stores.
C. Banks, offices, studios, medical centers, nursing or convalescent homes
and uses of a similar character.
D. Specialty shops for custom work and articles to be sold at retail on the
premises, such as baking, confectionary, dressmaking, printing,
tailoring and similar shops and services.
E. Restaurants, cafes, tearooms, drive-in restaurants and other places
serving food and drink. [Amended 6-8-2015]
F. Communication facilities and similar uses. [Amended 6-8-2015]
G. Radio and television studios.
H. Assembly halls, post offices, libraries, fire halls, and similar uses.
[Amended 6-8-2015]
I. Indoor recreation facilities, such as theaters, billiard or pool parlors
and bowling alleys.
J. Private schools.
K. Nonalcoholic bottling works.
L. Government buildings, department stores, bed-and-breakfasts, hotels
and motels, automobile and gasoline service stations, motor vehicle
and/or trailer sales rooms and sales lots, major automobile garages,
supermarkets and similar uses. [Added 6-8-201592]
§ 175-48 WATER § 175-49
172:413
§ 175-50. Area regulations.
§ 175-51. Building height. [Amended 6-8-2015]
No building shall be erected to a height in excess of 85 feet.
§ 175-52. Off-street parking and loading spaces.
Off-street parking and loading spaces shall be provided in accordance with
Articles XIV and XV.
§ 175-53. Special exception uses. [Amended 11-13-1989 by Ord. No.
1117; 6-8-2015]
The following uses may be approved as a special exception by the Zoning
Hearing Board in accordance with the procedures outlined in Article XVI:
M. Signs, when erected and maintained in accordance with the provisions
of Article XIII.
N. Uses and buildings accessory to the permitted uses in this district.
O. Enclosed storage units. [Added 1-9-2017]
A. Lot area width. There shall be no limit to lot area and width.
B. Lot coverage. There shall be no limit to lot coverage.
C. Yards. A side yard setback of five feet shall be required. [Amended
8-26-2002]
A. Bus passenger stations.
B. Mortuaries and undertaking establishments.
92.Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsections L and M as
Subsections M and N, respectively.
§ 175-49 SUNBURY CODE § 175-53
172:414
ARTICLE X
IP Industrial Park District
§ 175-54. Purpose.
The IP Industrial Park District is hereby established as a district in which
the regulations are intended to permit and encourage industrial
development that will be so located and designed as to constitute a
harmonious and appropriate part of the physical development of the City,
contribute to the soundness of the economic base of the City and otherwise
further the purposes of this chapter as set forth in § 175-1. In promoting
these and the general purposes of this chapter, the specific intent of this
article is to:
§ 175-55. Permitted uses.
A building may be erected or used and a lot may be used for any of the
following purposes:
§ 175-56. Area regulations.
A. Encourage the development of and continued use of the land for
industrial purposes.
B. Prohibit any use which would substantially interfere with the
development, continuation or expansion of industrial uses in the
district.
C. Establish reasonable standards for buildings and other structures, the
areas and dimensions of yards and other open spaces and the provision
of facilities and operation of industries to minimize air pollution, noise,
glare, heat, vibration and fire and safety hazards.
A. All industrial uses not otherwise prohibited by law.
B. Construction companies and lumberyards.
C. Warehousing.
D. Firehalls.
E. Signs, when erected and maintained in accordance with the provisions
of Article XIII.
F. Uses and buildings accessory to the permitted uses in this district.
A. Lot area. Each lot shall be not less than 10,000 square feet.
B. Lot width. Each lot shall have a width of at least 100 feet at the building
line.
C. Lot coverage. The principal and accessory buildings or storage yards
and loading and unloading docks shall not project into the required
yard spaces.
§ 175-54 WATER § 175-56
172:415
§ 175-57. Building height.
There shall be no building height limit.
§ 175-58. Off-street parking and loading spaces.
Off-street parking and loading areas shall be provided in accordance with
Articles XIV and XV.
§ 175-59. Special exception uses.
The following uses may be approved as a special exception by the Zoning
Hearing Board in accordance with the procedures outlined in Article XVI:
D. Open space. All open space, other than off-street parking lots, access
drives and rail sidings, shall be covered with a vegetative material.
E. Yards.
(1) The front yard depth shall be 30 feet.
(2) The side yard width shall be 20 feet.
(3) The rear yard depth shall be 30 feet.
(4) Notwithstanding the above, there shall be no setback requirements
in cases where a railroad siding abuts the property.
(5) Buffer yard width and/or depth shall be provided as follows:
(a) When adjacent to a residential district, a buffer yard and
screen planting shall be provided in addition to the above
yards, the depth of which shall be not less than 25 feet. All such
buffer yards and screen planting shall be provided and
maintained in accordance with the provisions of Article XI,
§ 175-75, hereof.
(b) When the industrial district is separated from a residential
district by a public street, the requirement of a buffer zone, 25
feet in width, and the screen planting in accordance with
Article XI, § 175-75, hereof may be waived at the discretion of
the Zoning Hearing Board as a variance when it is deemed that
adjacent residential uses shall not be adversely affected by the
industrial development.
(6) The space between two or more structures on the same industrial
site shall be at least 30 feet in any direction.
A. Uses permitted in the HC Highway Commercial District and subject to
the controls set forth therein when such uses are supplementary and
accessory to the existing or proposed industrial uses.
§ 175-56 SUNBURY CODE § 175-59
172:416
B. Recycling centers, subject to the following provisions: [Amended
4-10-2017]
(1) Lot area and width. Each lot shall not be less than 25,000 square
feet.
(2) Storage of recycling materials. All recycling materials shall be
contained in an enclosed building or enclosed structure.
(3) Screening. Each lot shall be completely obscured from surrounding
property and the street by solid screening and subject to the
following:
(a) Plant materials used in the screen planting shall be of such
species and size as will produce a complete visual screen at
least six feet in height. Screen planting shall be permanently
maintained, and any plant material which does not live shall be
replaced.
(b) A fence, when erected as a screen, shall be not less than six
feet in height and produce a complete visual screen of the area
fenced.
(c) All screening shall be subject to controls as deemed necessary
to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the citizenry.
(4) Grandfathering clause. This subsection, Article X, § 175-59B, shall
not be applicable to existing recycling centers located within the
City of Sunbury as of the effective date of this subsection.
C. Public playgrounds.
D. Vehicle salvage dealer and repair or towing businesses, subject to the
following provisions: [Added 4-10-2017]
(1) Lot area. Each lot shall not be less than 25,000 square feet.
(2) Compliance with Pennsylvania Law. All vehicle salvage dealers and
repair or towing businesses shall comply with all applicable
provisions of the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et
seq., and all applicable PennDOT regulations.
(3) Screening. Each lot shall be completely obscured from surrounding
property and the street by solid screening and subject to the
following:
(a) Plant materials used in the screen planting shall be of such
species and size as will produce a complete visual screen at
least six feet in height. Screen planting shall be permanently
maintained, and any plant material which does not live shall be
replaced.
§ 175-59 WATER § 175-59
172:417
§ 175-60. Prohibited uses.
No building, structure or portion thereof shall be hereafter erected, altered
or converted for any of the following uses:
(b) A fence, when erected as a screen, shall be not less than six
feet in height and produce a complete visual screen of the area
fenced.
(c) All screening shall be subject to controls as deemed necessary
to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the citizenry.
(4) Grandfathering clause. This subsection, Article X, § 175-59D, shall
not be applicable to existing vehicle salvage dealers and repair or
towing businesses located within the City of Sunbury as of the
effective date of this subsection, provided that said vehicle salvage
dealers and repair or towing businesses are in compliance with all
applicable provisions of the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code, 75
Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq., and all applicable PennDOT regulations.
A. Residential uses, except quarters for watchmen or caretakers.
B. The manufacture of rockets, projectiles, shells or other missiles,
gunpowder or fireworks; however, the manufacturing of component
parts thereof which have been assembled without all of their explosive
or propellant components shall be permitted.
C. The tanning or storage of rawhides or skins and fat rendering.
D. Stockyards and piggeries.
E. No quantity of explosives in excess of 1,000 pounds shall be stored or
used at any given time on any one property.
F. All uses of land, buildings and structures or industrial processes that
may be noxious or injurious by reason of the production or emission of
dust, smoke, refuse matter, odor, gas, fumes, noise, vibration or similar
substances or conditions; provided, however, that any such uses may be
permitted if approved by the Zoning Hearing Board and subject to such
conditions, restrictions and safeguards as may be deemed necessary by
said Board for the purpose of protecting the health, safety and morals
and the general welfare of the community.
§ 175-59 SUNBURY CODE § 175-60
172:418
ARTICLE XI
Supplementary Regulations
§ 175-61. Agricultural uses.
Activities involving the use of buildings and land for gardening, farming,
nurseries and greenhouses, riding academies, livery or boarding stables,
dog kennels and animal hospitals shall be subject to the applicable
regulations of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and to the following
safeguards and regulations:
§ 175-62. Conversion apartments.
The conversion of a building into a dwelling for one or more families may be
permitted subject to the following provisions:
§ 175-63. Group dwellings.
Group dwellings shall be permitted as a special exception in residential
districts in conformance with the following:
A. Buildings in which animals are kept shall not hereafter be erected or
converted within 100 feet of any lot line.
B. Storage of manure or an odor- or dust-producing substance shall not be
permitted within 100 feet of any lot line.
C. The tilling of the soil, raising of crops, gardening and sale of produce
grown on the premises shall be permitted in any district.
A. The minimum habitable floor area is provided as required in § 175-78
hereinafter.
B. If any extension of the building is proposed, it shall comply with the
area regulations of the district in which it is located.
C. No fire escapes shall be located on the front of the building.
D. Parking shall be provided in accordance with provisions of Article XIV.
A. Lot area shall be in accordance with the provisions of the district.
B. Lot coverage shall be in accordance with the provisions of the district.
C. Yards. Interior yards (open space between buildings) shall be provided
as follows:
(1) When front to front, rear to rear, or front to rear, parallel buildings
shall have 50 feet between faces for one story in height, plus five
feet for each additional story. If the front or rear faces are obliquely
aligned, the above distances may be decreased by as much as 10
feet at one end if increased by similar or greater distances at the
other end. Where parking areas or bank grade changes are
§ 175-61 WATER § 175-63
172:419
§ 175-64. Motels.
In districts where permitted, motels shall be subject to the following
safeguards and regulations:
introduced in this space, the yard distance shall be at least 25 feet
on each side of such features.
(2) Between end walls of buildings, yard space of 25 feet for each onestory
building, plus five feet for each additional story, shall be
required.
(3) Between end walls and front or rear faces of buildings, 30 feet for
one story, plus five feet for each additional story, shall be required.
(4) Outer and inner courts shall be permitted when such courts are not
less than 50 feet or equal to the dimensions of the full height of the
building walls enclosing the court, whichever is greater.
(5) The minimum distance separating multiple-family buildings from
nonresidential uses shall be not less than 40 feet.
D. Buffer yards. Along any district boundary line separating nonresidential
uses from residential uses, a buffer yard shall be provided and
maintained in accordance with § 175-75 hereof.
E. Off-street parking.
(1) Off-street parking shall be provided as set forth in Article XIV.
(2) Parking areas designed to serve four or more dwelling units shall
be located not more than 200 feet from the structures housing the
dwelling units to be served.
(3) Outdoor parking spaces and approaches shall be deemed to be part
of the open space of the lot on which they are located.
F. Streets.
(1) Plans for streets, drives, service access, parking, walks and all such
facilities shall be reviewed and approved. All such facilities shall
then be designed and installed in the manner prescribed by the
Sunbury Land Subdivision Regulations, and amendments thereto,93
for dedication, regardless of whether they are to be presented to
the municipality for dedication or not.
(2) Suitable access for fire-fighting equipment, refuse collection and
snow removal shall be provided.
G. Location. The site shall adjoin at least one of the major streets or be
reasonably near so that the access drive or drives can be satisfactorily
arranged to avoid increasing traffic on local residential streets.
93.Editor's Note: See Ch. 148, Subdivision of Land.
§ 175-63 SUNBURY CODE § 175-64
172:420
§ 175-65. Premanufactured housing (mobile home parks).
[Amended 1-11-2016]
As a special exception, in the R-2 Residential District, mobile home parks
may be permitted, subject to the following safeguards and regulations, and
shall comply with all applicable state and/or municipal regulations now in
effect or hereafter enacted.
A. No building or structure, or part thereof, shall be placed closer to any
lot line than 15 feet.
B. At least one parking space shall be provided on the premises for each
sleeping room (unit or accommodation). Off-street parking and loading
spaces for other facilities developed on the motel premises shall be
provided as required by Articles XIV and XV.
C. Every sleeping room (unit or accommodation) shall be provided with
hot and cold running water and toilet facilities.
A. The application shall include a plan for the layout and design of the
park, including a legal description and clearly setting forth the
following information:
(1) Minimum mobile home park area: A mobile home park shall have
an area of at least 10 acres.
(2) Boundaries of the tract.
(3) The extent and area to be used for parking purposes.
(4) Driveways and entrances, exits, roadways and walkways.
(5) Location and number of proposed sanitary conveniences, including
washrooms, laundry rooms, drying space, utility rooms and toilets.
(6) Location of the sites for mobile homes.
(7) Method and plan of sewage disposal.
(8) Method and plan for garbage and trash removal.
(9) Plans for electric lighting and service connections.
(10) Plans for water supply and distribution.
(11) Area to be used for play space.
B. The driveways, exits, entrances and walks shall be lighted and paved in
accordance with municipal standards. One-way-traffic driveways shall
not be less than 12 feet wide, and two-way-traffic driveways shall not be
less than 22 feet wide. Sidewalks shall be a minimum of five feet in
width.
§ 175-64 WATER § 175-65
172:421
§ 175-66. Natural production uses.
The Zoning Hearing Board may authorize the following as special
exceptions: the excavation and sale of topsoil, sand, gravel, clay, shale
C. An area of not less than 2,000 square feet shall be provided for each
mobile home. No more than 30% of any lot shall be covered by
structures.
D. The minimum width of each mobile home space shall be 40 feet.
E. The minimum depth of each mobile home space shall be not less than
50 feet or 30% longer than the mobile home, whichever requirement is
greater.
F. Each mobile home shall be located not less than 20 feet from any
building or other mobile home and not less than 50 feet from the lot line
bounding adjacent property. The maximum height of any building shall
be 15 feet or one story.
G. Separate provision shall be made for the parking of tow vehicles at a
location removed from the mobile home spaces, and there shall be one
off-street parking space not less than nine feet wide and 20 feet long for
each mobile home space.
H. In addition to the off-street parking required in Subsection G above,
there shall be additional off-street parking spaces required equal to 1/2
the number of mobile home spaces provided in the mobile home park.
I. Sewers. Each mobile home park shall be provided with sewage disposal
facilities. The proposed provisions for sewerage shall be presented to
the Zoning Hearing Board for approval before any mobile home shall be
permitted on the site. Approval shall be given only when a collectivetype
sewerage facility is to be provided.
J. Safe potable water supply shall be provided, and when no public supply
is available, the source shall comply with the Environmental Protection
Agency safe drinking water standards and shall be subject to the
continuous inspection and approval of the City Health Officer and the
State Department of Environmental Resources.
K. Play space. Each park shall provide and equip a recreation area, the
size and location to be subject to the approval of the Zoning Hearing
Board.
L. Buffer yard. When the proposed mobile home park is adjacent to an
existing residential use or where the park abuts or is opposite different
zone districts, a buffer yard of not less than 50 feet in depth shall be
provided. This yard shall be planted with a combination of evergreen
and deciduous material spaced so as to provide a year-round screen.
The size, spacing and type of plant material shall be subject to the
review and approval of the Zoning Hearing Board.
§ 175-65 SUNBURY CODE § 175-66
172:422
or other natural mineral deposits or the quarrying of any kind of rock
formation, subject to the performance standards specified in § 175-80
hereof and the following conditions:
§ 175-67. Outdoor lighting.
All outdoor lighting shall be so arranged and shielded that no unreasonable
glare or illumination is cast upon adjoining residential uses or creates a
hazard to traffic in any district.
§ 175-68. Swimming pools.
A. Where deemed necessary by the Zoning Hearing Board, an open
excavation shall be enclosed by a fence or wall not less than four feet in
height and having openings no larger than six inches.
B. No quarry wall shall be nearer than 150 feet to any property line or
street line. However, in no case shall the slope between the property
line or street line and the quarry wall exceed 20%.
C. In the case of an open excavation, a slope no greater than 20% shall
extend from property or street lines for a depth of 150 feet.
D. A plan for reclamation of the site shall be submitted for review by the
Zoning Hearing Board. Such plan shall take into consideration the
following:
(1) Drainage, prevailing winds, soil erosion and other problems
created by excavation, stripping, quarrying stockpiles and waste
piles while in production.
(2) A grading and reuse plan for the site after completion of production
as shall permit the carrying out of the purposes of this chapter.
A. Every outdoor swimming pool of permanent construction, whether
above or below ground, shall be completely surrounded by a fence or
wall not less than four feet in height, which shall be so constructed as
not to have openings, holes or gaps larger than six inches in any
dimension.
(1) If a picket fence is erected or maintained, the horizontal or vertical
dimension of space between pickets shall not exceed six inches.
(2) A dwelling or an accessory building may be used as part of such
enclosure.
(3) All gates or doors opening through such enclosure shall be
equipped with a self-closing and self-latching and locking device for
keeping the gate or door securely closed at all times when not in
actual use, except that the door of any dwelling which forms a part
of the enclosure need not be so equipped.
§ 175-66 WATER § 175-68
172:423
§ 175-69. Automobile service stations.
In districts where permitted, automobile service stations shall be subject to
the following safeguards and regulations:
§ 175-70. Uses prohibited in all districts.
B. The pool or structures accessory thereto may not be located closer than
five feet to any property line of the parcel upon which it is located.
Walks and paved areas may be included in this buffer strip.
A. Driveways shall be located as provided in Article XV, Loading Areas and
Access Drives.
B. All driveways and service areas shall be paved with a hard surface
material in accordance with the specifications of the Pennsylvania
Department of Highways, and adequate drainage shall be provided.
C. Gasoline pumps and all service equipment shall be set back not less
than 15 feet from any lot line and so located that vehicles stopped for
service will not extend over the property line.
D. Signs shall be as permitted in Article XIII of this chapter, and no other
signs.
A. The primary living and sleeping quarters of dwelling units shall not be
permitted in cellars.
B. The following uses are prohibited in all districts throughout the
municipality:
(1) The incineration (not including approved incinerators), reduction
or storage of garbage, offal, animals, fish or refuse, unless by the
authority of or under the supervision of the municipality.
(2) Dumps and dumping of any kind, other than a sanitary landfill,
unless by the authority of or under the supervision of the
municipality.
(3) Junkyards prohibited. [Added 4-10-2017]
(a) It shall be unlawful for any individual or business entity to
establish, maintain, conduct, or allow any junkyard, as defined
under § 175-4C herein, either on public or private property
within the limits of the City of Sunbury.
(b) The establishment, maintenance, or conduct of any junkyard,
as defined under § 175-4C herein, within the limits of the City
of Sunbury is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and
liable to be abated as provided by law. Any junkyards
heretofore established and now existing and maintained upon
any property, either public or private, within the limits of the
City of Sunbury in violation of this subsection, Article XI,
§ 175-68 SUNBURY CODE § 175-70
172:424
§ 175-71. Unspecified uses.
In any district established by this chapter, when a specific use is neither
permitted nor denied, the Zoning Hearing Board shall make a determination
as to the permitted uses in the district. No zoning permit shall be issued by
the Zoning Officer for any unspecified use until this determination has been
made.
§ 175-72. Public utility facilities.
Public utility facilities, where permitted, shall be subject to the following
regulations:
§ 175-70B(3), are hereby declared to be a nuisance and shall be
removed by the owner, lessee, or proprietor of such premises
within 90 days of the effective date of this subsection.
A. Buildings.
(1) Front, side and rear yards shall be provided for in accordance with
the regulations of the district in which the facility is located.
(2) Height shall be as required by the district regulations.
(3) Housed equipment. When the equipment is totally enclosed within
a building, no fence or screen planting shall be required, and the
yard shall be maintained in conformity with the district in which
the facility is located.
(4) The external design of the building shall be in conformity with the
buildings in the districts.
(5) Parking shall be provided in accordance with Article XIV.
B. Unhoused equipment, such as substations, gas regulating stations, etc.
(1) Unhoused equipment shall be enclosed with a chain link fence six
feet in height.
(2) Screen planting in residential districts. The required fence for
unhoused equipment shall be surrounded by an evergreen
planting.
(3) Access. Where vehicular access is across the front yard, the gate
shall be constructed of solid materials having not less than 50%
solid space in ratio to open space. In residential districts, the
permitted public facility shall not include the storage of vehicles or
equipment used in the maintenance of any utility, and no equipment
causing noise, vibration, smoke, odor or hazardous effect shall be
installed.
(4) Parking shall be provided in accordance with Article XIV.
§ 175-70 WATER § 175-72
172:425
§ 175-73. Height regulations. [Amended 1-11-2016]
§ 175-74. On-lot water supply and sanitary sewage disposal
facilities.
Where on-lot water supply and/or sanitary sewage are provided by
individual on-lot facilities, the following regulations shall apply:
C. Other facilities, such as poles, phone booths, telephone terminal boxes,
etc., shall be permitted in any district without regard to the use and
area regulations; provided, however, that such facilities other than
poles shall comply with § 175-75B(6).
A. Height regulations shall not apply to any of the following, provided that
the use is not for human occupancy: agricultural buildings, spires,
belfries, cupolas penthouses, domes, chimneys, ventilators, skylights,
water tanks, bulkheads, utility poles, silos, television and radio
antennas and ornamental or necessary mechanical appurtenances.
B. Radio transmission and receiving towers; cellular and television
transmission or receiving towers: Such tower shall be set back from all
tract boundary lines a distance equal to its height, and the base of such
tower shall be surrounded by a chain-link fence and locked gate at least
six feet high and located at least six feet from the outer edge of the
base. The fence and gate shall be maintained in good condition. No new
construction can occur from any utility lines or easements and from any
building or buildings on the lot within the boundary lines of the tower.
C. For all residential uses, accessory buildings shall not exceed 20 feet in
height.
A. Where both water and sanitary sewage disposal are provided by
individual on-lot facilities, lots for single-family detached dwellings
shall have a minimum area of 20,000 square feet and a minimum width
at the building line of 100 feet.
B. Where either water supply or sanitary sewage disposal, but not both,
are provided by individual on-lot facilities, lots for single-family
detached dwellings shall have a minimum area of 12,000 square feet
and a minimum width, measured at the building line, of 80 feet.
C. Notwithstanding the above, lot areas shall be increased to the size as
deemed necessary after percolation tests.
D. In all cases where public sewers are not available, the lot areas shall be
of sufficient size to provide open areas, exclusive of parking or other
paved areas, for a septic tank and tile field.
E. All methods and plans for the on-lot disposal of sewage or wastes shall
be designed in accordance with all applicable regulations pertaining to
the treatment and disposal of sewage and wastes. A certificate or
§ 175-72 SUNBURY CODE § 175-74
172:426
§ 175-75. Area regulations.
statement of adequacy from the appropriate agency shall be a
prerequisite to the issuance of a zoning permit.
A. On a lot held in single or separate ownership which does not fulfill the
regulations for the minimum lot area and/or width for the district in
which it is located, a building may be erected, altered and used thereon,
and side yards may be reduced, to the point that would permit the
owner to erect a building and insofar as possible fulfill the intent and
purpose of the chapter when authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board
as a variance.
B. Yards shall be provided in accordance with the provisions set forth
herein and shall be planted with grass seed, sod, ground cover or other
vegetative cover, except in cases where walks, access drives, off-street
parking lots, patios or other types of surfaces are permitted by this
chapter. All yards shall be maintained and kept free of all debris and
rubbish.
(1) For setbacks, see district regulations.
(2) Adjustments to meet existing setbacks in front yards.
(a) When a lot is situated between two lots, each having a
principal building which extends into the required front yard,
the front yard of such lot may be the same depth as the average
of the front yards of such two adjacent lots, notwithstanding
the yard requirements of the district in which it is located.
(b) Where a lot adjoins only one improved lot having thereon a
principal building within 25 feet of the common side lot line,
which extends into the required front yard of such improved
lot, the front yard depth of such unimproved lot may be the
average depth of the front yard of such adjacent improved lot
and the front yard required for the district in which such
unimproved lot is located, notwithstanding the yard
requirements for such district. However, the second
unimproved lot from the original improved lot must have at
least the minimum front yard depth required in the district.
(3) Accessory buildings in residential districts may be constructed in
accordance with the following provisions:
(a) An accessory building shall be erected only within the rear
yard.
(b) If the rear property line abuts on the right-of-way of any street
or alley, the accessory building shall not be less than 10 feet
from the rear lot line.
§ 175-74 WATER § 175-75
172:427
(c) If the rear property line abuts another lot, the accessory
building shall not be less than five feet from the rear lot line.
(d) It shall be at least 10 feet from the nearest wall of the main
building, or this distance may be reduced to five feet if no
windows or other openings are involved, or the accessory
building may be integrated with the main building by
contiguous wall, breezeway or other connection.
(e) When a lot is situated between two lots, each having an
accessory building that extends into the required rear yard
setback, the rear yard setback of such lot may be the same
depth as the average of the rear setbacks of the two adjacent
lots, notwithstanding the rear yard setback requirements of
the district in which it is located. [Added 7-14-1997]
(f) Where a lot adjoins only one improved lot having thereon an
accessory building that extends into the rear yard setback, the
rear yard setback of such lot may be the same depth as the
accessory building setback of the adjoining lot,
notwithstanding the yard requirements of the district in which
it is located. [Added 7-14-1997]
(4) Parking lot screening and landscaping. The purposes for providing
such landscaping are: to protect the public safety, to allow
precipitation to return to the underground aquifers, to provide for
natural drainage and for flood protection, to reduce the level of
carbon dioxide and to return oxygen to the air, to provide shade and
reduce blighting effects of parking lots, and to preserve property
values of adjacent properties and to improve the appearance of the
community. [Amended 1-11-2016]
(a) Off-street parking areas for more than five vehicles and all offstreet
loading areas shall abide by the following:
[1] Such areas shall be effectively screened by a planting strip
at least five feet in depth along all abutting property lines.
The planting strip shall include a solid wall or a
substantial, attractive, tight fence or evergreen hedges a
minimum of four feet in height, and other shrubbery, vines,
flowers, grass and other foliage.
[2] A planting strip at least 10 feet in depth shall be located
between the parking lot and abutting right-of-way except
for accessways crossing the strip. Such a strip shall
contain one shade tree for each 40 linear feet of the strip,
and no tree shall be less than eight feet in height at the
time of planting. The planting strip shall also contain
shrubbery, vines, flowers, grass and other foliage.
[3] All screening and landscaping areas shall be maintained in
good condition, free of paper and rubbish and free from all
§ 175-75 SUNBURY CODE § 175-75
172:428
advertising signs. All trees, shrubbery and other
landscaping materials shall be maintained in a healthy
and growing condition, with dead materials replaced as
necessary.
[4] A clear sight triangle shall be maintained at all street
intersections and at all points where private accessways
intersect public streets.
[5] Any parking lot or loading area which qualifies as a
nonconforming use upon enactment of this chapter shall
comply with the requirements for screening and
landscaping upon any enlargement, extension,
reconstruction or structural alteration.
(b) Off-street parking areas for 12 or more vehicles shall abide by
the following;
[1] All regulations in Subsection B(4)(a) above; and
[2] The interior of a parking lot, in addition to all border
planting strips, shall contain planting areas dispersed
throughout with not less than 5% of such interior area in
landscaping. Such planting areas shall contain shade
trees, with no tree less than eight feet in height at the time
of planting shrubbery, vines, flowers, grass and other
foliage.
(5) Projections in yards.
(a) Cornices, eaves, gutters, bay windows, chimneys or uncovered
steps may project into the front, side or rear yard of a lot not
more than 24 inches.
(b) Covered porches, whether enclosed or unenclosed, shall be
considered as part of the main building and shall not project
into any yard.
(c) Patios, driveways, walks, parking areas, stairs and window
wells and such other structures as are customarily incidental
to the main building may project into the front, side or rear
yards of a lot, provided that the finished grade elevation shall
be not more than 12 inches above the yard grade.
(6) Obstructions to vision.
(a) No walk, fence, sign or other structure shall be erected or
altered, and no hedge, trees, shrubs or other growth shall be
maintained or permitted, which may cause danger to traffic on
streets or public roads by obscuring the view.
(b) At all intersections of streets, private roads and/or access
drives, a clear sight triangle shall be maintained within which
§ 175-75 WATER § 175-75
172:429
§ 175-76. Fences and walls. [Amended 6-9-2003]
Fences and walls may be erected, altered and maintained within the yards
and open spaces, provided that any such fence, wall or combination of fence
and wall shall not exceed eight feet in height in R-1 and R-2 Residential
Districts, NB Neighborhood Business Districts, CB Central Business
District, HC Highway Commercial Districts and IP Industrial Park Districts.
Retaining walls may also be erected, altered and maintained within the
yards and open spaces, provided that any such wall shall not exceed from
the level of the ground being retained a height of more than eight inches.
A fence may be installed on top of a retaining wall, provided that the
combination of fence and wall shall not extend from the level of the ground
being retained a height of more than eight feet in R-1, and R-2 Residential
Districts, NB Neighborhood Business Districts, CB Central Business
District, HC Highway Commercial Districts and IP Industrial Park Districts.
§ 175-77. Courts.
Courts shall conform to the following requirements:
there shall be no visual obstructions, such as a wall, fence,
sign or other structure; and no tree, hedge, shrub or other
growth of more than three feet above the grade of the street
and/or access drive or private road shall be erected, planted or
maintained.
(c) The clear sight triangle shall be as follows when measured
from the point of intersection of:
[1] Two street lines: equal to the required depth of the
building setback from the street line in the district where
located.
[2] A street and an access drive or private road: equal to the
width of the access drive or private road.
(7) Storage on lot. In all residential districts, no commercial vehicle,
truck, tractor, trailer, mobile home, boat or any similar vehicle or
equipment shall be parked or stored for more than 24 hours unless
it is:
(a) In an enclosed structure or the vehicle or equipment shall be
completely screened from view from the adjoining properties
and the street at all seasons of the year. The screening may be
an evergreen hedge or fence or a combination of materials.
(b) The storage of the vehicle or equipment shall not be permitted
within any of the required front and side yards.
A. An open space in the form of an inner court or outer court shall be
provided in connection with any building in any residential or business
district, wherever any room therein in which a person or persons live,
§ 175-75 SUNBURY CODE § 175-77
172:430
§ 175-78. Minimum habitable floor area.94
The minimum habitable floor area of a dwelling unit or any building or
structure hereafter erected or used for living purposes shall be 600 square
feet. In case of apartment houses and conversion apartments, the minimum
habitable floor area shall be not less than 400 square feet per apartment,
except those apartments designed for and occupied exclusively by one
person, which apartments shall each contain not less than 300 square feet
of habitable floor area.
§ 175-79. Reduction of lot dimensions.
The area, width or depth of any lot shall not be reduced by subdivision, sale
or development so that the lot width, lot area, lot area per dwelling unit,
courts and yards or other open spaces are smaller, or so that the coverage
is greater, than prescribed herein.
sleep or congregate cannot be adequately lighted and ventilated. Such
court shall be adjacent to such room, the windows of which shall open
in such court. (This section shall not apply to specialized commercial or
manufacturing processes where controlled light and/or ventilation are
required.)
B. Outer courts.
(1) The width of any outer court upon which windows open from a
living room, bedroom or dining room shall be not less than the
height of any wall opposite such windows.
(2) The depth of an outer court formed by walls on three sides shall be
not greater than 1 1/2 times the width.
(3) The width of an outer court shall be not less than 2/3 the height of
any opposing wall forming said court.
C. Inner courts.
(1) The least dimension of an inner court shall be not less than the full
height of the walls enclosing such court, but not less than 50 feet
for apartment buildings and not less than 10 feet for two-family
dwellings.
(2) An open and unobstructed passageway shall be provided for each
inner court. Such passageway shall have sufficient cross-section
area and headroom for the passage of fire-fighting equipment and
shall be continuous from the inner court to a yard or an
unobstructed open area with access to a street.
94.Editor’s Note: An ordinance adopted on 1-9-2017 provided that the minimum habitable
floor area shall be 900 square feet for the Central Business District only.
§ 175-77 WATER § 175-80
172:431
§ 175-80. Performance standards.
Hereafter all uses of land, buildings and structures or industrial processes
shall be prohibited that may be noxious or injurious by reason of the
production or emission of dust, smoke, refuse matter, odor, gas, fumes,
noise, vibration or similar substances or conditions; provided, however,
that any uses may be permitted if adequate provisions, restrictions and
safeguards to protect the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the
community are established by a written agreement, subject to the securing
of a permit therefor and subject to the carrying out of such provisions,
restrictions and safeguards.
§ 175-81. Home occupations.
§ 175-82. Drainage.
A building may be erected or used and a lot may be used or occupied only
when in conformity with the following regulations:
A. The intent of this section is to permit those uses which will be of service
nature and not involve the purchase and/or sale of goods.
B. Any use customarily conducted within a dwelling by the residents
thereof. The use shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the use of
the dwelling for dwelling purposes, and the exterior appearance of the
structure and premises shall be residential in character. There shall be
no exterior evidence of the home occupation, except the permitted sign;
and the use shall cause no offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odor,
heat or glare. Hereafter, no home occupation shall be permitted unless
off-street parking space is provided. The off-street parking shall be in
addition to the spaces required for the residential use and shall be at
least two spaces.
C. No more than one employee, other than the residents of the dwelling,
shall be permitted unless additional employees would be authorized by
the Zoning Hearing Board by special exception. Such special exception
may be granted only when sufficient protection to neighboring
properties is provided so that no adverse effect would result.
D. A "home occupation" shall include but is not limited to dressmaking,
millinery, seamstress, art studio, professional office of a physician,
dentist, lawyer, engineer, architect, landscape architect, accountant
and musical instruction when limited to a single pupil at a time. For the
purpose of this chapter, barber and beauty shops shall be deemed home
occupations.
A. Adequate drainage required. No principal building may be erected or
relocated on land:
(1) Which is not adequately drained at all times.
(2) Which is subject to periodic flooding.
§ 175-80 SUNBURY CODE § 175-82
172:432
B. Building restricted adjacent to drainage channels and watercourses.
Except for a boathouse, no building may be erected or relocated:
(1) Within 30 feet of the natural or constructed edge of a stream
channel or open drainageway, provided that the Zoning Hearing
Board may authorize a reduction of this dimension when the
applicant demonstrates that adequate safeguards have been
provided for the natural flow of water downstream so as not to
damage public or private property adjacent to said stream or
drainageway.
(2) So that its lowest floor designed and used for human habitation
shall be an adequate height above the drainage channel to afford
protection from surface and ground water.
C. Obstructions. The following shall not be placed or caused to be placed
in a stream channel or open drainageway: fences except two-wire
fences, other structures or other matter which may impede, retard or
change the direction of the flow of water in such stream or open
drainageway or that will catch or collect debris carried by such water or
that is placed where the natural flow of the stream would carry the
same downstream to the damage or detriment of either public or
private property adjacent to the said stream or open drainageway.
D. Structure effect. Any structures permitted shall be constructed and
placed on the lot so as to offer the minimum obstruction to the flow of
water and shall be designed to have a minimum effect upon the flow and
height of floodwater.
E. Structure anchoring. Any structure permitted shall be firmly anchored
to prevent the structure from floating away and thus threaten life or
property downstream or to further restrict bridge openings and other
restricted sections of the stream or drainageway.
F. Private sewage disposal systems. Private sewage disposal systems shall
not be constructed within a stream or drainageway, but shall be
constructed in accordance with the procedures and standards
established by existing municipal ordinances.
G. Municipal liability. The granting of a zoning permit in any drainage
channels or watercourses, or adjacent thereto, shall not constitute a
representation, guaranty or warranty of any kind or nature by the
municipality or by an official or employee thereof of the practicability or
safety of any structure, use or other plan proposed and shall create no
liability upon or a cause of action against such public body, official or
employee for any damage that may result pursuant thereto.
H. Installation of fill materials. Fill may be placed at and within the outer
line of a modified stream or drainageway when approved as a special
exception by the Zoning Hearing Board and subject to the following
conditions:
§ 175-82 WATER § 175-82
172:433
§ 175-83. Modification of side yard requirements for accessory uses.
Where a lot is held under single and separate ownership and said lot
contains a major structure the use of which establishes the principal use
of the lot, accessory buildings shall be permitted, either attached or
unattached, and the yard areas may be modified as follows:
§ 175-84. Special sales.
Special sales shall be permitted in all districts subject to the following
provisions:
(1) Satisfactory evidence shall be submitted to the Zoning Hearing
Board indicating that the cross-sectional area of the modified
stream or drainageway will not be significantly reduced.
(2) Satisfactory evidence shall be submitted to the Zoning Hearing
Board indicating that there will be no adverse flooding conditions
created by the proposed fill.
(3) Permission shall be obtained for the proposed fill from the Bureau
of Dams and Waterway Management of Pennsylvania Department
of Environmental Resources pursuant to the state regulations of
water obstructions.
I. State regulations. All regulations of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
governing stream encroachments shall remain in full force and effect.
In cases of inconsistency with regulations of this chapter, the more
restrictive provisions shall govern.
J. Reduction of lot area. Where the configuration of a stream and
drainageway is such that minimum lot area or width regulations cannot
be reasonably met, adjacent land within other districts may be applied
to meet requirements. In such cases, the largest lot area and width of
the district involved shall apply. All other district regulations shall
remain in force.
A. Carports. Side yard requirements may be reduced to a minimum of two
feet, provided that the side facing the neighboring lot or lots has
openings, other than windows, equal to at least 60% of its total area.
B. Enclosed garage. The side yard may be reduced subject to special
exception authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board. The resultant space
between the garage wall and the nearest wall of the neighboring house
shall not be less than 10 feet.
C. Off-street parking. Off-street parking for residential uses shall be
permitted to within six inches of the side yard.
A. Signs are to be erected and maintained in accordance with the
provisions of Article XIII.
B. No such sale shall continue for a period longer than three days.
§ 175-82 SUNBURY CODE § 175-84
172:434
§ 175-85. Adult-oriented businesses.
Adult-oriented businesses shall be permitted subject to the following
provisions:
§ 175-86. Fire escapes.
No fire escape shall be located on the front of a building.
§ 175-87. Access to buildings.
No building hereafter shall be erected or altered unless there is direct
access to the structure through an open space on the same lot. Such open
space shall be at least 12 feet in width and shall extend from the building to
a public right-of-way.
§ 175-88. Professional offices.
The Zoning Hearing Board may allow the practitioner of a calling other
than the traditional professions of theology, medicine and law to establish
a professional office when the Board finds the calling to be professional in
character by virtue of the specialized knowledge, training, education and
experience required as a condition for the practice thereof, and the practice
of which will not adversely affect the safe and comfortable enjoyment of
property rights in any zone in which it is located to a greater extent than
the practice of theology, medicine and law.
C. No more than one sale shall be held per month.
A. Such use shall only be permitted in the HC Highway Commercial
District.
B. Such use shall not be located within a radius of 500 feet from any
church, school, library, playground, public park or day-care center, as
measured from the property lines.
C. No such use shall be located within a radius of 500 feet of another
adult-oriented business as measured from the property lines.
D. There shall be no display of adult-oriented materials that can be seen
from the exterior of the building.
E. No unlawful sexual activity or conduct shall be performed or permitted.
F. Signs are to be erected and maintained in accordance with Article XIII,
In addition, the Zoning Hearing Board shall review and approve all
exterior signs for compatibility with adjacent uses.
G. Off-street parking and loading spaces shall be provided in accordance
with Articles XIV and XV.
§ 175-84 WATER § 175-88.1
172:435
§ 175-88.1. Pet grooming. [Added 6-10-2002]
Pet grooming shall only be permitted in the following zoned areas of the
City:
§ 175-89. Development of rental units. [Added 12-13-2004]
§ 175-90. Rental property permits. [Added 11-14-2005 by Ord. No.
1242-B]
A. Highway Commercial (HC);
B. Industrial Park (IP);
C. Neighborhood Business (NB); and
D. Central Business (CB).
A. A current owner-occupied property, or the property of an estate of an
owner, may be converted into a single rental property as long as the
property owner satisfies the following requirements:
(1) That the City Council approves the conversion; and
(2) That the conversion does not impact the character of the
neighborhood.
B. A current commercial property may be converted into a rental property
for residential use as long as the property owner satisfies the following
requirements:
(1) That the City Council approves the conversion; and
(2) That the conversion does not impact the character of the
neighborhood.
C. A vacant lot may be converted into rental properties in such numbers as
the City Council approves as long as that use satisfies the zoning
requirements of that particular zoning district.
D. The review process by City Council may include consideration of the
following factors which may be waived: Off-street parking with a
minimum of 1 1/2 spaces per rental unit: 1,000 square feet of space in
the property for a one-bedroom unit and 1,200 square feet of space for
a two-bedroom unit.
A. A party interested in obtaining approval for a new housing permit for a
rental property shall apply to the City of Sunbury by filing an
application with the Code Administration Office of the City of Sunbury.
The application shall include a nonrefundable fee as published on the
annual City Fee Schedule. All properties shall first pass an inspection
for use by the Code Administration Office prior to any further action on
the application. [Amended 12-11-2017]
§ 175-88.1 SUNBURY CODE § 175-90
172:436
B. Fast-track approval. [Amended 1-9-2017; 2-13-2017; 12-11-2017]
(1) A fast-track approval process shall be available for applicants with
properties that meet the following criteria:
(a) A single-family home converted to a single-family rental unit.
(b) A 1/2 double single-family home converted to a 1/2 double
single-family rental unit.
(c) A single-family townhouse converted from a single-family
townhouse to a single-family rental townhouse unit.
(d) A rental unit located as a part of a commercial structure in the
Central Business District with a minimum of 900 square feet of
living space. The space would include separate rooms for
cooking, sleeping, living rooms and an overall use by one
family as opposed to a boardinghouse facility. The commercial
space must remain in the portion of the property that existed
immediately prior to filing the application.
(e) There must be 1.5 nonpublic parking spaces available for each
rental unit to receive a fast-track approval. This provision shall
not apply to rental permit applications for properties located
within the Central Business District.
(2) The fast-track approval process shall be available for an unlimited
number of applications. The Code Administration Office of the City
of Sunbury shall have the authority to issue a housing permit for a
rental property which meets the fast-track criteria.
C. The Code Administration Office of the City of Sunbury shall forward the
application to the Zoning Hearing Board for any properties which do
not meet the fast-track criteria. The Zoning Hearing Board shall
consider the application within 60 days of filing. The Sunbury City
Council shall make an annual determination of the number of rental
permits which may be granted by the Zoning Hearing Board. This
number may be increased or decreased through the course of a year by
Sunbury City Council. The standard Zoning Hearing Board fee shall be
paid along with the application fee. Said fees shall be published on the
annual City Fee Schedule. [Amended 12-11-2017]
D. The Zoning Hearing Board shall make a written decision on whether a
housing permit for a rental property shall be issued. The Board shall
consider the following factors with weight applied to each factor in its
own discretion: [Amended 12-11-2017]
(1) The use will preserve the neighborhood.
(2) There is sufficient parking in the neighborhood or on private
property for the rental property.
§ 175-90 WATER § 175-90
172:437
§ 175-91. (Reserved)
§ 175-92. (Reserved)
(3) The use is consistent with a prior use of the property as a rental
property in prior years.
(4) One-family use that will be rented to one family.
(5) New construction of a completely renovated building or new
construction on raw land in the City.
(6) There is sufficient parking for each rental unit.
E. The Zoning Hearing Board shall make a written decision and forward it
to the property owner and to Sunbury City Council. The decision may be
appealed by the applicant pursuant to Pennsylvania law. [Amended
12-11-2017]
F. The Sunbury City Council shall have the authority to revoke a rental
permit following notice and a hearing before City Council. The
revocation shall be based upon three citations for code violations at the
property over the course of ownership by one specific owner or by City
Council declaring the property as a public nuisance. [Amended
12-11-2017]
G. The Code Administration Office shall provide Sunbury City Council with
the City Housing List so that City Council will be in a position to create
policies and develop ordinances to further the goal of improving
housing in the City. The City Housing List shall be filed with the City
Clerk and available for public inspection as a public record. The
property list will include the following information: [Amended
12-11-2017]
(1) Number of rental property units.
(2) Number of owner-occupied units.
(3) Number of apartment units v. homes.
(4) Number of public housing units.
(5) Number of Section 8 housing units.
(6) The total amount of tax collected from housing in the City.
H. The Sunbury City Council shall work with the City Housing List to
develop ordinances which result in improvement of all properties,
including the reduction of rental units through tax and service fee
reductions. [Amended 12-11-2017]
I. A reinspection of the property shall be required prior to assignment of a
housing rental permit to a new owner. [Amended 12-11-2017]
§ 175-90 SUNBURY CODE § 175-92
172:438
ARTICLE XII
Nonconforming Buildings and Uses
§ 175-93. Existing uses.
All lawful uses of land, buildings or other structures may be continued,
altered, reconstructed, changed, sold or maintained without being in
violation of this chapter, even though such use may not conform to the use
and/or dimension regulations of the district in which it is located. When
existing uses do not conform to the regulation established for the district in
which located, such uses become nonconforming in terms of this chapter,
and such nonconforming uses or structures must comply with the following.
§ 175-94. Registration; recordkeeping.
The Zoning Officer shall identify and register all nonconforming structures,
buildings and uses, and such information shall be maintained in a
permanent inventory or record of nonconforming structures, buildings and
uses and shall include facts pertaining to the property location and the
nature and degree of nonconformance of each such structure, building or
use.
§ 175-95. Certificates of nonconformance; business identification
signs.
§ 175-96. Repairs and alterations.
A. The owner of the premises occupied by a lawful nonconforming use or
building may secure a certificate of nonconformance, which shall be for
the purpose of ensuring to the owner the right to continue a
nonconforming building or use.
B. Business identification signs. Nonconforming business identification
signs, whether or not on existing nonconforming uses, may be
continued and maintained in conformance with Article XIII, § 175-104.
A. Repairs and structural alterations may be made to a nonconforming
building or a building occupied by a nonconforming use.
B. A nonconforming building which is damaged by fire, explosion, flood,
wind or other unforeseen circumstances may be rebuilt and used for the
same purposes, provided that:
(1) If the damage is less than 60% of the floor area prior to destruction,
rebuilding may take place upon the original foundation; however, if
any expansion is proposed and approved, such expansion shall be
controlled by all setback and open space requirements for the
district in which it is located and, when applicable, parking and
loading requirements as set forth in this chapter.
(2) If the damage is greater than 60% of the floor area prior to
destruction, rebuilding may take place upon the original foundation
§ 175-93 WATER § 175-96
172:439
§ 175-97. Extensions or enlargements.
§ 175-98. Change of use.
§ 175-99. Abandonment. [Amended 5-13-1991 by Ord. No. 1151]
If a nonconforming use of a building or land ceases, is discontinued or is
abandoned for a continuous period of two years or more, subsequent use
of such building or land shall be in conformity with the provisions of this
chapter, except when the discontinuance is due to a death and the settling
of the estate. In such cases, the discontinuance shall not be presumed to
start until the estate is settled or a court order concerning the disposition
of the estate has been entered.
§ 175-100. Floodplain District.
when approved by the Zoning Hearing Board as a variance;
however, if any expansion is proposed and approved, such
expansion shall be controlled by all setback and open space
requirements for the district in which it is located and, when
applicable, parking and loading requirements as set forth in this
chapter.
(3) The reconstruction of the building is commenced within one year
from the date of the destruction of the building and is carried to
completion without undue delay.
A. A nonconforming use in a building may be extended throughout the
building.
B. A nonconforming use may be extended upon a lot occupied by such use
and held in single and/or separate ownership when authorized as a
special exception, provided that such extension does not replace a
conforming use and does not violate the yard and coverage
requirements of the district in which the nonconforming use exists.
C. The extension or enlargement of the building or use shall be provided
with off-street parking and loading spaces as required by this chapter.
A. A nonconforming use may be changed to another nonconforming use of
the same or more restricted classification.
B. Whenever a nonconforming use has been changed to a more restricted
classification or to a conforming use, such use shall not hereafter be
changed to a use of less restricted classification.
A. Existing nonconforming structures and/or uses located in the floodway
shall not be expanded or enlarged unless the effect of the proposed
expansion or enlargement on flood heights is fully offset by
accompanying stream improvement.
§ 175-96 SUNBURY CODE § 175-100
172:440
B. Any modification, alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement of
any kind to a nonconforming structure and/or use located in the
floodway, to an extent or amount of less than 50% of its value, should be
undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter
and any other applicable ordinance.
C. The modification, alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement of
any kind to a nonconforming structure and/or use, regardless of
location, to an extent or amount of 50% or more of its market value,
shall be undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this
chapter and any other applicable ordinance.
D. Uses or adjuncts thereof which are or become nuisances shall not be
permitted to continue.
§ 175-100 WATER § 175-100
172:441

ARTICLE XIII
Signs
§ 175-101. Compliance required.
Signs may be erected and maintained only when in compliance with the
provisions of this article and any and all other ordinances and regulations
relating to the erection, alteration or maintenance of signs and similar
devices.
§ 175-102. Types of temporary signs permitted.
The following types of temporary signs, and no others, shall be permitted:
A. Signs advertising the sale or rental of the premises upon which they are
erected by the owner or broker or any other person interested in the
sale or rental of such premises may be erected and maintained,
provided that:
(1) The size of any such sign in R-1 and R-2 Residential Districts shall
not exceed six square feet.
(2) The size of any such sign in all other districts shall not exceed 50
square feet.
(3) Not more than two signs are placed upon any property in single and
separate ownership.
(4) Such signs are removed promptly upon completion of the activity.
B. Signs advertising the sale and development of the premises upon which
they are erected, when erected in connection with the development of
the premises by a builder, contractor, developer or other person
interested in such sale of development, may be erected and maintained,
provided that:
(1) The size of any sign is not in excess of 20 square feet.
(2) Not more than two signs are placed upon any property in single and
separate ownership.
C. Signs of mechanics, painters and other artisans during the period such
persons are performing work on the premises on which such signs are
erected, provided that:
(1) The size thereof is not in excess of 12 square feet.
(2) Such signs are removed promptly upon completion of the work.
D. Signs advertising the sale of farm and garden products, special sales,
public sales and other sales similar in nature, provided that:
(1) The size of any such sign is not in excess of six square feet.
§ 175-101 WATER § 175-102
172:443
§ 175-103. Types of permanent signs permitted.
The following types of permanent signs, and no others, shall be permitted:
(2) Not more than two signs are used.
(3) Such signs are removed promptly upon completion of the activity.
E. Political campaign posters, provided that:
(1) The size of any such sign is not in excess of 24 square feet.
(2) Such signs are removed promptly upon completion of the election.
F. Signs connected with a charitable campaign, provided that:
(1) The size of such sign is not in excess of 32 square feet.
(2) Such signs are removed promptly upon completion of the
campaign.
A. Signs for business identification, provided that:
(1) The signs shall bear the name of the occupant and products
manufactured, processed, sold or displayed on the premises.
(2) The size of any such sign shall not exceed two square feet in R-1
and R-2 Districts or 150 square feet in all other districts; and all
general regulations of § 175-104 shall apply to such signs.
B. Signs identifying schools, colleges, churches, hospitals, sanatoriums
and apartments, provided that:
(1) The size of any such sign is not in excess of 20 square feet.
(2) Not more than two signs are placed on a property in single and
separate ownership.
C. Signs indicating the private nature of a driveway, parking space
identification, trespassing, business departments or delivery locations,
provided that the size of any such sign shall not exceed two square feet.
D. Billboards, including poster and sign boards, that advertise goods and
services processed, sold or displayed at another location shall be
permitted in the central business, industrial and open space districts,
subject to the following requirements:
(1) All billboards shall conform to the setback and yard requirements
of the districts in which they are located.
(2) The size of such billboard located in the CB Central Business
District shall not exceed 30 square feet.
(3) Billboards located in OS Open Space Districts shall be limited to
those which are located on ballfield fences.
§ 175-102 SUNBURY CODE § 175-103
172:444
§ 175-104. General regulations.
The following regulations shall apply to all permitted uses:
E. Signs advertising home occupations bearing the name and occupation
or use (work only) conducted within the building, provided that:
(1) The size of any such sign is not in excess of two square feet.
(2) Only one such sign shall be permitted.
A. Signs must be constructed of durable materials, maintained in good
condition and not allowed to become dilapidated.
B. Signs shall not be placed in such a position that they will cause danger
to traffic on a street by obscuring the view.
C. Signs, other than an official traffic sign, shall not be erected within the
lines of any street, unless authorized by the municipal officials for a
special purpose.
D. Signs shall not project over a public sidewalk area more than 30 inches
in the Central Business District or 18 inches in all other districts. The
size of any projecting sign shall not exceed four square feet.
E. Signs shall not project above the height limit permitted in any district in
which they are located.
F. All signs shall be removed when the circumstances leading to their
erection no longer apply.
G. No sign shall be permitted that rotates or flashes intermittently.
H. No sign shall be permitted that creates conflict with traffic and safety
signals.
I. If a sign rendered nonconforming by reason of this chapter is taken
down for purposes of restoring it to its original condition or for
purposes of making it safer and if said sign is not remodeled, altered or
changed, it may be reerected without conforming to Subsection D of
this section. If a nonconforming sign is taken down and remodeled,
altered or changed, it may be reerected only if it conforms with all the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 175-103 WATER § 175-104
172:445

ARTICLE XIV
Off-Street Parking
§ 175-105. General regulations.
§ 175-106. Number of spaces required.
A. Parking spaces shall be provided to lessen congestion in the streets.
The parking spaces and areas provided for herein shall be available
throughout the hours of operation of the particular use or business for
which they are provided.
B. Parking spaces may be located on a lot other than that containing the
principal use when authorized as a special exception by the Zoning
Hearing Board, provided that such spaces comply with the following:
(1) The distance between the principal use and the lot containing the
parking spaces shall be no more than 300 feet.
(2) The parking spaces shall be located on a municipal lot or shall be
subject to deed restrictions filed in an office of record, binding the
owner of the lot used for parking and his heirs and/or assigns to
maintain the required number of spaces throughout the life of the
principal use.
C. All parking spaces shall be ample in size for the vehicles for which use
is intended. The net parking space per vehicle shall not be less than
nine feet wide when measured at right angles to the edge of the parking
area and 20 feet long. Parking spaces, and the approaches thereto, shall
be deemed to be a part of the open space of the lot on which they are
located.
D. A garage or carport may be wholly or partly located inside the walls of
the principal building or attached to the outer walls. The garage may be
constructed under a yard or court, provided that the level of such yard
or court shall conform to the general level of the other yards or courts
on the lot. The space above an underground garage shall be deemed to
be part of the open space of the lot on which it is located.
A. Any structure or building hereafter erected, converted or enlarged for
any of the following uses, or any open area hereafter used for any
purpose, shall be provided with not less than minimum parking spaces,
as set forth hereinafter, which spaces shall be readily accessible to the
uses served thereby. Fractional numbers of parking spaces shall be
increased to the next whole number.
(1) Dwellings: two parking spaces for each dwelling unit.
(a) Low-income: one parking space for each dwelling unit.
(b) High rise for elderly: one parking space for each two dwelling
units.
§ 175-105 WATER § 175-106
172:447
(2) Apartments: the total number of parking or garage spaces shall be
not less than 1 1/2 times the number of dwelling units in the
building. A garage accessory to the apartment shall provide only
for the storage of vehicles of the owner, tenants and employees.
(a) Low-income: one parking space for each dwelling unit.
(b) High rise for elderly: one parking space for each two dwelling
units.
(3) Rooming houses, hotels, motels and tourist houses: at least one
parking space for each guest room, plus one additional space for
every two full-time employees. If a restaurant in connection with
the above is open to the public, the off-street parking facilities shall
be not less than those required for restaurants, in addition to those
required for guest rooms.
(4) Theaters, auditoriums, churches, stadiums or any other place of
public or private assembly: at least one parking space for each four
seats provided for public or private assembly.
(5) Retail stores: at least one parking space for each 200 square feet of
gross floor area, exclusive of areas not used for sale or display of
merchandise.
(6) Restaurants and bars: at least one parking space for every four
customer seats, plus one additional space for every two full-time
employees.
(7) Office buildings: at least one parking space for each 200 square
feet of floor area or fraction thereof.
(8) Shopping centers: at least two parking spaces shall be provided for
each 100 square feet of floor area devoted to selling, display and
patron use.
(9) Industrial and wholesale establishments: at least one parking space
for each two employees per shift.
(10) Major garages or automobile service stations: at least four parking
spaces for each service bay.
(11) Hospitals and sanatoriums: parking space shall be provided for
visitors at the rate of at least one parking space for each three
accommodations (beds) for patients, plus one parking space for
each two full-time employees.
(12) Open areas used for recreational purposes, such as parks,
playgrounds, playfields, miniature golf courses and other uses
similar in character: at least one parking space for each 1,500
square feet of area or fraction thereof.
§ 175-106 SUNBURY CODE § 175-106
172:448
§ 175-107. Reductions in required number of spaces.
The Zoning Hearing Board may authorize the reduction of the number and
size of the off-street parking spaces as a special exception in cases where
the applicant can justify a reduction and still provide adequate parking
facilities to serve the proposed uses of the building and/or land.
(13) Dance halls, roller rinks, clubs, lodges and other similar places: at
least one parking space for each 100 square feet of floor area.
(14) Mortuaries, funeral homes and undertaking establishments: at
least one parking space for each four seats for public use. Such
space shall be in addition to:
(a) Employee parking needs.
(b) Service area for mobile equipment such as hearses and
ambulances.
(15) Swimming pools: where a swimming pool is the principal use, at
least one parking space for each four persons, based upon the
designed capacity of the pool.
(16) Laundromats: at least one parking space for every two washing
machines.
(17) Public or private schools:
(a) Public schools: at least one parking space for each 20 students
or, if facilities for assembly are provided, at least one parking
space for each four seats, whichever is greater.
(b) Private schools: at least one parking space for each two
students.
(18) Public utilities, including substations and water pumping stations:
at least one parking space plus such additional spaces as may be
required by this subsection.
B. No part of the public right-of-way of any street or road shall be used in
computing the required area for parking; however, parallel parking may
be permitted along the curb or edge of an access drive or private road,
in addition to the required width for the circulation of vehicles.
C. When parking requirements for a use are not addressed by this chapter,
the Zoning Hearing Board shall make a determination as to the
required parking spaces. No zoning permit shall be issued by the
Zoning Officer until this determination has been made.
§ 175-106 WATER § 175-107
172:449

ARTICLE XV
Loading Areas and Access Drives
§ 175-108. Design standards.
A. Whenever required and/or provided under the provisions of this
chapter, all parking and loading areas and access drives shall be
designed according to the following standards:
(1) Except in the case of single- and two-family dwellings, the general
layout shall be such that there will be no need for motorists to back
over or onto public rights-of-way.
(2) Access drives shall be covered with a hard surfaced material and
shall not exceed 35 feet in width within 12 feet of the street rightof-
way line, except as increased by the curb radii. When driveways
cross sidewalks, the section crossing the sidewalk shall be paved
with materials approved by the City Engineer.
(3) The number of access drives shall not exceed two per lot on any one
street frontage. The Zoning Hearing Board may grant permission
for additional access drives where required to meet exceptional
circumstances and where frontage of unusual length exists.
(4) Access drives shall not cross the street right-of-way line:
(a) Within 40 feet of the street right-of-way line of an intersecting
street and in no case less than 10 feet from the point of
tangency when the intersecting street lines are joined by a
curve. Such access drives shall be located on major streets
where practical, in a manner to permit safe ingress and egress.
(b) Within five feet of a fire hydrant, catch basin or drain inlet.
(c) Within 40 feet of an access drive on the same lot, except that in
the case where dual access drives are deemed necessary to
permit safe ingress and egress, this dimension may be reduced
to not less than six feet between two access drives, when
authorized as a variance by the Zoning Hearing Board.
(d) Within three feet of a property line within all districts, unless
two adjoining owners mutually agree to a common access drive
in a legally recorded instrument.
(5) Access to public highway or street shall be controlled in the
interest of public safety. The off-street parking, loading and service
areas on all properties used for any purpose other than singlefamily
residences required by this article shall be physically
separated from the highway or street by a curb, pipe rail, fence or a
planting strip.
(6) General safety requirement, sight distance. Driveways shall be
located in safe relationship to sight distance and barriers to vision
§ 175-108 WATER § 175-108
172:451
and shall not exceed a slope of 10% within 12 feet of the street line.
Where drives enter a bank through a cut, unless a retaining wall is
used, the shoulders of the cut shall be graded to not more than 1/
2 foot vertical to one foot horizontal within 10 feet of the point the
drive intersects with the right-of-way.
(7) In addition to the off-street parking spaces as required in Article
XIV, all commercial and industrial establishments, hospitals or
sanatoriums and other similar uses shall provide adequate offstreet
area for loading and unloading of supplies to and from
vehicles.
(8) In no case where a building is erected, converted or enlarged shall
the public right-of-way be used for loading and unloading space.
B. Submission of plans. A scaled drawing of proposed off-street parking
and loading areas, access drives and walks shall be submitted as part of
the required plot plan. Any plan requiring access onto a state highway
shall be approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Highways in
addition to municipal approval.
C. Adjustment of standards. The Zoning Hearing Board may reduce or
increase the standards established in this section, when authorized as a
variance, to adjust to existing conditions wherein a hardship would be
created from the strict application of these regulations, provided that
the public safety is assured.
§ 175-108 SUNBURY CODE § 175-108
172:452
ARTICLE XVI
Administration and Enforcement
§ 175-109. Enforcement officer designated.
It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer, and he is hereby given the power
and authority, to enforce the provisions of this Zoning Chapter.
§ 175-110. Permits.
The Zoning Officer shall examine all applications for permits, issue permits
for construction and uses which are in accordance with the requirements
of this Zoning Chapter, record and file all applications for permits with
accompanying plans and documents and make such reports as the City
Council may require. Permits for construction and uses which are a special
exception or a variance to requirements of this Zoning Chapter shall be
issued only upon written order of the Zoning Hearing Board.
A. Zoning permits.
(1) When required. A zoning permit shall be required prior to the
erection, addition or alteration of any building, or portion thereof,
prior to the use or change in use of a building or land, prior to the
change or extension of a nonconforming use and prior to the
erection, addition or alteration of any permanent sign. It shall be
unlawful for any person to commence any of the above activities
until a zoning permit has been duly issued therefor.
(2) Application. All applications for zoning permits shall be
accompanied by plans in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing the
actual shape and dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the exact
size and location of any buildings existing on the lot, the lines
within which the proposed building or structure shall be erected or
altered, the existing and extended use of each building or part of a
building, the number of families or dwelling units the building is
designed to accommodate and such information as may be
necessary to determine compliance with the provisions of this
Zoning Chapter and all other pertinent ordinances. One copy of
such plans shall be returned to the owner, if requested, when such
plans are approved by the Zoning Officer. All applications with
accompanying plans and documents shall become a public record
after a permit is issued or denied. It shall be the responsibility of
the applicant in all cases to furnish adequate information and to
certify that the proposed use will comply with all regulations,
including performance standards, as will permit the carrying out of
the provisions of this Zoning Chapter.
(3) Issuances. No zoning permit shall be issued until the Zoning Officer
has certified that the proposed building, addition or alteration
complies with all the provisions of this Zoning Chapter.
§ 175-109 WATER § 175-110
172:453
§ 175-111. Zoning Hearing Board.
The Zoning Hearing Board shall hear appeals from the decisions of the
Zoning Officer, hear challenges to the validity of this Zoning Chapter or
the Zoning Map, hear requests for special exceptions, hear requests for
variances and perform all other acts and duties under and pursuant to the
provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code as said code
may from time to time be amended, revised or reenacted.
B. Temporary permits.
(1) A permit may be authorized by the City Council, on the
recommendation of the Zoning Hearing Board, for a temporary
nonconforming structure or use which is deemed beneficial to the
public health and general welfare or which is deemed necessary to
promote the proper development of the community; provided that
such nonconforming structure or use shall be completely removed
upon expiration of the permit without cost to the City of Sunbury.
Such permits shall be issued for a specified period of time not to
exceed one year and may be renewed annually, at the discretion of
the City Council.
(2) A temporary permit shall not be issued for any permanent structure
which otherwise would require amendment of this Zoning Chapter;
nor shall a temporary permit be issued for any extension or
enlargement of nonconforming uses which otherwise would be
subject to the procedures set forth under § 175-97 of Article XII.
A. Appeal: challenge; application for special exception or variance. An
appeal, challenge, application for a special exception or application for
a variance shall be filed with the Zoning Officer and shall contain, as
applicable, the following:
(1) The name and address of the appellant, challenger or applicant.
(2) The name and address of the owner of the real estate affected or to
be affected.
(3) A brief description and location of the real estate affected or to be
affected.
(4) A statement of the present zoning classification of the real estate
affected or to be affected and the present use of said real estate.
(5) A statement of the section of this Zoning Chapter under which the
special exception requested may be allowed and the reasons why it
should be granted.
(6) A statement of the nature of the variance requested and the
reasons why it should be granted.
(7) A statement of the part or parts of the Zoning Chapter or the
Zoning Map being challenged and the reasons for said challenge.
§ 175-110 SUNBURY CODE § 175-111
172:454
(8) A reasonably accurate description of the present improvements
and the additions intended to be made, indicating the size of the
proposed improvements, material and general construction
thereof. In addition, there shall be attached a plot plan of the real
estate to be affected, drawn to scale, showing the location and size
of the lot and size of improvements now erected and those
proposed to be erected thereon.
B. Time limit for appeals, etc., to Zoning Hearing Board. No person shall
be allowed to file an appeal or other proceeding before the Zoning
Hearing Board later than 30 days after an application for a permit or for
other action under this Zoning Chapter has been approved or
disapproved by the Zoning Officer or other appropriate municipal
officer or body, if such proceeding is designed to secure reversal of or
limit the approval or disapproval in any manner, unless such person
alleges and proves that he had no notice, knowledge or reason to
believe that such approval or disapproval had been given. If such
person has succeeded to his interest after such approval or disapproval,
he shall be bound by the knowledge of his predecessor in interest.
C. Hearings. The Zoning Hearing Board shall conduct hearings and make
decisions in accordance with the requirements of this Zoning Chapter
and the provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as
they may, from time to time, be amended, revised or reenacted.
(1) A hearing shall be conducted by the Zoning Hearing Board within
60 days after receipt, by the Zoning Officer, of an appeal, challenge
or application which has been properly completed and filed
according to the provisions of this Zoning Chapter. The Board may
grant an extension of time for said hearing beyond said 60 days for
cause shown, but in no event shall it conduct said hearing later
than 90 days after said receipt by the Zoning Officer.
(2) Notice. Fourteen days' notice of the hearing shall be given by
personal service or ordinary mail to the appellant, challenger or
applicant and to any person who has made timely request for
notice. Notice shall also be published once a week for two weeks in
a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Sunbury, the first
publication to be not less than 14 days prior to the date of the
hearing. Such notice shall state the time and place of the hearing
and the particular nature of the matter to be considered at the
hearing.
(3) Decision. The Zoning Hearing Board shall render a written decision
or, when no decision is called for, make written findings within 45
days after the last hearing before the Board. A copy of the final
decision or of the findings shall be delivered to the appellant,
challenger or applicant personally or mailed to him by ordinary
mail not later than the day following its date.
D. Special exceptions.
§ 175-111 WATER § 175-111
172:455
(1) In granting a special exception, the Zoning Hearing Board may
attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards, in addition to
those expressed in this Zoning Chapter, as it may deem necessary
to implement the purposes of this Zoning Chapter. In its
consideration of the request for a special exception, the Board shall
take into account the following:
(a) The effect or impact of the proposed use upon the character of
the immediate neighborhood. In this regard, the Board shall
consider, among other things, the impact of the proposed use
on the value of surrounding properties and whether the
proposed use is consistent with surrounding uses.
(b) Whether the increase in traffic resulting from the proposed use
will cause an unwarranted impact upon the immediate
neighborhood and/or whether there is a high degree of
probability that the safety and health of the immediate
neighborhood or of the community at large will be adversely
affected thereby. (The Board shall take notice that the City
Council, in providing for special exceptions in this Zoning
Chapter, has recognized that the use of land for such purposes
will result in an increase in traffic commensurate with such
use.)
(2) A special exception use for which a permit is granted by the Zoning
Hearing Board pursuant to the provisions of this Zoning Chapter
shall be construed to be conforming use.
E. Variances.
(1) In granting a variance, the Zoning Hearing Board may attach such
reasonable conditions and safeguards, in addition to those
expressed in this Zoning Chapter, as it may deem necessary to
implement the purposes of this Zoning Chapter. The Board may
grant a variance, provided that the following findings are made
where relevant in a given case:
(a) That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions,
including irregularity, narrowness or shallowness of lot size or
shape or exceptional topographical or other physical
conditions, peculiar to the particular property and that the
unnecessary hardship is due to such conditions and not the
circumstances or conditions generally created by the
provisions of this Zoning Chapter in the neighborhood or
district in which the property is located.
(b) That, because of such physical circumstances or conditions,
there is no possibility that the property can be developed in
strict conformity with the provisions of this Zoning Chapter
and the authorization of a variance is therefore necessary to
enable the reasonable use of the property.
§ 175-111 SUNBURY CODE § 175-111
172:456
(c) That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the
applicant.
(d) That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential
character of the neighborhood or district in which the property
is located nor substantially or permanently impair the
appropriate use or development of adjacent property nor be
detrimental to the public welfare.
(e) That the variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum
variance which will afford relief and represent the least
modification possible of the regulation in issue.
(2) The following factors shall be considered when reviewing cases for
variances in the Floodplain District:
(a) Variances shall not be issued by the Board within the
designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the
base flood discharge would result.
(b) Variances may be issued by the Board for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or
less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing
structures constructed below the base flood level, in
conformance with the procedures of Subsection E(2)(c), (d), (e)
and (f) below.
(c) Variances shall only be issued by the Board upon a showing of
good and sufficient cause, a determination that failure to grant
the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the
applicant and a determination that the granting of a variance
will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to
public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances,
cause fraud on or victimization of the public or conflict with
existing local laws or ordinances.
(d) Variances shall only be issued upon determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood
hazard, to afford relief.
(e) The Board shall notify the applicant, in writing, over the
signature of a community official, that the issuance of a
variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will
result in increased premium rates for flood insurance and that
such construction below the base flood level increases risks to
life and property. Such notification shall be maintained with a
record of all variance actions as required in Subsection E(2)(f)
below.
(f) The Board shall maintain a record of all variance actions,
including justification for their issuance, and shall report such
§ 175-111 WATER § 175-111
172:457
§ 175-112. Fees.
variances issued in its annual report submitted to the Federal
Insurance Administrator.
F. Certificate of nonconformance. When a question arises in regard to the
provisions of Article XII or when the applicant for a certificate of
nonconformance wishes to appeal the decision of the Zoning Officer in
regard to issuing a certificate of nonconformance, an application for a
certificate of nonconformance may be made to the Zoning Hearing
Board by the owner of any property which does not conform to the
provisions of this Zoning Chapter. Such application may be made at any
time and a certificate issued upon receipt of proper information. The
certificate shall set forth in detail all of the nonconforming conditions of
said property. Said certificate shall be for the purpose of ensuring to
such owner the right to continue a nonconforming use. A copy of the
certificate shall be retained by the Zoning Hearing Board.
A. Zoning permits.
(1) The fee for a zoning permit shall be $5. Such fee shall be payable at
the office of the Zoning Officer upon making application for such
permit, and no permit shall be issued until such fee is paid.
(2) If work which requires a permit under the provisions of this chapter
is begun without first securing a permit therefor, a permit shall be
obtained at a fee which shall be double that required by
§ 175-112A(1).
B. The fee for a temporary zoning permit shall be $5 per year.
C. Certificate of nonconformance. A fee of $5, payable in advance, shall be
paid to the Zoning Officer upon making application for a certificate of
nonconformance.
D. Zoning Hearing Board. [Amended 7-9-1990 by Ord. No. 1125]
(1) A fee of $150 with a filing fee of $150 shall be paid with each
appeal, application for a variance, special exception, and all other
requests for the Zoning Hearing Board. [Amended 3-22-2004]
(2) A court stenographer shall also be present to transcribe the
proceeding before the Zoning Hearing Board. All costs associated
with the request for copies of the transcript shall be paid by the
party requesting the transcript.
E. Changes or amendments in the Zoning Chapter and/or Zoning Map. A
fee of $500, payable in advance, shall be paid for each application for a
change or amendment in the Zoning Chapter and/or Zoning Map.
[Amended 7-9-1990 by Ord. No. 1125]
F. Statement of classification or compliance. A fee of $50, payable in
advance, shall be paid for each certified statement of district
§ 175-111 SUNBURY CODE § 175-112
172:458
§ 175-113. Violations and penalties; notice; remedies.
Failure to comply with any provision of this chapter or failure to secure
a permit or Zoning Hearing Board certificate, when required, previous to
the erection, construction, extension, addition or change to a conforming or
nonconforming building, use or sign shall be a violation of this chapter.
classification of any property and/or compliance of any property with
the provisions of this chapter.
(1) The owner of a new residential home shall pay a fee of $50 for an
occupancy inspection. [Added 3-22-2004]
(2) The owner of a property which has prints and/or plans for the
review of the Planning Committee shall pay a fee of $25. [Added
3-22-2004]
G. Each member of the Zoning Hearing Board shall be compensated $160
per year for service during the time of appointment. [Added
1-14-1991 by Ord. No. 1135]
A. Notice of violation. When written notice of a violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter has been served by the Zoning Officer on the
owner, agent, occupant, contractor or builder, such violation shall be
discontinued immediately.
B. Penalties. Any owner, general agent, manager, contractor, builder,
architect, tenant, lessee or occupant of an entire building or premises
in which any violation of this chapter has been committed or shall exist,
and any owner, general agent, manager, contractor, builder, architect,
tenant, lessee or occupant of any part of a building or premises in which
such violation has been committed or shall exist, and any person who
knowingly commits, participates in or permits any such violation shall,
upon conviction thereof before any District Justice in a summary
proceeding, be sentenced for each such violation to pay a fine not
exceeding $300 and, in a default thereof, to undergo imprisonment in
the Northumberland County Jail for a period not exceeding 60 days.
Whenever any such person shall have been notified by the Zoning
Officer by prosecution or in any other manner of such violation, each
day thereafter that such violation shall continue shall constitute a
separate violation hereof and may be punishable as such hereunder.
C. Remedies. In case any building or structure is erected, constructed,
reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained, or any
building, structure or land is used in violation of this article or of any
ordinance or other regulation made under authority conferred hereby
the City Council or, with the approval of the City Council, the Zoning
Officer or other official designated by the City Council, in addition to
other remedies, may institute in the name of the municipality any
appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection,
construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion,
§ 175-112 WATER § 175-113
172:459
maintenance or use; to restrain, correct or abate such violation; to
prevent the occupancy of said building, structures or land; or to prevent
any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about such premises.
§ 175-113 SUNBURY CODE § 175-113
172:460
ARTICLE XVII
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 175-114. Amendments to zoning provisions.
The City Council may amend this Zoning Chapter in accordance with the
requirements and provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code as said code may from time to time be amended, revised or reenacted.
§ 175-115. Description of district boundaries.
The following list of boundaries briefly describes the location of the zoning
districts as indicated on the Zoning Map of the City of Sunbury.95
A. Floodplain District: the area designated on the Flood Hazard Boundary
Map prepared for the City of Sunbury by the Federal Insurance
Administration of the United States Department of Housing and Urban
Development.
B. Open Space District:
(1) All of the land of the Sunbury Municipal Authority water treatment
plant bounded by Shamokin Creek and the City line.
(2) All of the land bounded as follows: Beginning at Front Street at the
northern City line; thence along Front Street to a point opposite the
northern extension of the flood control levee; thence across Front
Street to the levee; thence along the levee to ConRail lines; thence
along ConRail lines to the City line; thence along the City line to the
place of beginning.
(3) (Reserved)96
C. R-1 Residential District:
(1) All of the land bounded as follows: Beginning at the intersection of
Memorial Drive and the northern City line; thence east along said
City line to Shamokin Creek; thence along Shamokin Creek to
Market Street; thence along Market Street to Highland Avenue;
thence along Highland Avenue to North Twelfth Street; thence
along North Twelfth Street to Market Street; thence along Market
Street to South Twelfth Street; thence along South Twelfth Street
to Court Street; thence along Court Street to Tenth Street; thence
along Tenth Street to Fairmount Avenue; thence along Fairmount
Avenue to Purdy Street; thence along Purdy Street to Catawissa
Avenue; thence south on Catawissa Avenue to an alley; thence west
along said alley to Eighth Street; thence along Eighth Street to
95.Editor's Note: For current provisions, consult the Zoning Map on file in the City offices.
96.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(3), as amended, which described land in the Open
Space District, was repealed 3-9-1987 by Ord. No. 1081.
§ 175-114 WATER § 175-115
172:461
Packer Street; thence along Packer Street to Memorial Drive;
thence along Memorial Drive to the place of beginning.
(2) The following area is hereby changed from Industrial Park to R-1
Residential: Beginning at a point which marks the intersection of
center lines of Greenough Street and Ninth Alley; thence in an
easterly direction along the center line of Greenough Street, 262
feet, more or less, to a point; thence in a northerly direction at a
90° angle from the last line, crossing the northern half of
Greenough Street, 181 feet, more or less, to a point in the center of
a 20 feet wide alley; thence in an easterly direction at a 90° angle
from the last line, along the center of the said alley, 134 feet, more
or less, to a point; thence in a southerly direction at a 90° angle
from the last line, crossing the southern half of the said alley, along
a 0.28 acre lot subdivided in April of 1994, 181 feet, more or less, to
a point in the center line of Greenough Street; thence in a westerly
direction at a 90° angle from the last line, along the center line of
Greenough Street, 26 feet, more or less, to a point; thence in a
southerly direction at a 90° angle from the last line, crossing the
southern half of Greenough Street, 161 feet, more or less, to a point
in the center of a 20 feet alley; thence in a westerly direction at a
90° angle from the last line, along the center of said alley, 369 feet,
more or less, to the center or Ninth Alley; thence in a northerly
direction, 161 feet, more or less, to the point of beginning. [Added
12-12-1994 by Ord. No. 1194]
D. R-2 Residential District:97
(1) All the land bounded as follows: Beginning at the intersection of
North Front Street and Susquehanna Avenue; thence along
Susquehanna Avenue to John Street; thence along John Street to
North Second Street; thence along North Second Street to Packer
Street; thence along Packer Street to Edison Avenue; thence along
Edison Avenue to Greenough Street; thence along Greenough
Street to North Second Street; thence along North Second Street
to Reagan Street; thence along Reagan Street to North Center
Street; thence along North Center Street to Line Street; thence
along Line Street to North River Avenue; thence along North River
Avenue to Race Street; thence along Race Street to North Center
Avenue; thence along North Center Avenue to Pennsylvania
Avenue; thence along Pennsylvania Avenue to North Third Street;
thence along North Third Street to Woodlawn Avenue; thence along
Woodlawn Avenue to North Front Street; thence along North Front
Street to the place of beginning.
(2) All the land bounded as follows: Beginning at the intersection of
Eighth Street and Race Street; thence along Race Street to Sixth
Street; thence along Sixth Street to Line Street; thence along Line
97.Editor's Note: Portions of the R-2 District along Front Street from Reagan Street to
Woodlawn Avenue were changed to Neighborhood Business 6-26-2000.
§ 175-115 SUNBURY CODE § 175-115
172:462
Street to North Fourth Street; thence along North Fourth Street
to Reagan Street; thence along Reagan Street to the ConRail rail
lines; thence along the ConRail rail lines to Packer Street; thence
along Packer Street to North Fourth Street; thence along North
Fourth Street to Lincoln Street; thence along Lincoln Street to
North Fifth Street; thence along the land of Weis Markets to the
land of the Y.M.C.A.; thence to and along the northern line of the
land of the Y.M.C.A. to North Fourth Street; thence along North
Fourth Street to the northern City line; thence along said City
line to Shikellamy Avenue; thence along Shikellamy Avenue to
Memorial Drive; thence along Memorial Drive to Packer Street;
thence along Packer Street to Eighth Street; thence along Eighth
Street to the place of the beginning. [Amended 10-13-1986 by
Ord. No. 1077; 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 1113]
(3) All of the land bounded as follows: Beginning at the intersection of
Tenth Street and Court Street; thence along Court Street to South
Twelfth Street; thence along South Twelfth Street to Market Street;
thence along Market Street to North Twelfth Street; thence along
North Twelfth Street to Highland Avenue; thence along Highland
Avenue to Wolverton Street; thence along Wolverton Street to
Tenth Street; thence along Tenth Street to the place of beginning.
(4) All the land bounded as follows: Beginning at the intersection of
South Front Street and Penn Street; thence along Penn Street to
South Second Street; thence along South Second Street to Church
Street; thence along Church Street to Sixth Street extended;
thence along Sixth Street extended to Penn Street; thence along
Penn Street to Tenth Street; thence along Tenth Street to the flood
control levee; thence along the flood control levee to Fawn Lane;
thence along Fawn Lane to South Fourth Street; thence along
South Fourth Street to the southern line of the City cemetery;
thence along the southern line of the City cemetery to South Third
Street; thence north on South Third Street to an unnamed alley
immediately south of Pine Street; thence along said unnamed alley
to South Second Street; thence along South Second Street to
Bainbridge Street; thence along Bainbridge Street to South Front
Street; thence along South Front to the place of beginning.
E. Highway Commercial District:
(1) All the land bounded as follows: Beginning at the intersection of
Haas Avenue and Wolverton Street; thence along Wolverton Street
to Market Street; thence along Market Street to the eastern City
line; thence along the eastern City line to ConRail rail lines; thence
along ConRail rail lines to Haas Avenue; thence along Haas Avenue
to the place of beginning.
(2) All of the land bounded on the east by South Front Street and on
the west by the flood control levee.
§ 175-115 WATER § 175-115
172:463
(3) All the land bounded as follows: Beginning at the intersection of
North Fourth Street and the northern City line; thence along North
Fourth Street to the northern line of land of the Y.M.C.A.; thence
along the line of land of Y.M.C.A. to the line of land of Weis Markets;
thence along land of Weis Markets to 155 feet beyond unopened
Jefferson Street extended on the east side of North Fifth Street
from Jefferson Street to Lincoln Street; thence along North Fifth
Street to Lincoln Street; thence along Lincoln Street to North
Fourth Street; thence along North Fourth Street to Packer Street;
thence along ConRail rail lines to the northern City line; thence
along the northern City line to the place of beginning. [Amended
4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 1113]
F. Central Business District: All of the land bounded as follows: Beginning
at the intersection of North Front Street and Woodlawn Avenue; thence
along Woodlawn Avenue to the former Horn Railroad; thence along the
former Horn Railroad to Market Street; thence along Market Street to
Tenth Street; thence along Tenth Street to Court Street; thence along
Court Street to Seventh Street; thence along Seventh Street to an
unnamed alley immediately south of Market Street; thence along said
unnamed alley to Sixth Street extended; thence south along Sixth
Street extended to an unnamed alley immediately north of Chestnut
Street; thence along said unnamed alley to Fifth Street; thence along
Fifth Street to Court Street; thence along Court Street to Front Street;
thence north along Front Street to the place of beginning. [Amended
4-13-1987 by Ord. No. 1083; 11-13-1989 by Ord. No. 1117]
G. Neighborhood Business District:98
(1) All of the land bounded as follows: Beginning at the intersection of
North Third Street and Woodlawn Avenue; thence along North
Third Street to Pennsylvania Avenue; thence along Pennsylvania
Avenue to North Center Street; thence along North Center Street
to Race Street; thence along Race Street to North River Avenue;
thence along North River Avenue to Line Street; thence along Line
Street to North Center Street; thence along North Center Street to
Reagan Street; thence along Reagan Street to North Fourth Street;
thence along North Fourth Street to Line Street; thence along Line
Street to North Sixth Street; thence along North Sixth Street to
Race Street; thence along Race Street to Eighth Street; thence
along Eighth Street to the point where the northern line of Purdy
Street would intersect if extended westward; thence along the
northern line extension of Purdy Street to Fairmount Avenue;
thence along Fairmount Avenue to Market Street; thence along
Market Street to the former Horn Railroad; thence along the
former Horn Railroad to Woodlawn Avenue; thence along
Woodlawn Avenue to the place of beginning. Excluding an area
beginning at the intersection of North Fourth Street and Vine
98.Editor's Note: Portions of the R-2 District along Front Street from Reagan Street to
Woodlawn Avenue were changed to Neighborhood Business 6-26-2000.
§ 175-115 SUNBURY CODE § 175-115
172:464
Street; thence along Vine Street to North Fifth Street; thence
along North Fifth Street to an unnamed alley; thence along an
unnamed alley to the property line of 422 North Fourth Street;
thence along the property line of 422 North Fourth Street to the
northern property line of North Fourth Street; thence along North
Fourth Street to the place of beginning. [Amended 4-13-1987 by
Ord. No. 1083; 11-13-1989 by Ord. No. 1117; 9-10-1990 by
Ord. No. 1128]
(2) All of the land bounded as follows: Beginning at the intersection of
South Front Street and Court Street; thence along Court Street to
Fifth Street; thence south along Fifth Street to an unnamed alley
immediately north of Chestnut Street; thence along said unnamed
alley to Sixth Street extended; thence north along Sixth Street
extended to an unnamed alley immediately south of Market Street;
thence along said unnamed alley to South Seventh Street; thence
along South Seventh Street to Court Street; thence along Court
Street to Tenth Street; thence along Tenth Street to Raspberry
Avenue; thence along Raspberry Avenue to South Awl Street;
thence along South Awl Street to Church Street; thence along
Church Street to South Second Street; thence along South Second
Street to a point 100 feet south of the southern line of Penn Street;
thence westwardly in a line parallel to Penn Street a distance of
110 feet to a point; thence northwardly in a line parallel to Second
Street a distance of 100 feet to a point in the southern line of Penn
Street; thence along Penn Street to South Front Street; thence
along South Front Street to the place of beginning. [Amended
7-21-1988 by Ord. No. 1103]
(3) Beginning at the intersection of Edison Avenue and Masser Street;
thence along Masser Street to North Second Street extension;
thence along North Second Street; thence to Greenough Street;
thence along Greenough Street to Edison Avenue; thence along
Edison Avenue to the point of beginning. [Added 12-14-1992 by
Ord. No. 1171]
H. Industrial Park District:99
(1) All of the land bounded as follows: Beginning at the intersection of
North Front Street and the northern City line; thence along the
northern City line to ConRail rail lines; thence along ConRail rail
lines to Reagan Street; thence along Reagan Street to North
Second Street; thence along North Second Street to Greenough
Street; thence along Greenough Street to Edison Avenue; thence
along Edison Avenue to Packer Street; thence along Packer Street
to North Second Street; thence along North Second Street to John
Street; thence along John Street to Susquehanna Avenue; thence
99.Editor's Note: The following description of the Industrial Park District does not include
parcels or lots subsequently rezoned. For example, see § 175-115C(1).
§ 175-115 WATER § 175-115
172:465
along Susquehanna Avenue to North Front Street; thence along
North Front Street to place of beginning.
(2) All of the land bounded as follows: Beginning at the intersection of
South Awl Street and Raspberry Avenue; thence along Raspberry
Avenue to Tenth Street; thence along Tenth Street to Wolverton
Street; thence along Wolverton Street to Haas Avenue; thence
along Haas Avenue to ConRail rail lines; thence along ConRail rail
lines to flood control levee; thence along flood control levee to
Tenth Street; thence along Tenth Street to Penn Street extended;
thence along Penn Street to Sixth Street extended; thence along
Sixth Street extended to Church Street; thence along Church
Street to South Awl Street; thence along South Awl Street to place
of beginning.
(3) All of the land bounded as follows: Beginning at the intersection of
South Front Street and Bainbridge Street; thence along Bainbridge
Street to South Second Street; thence north along South Second
Street to an unnamed alley immediately south of Pine Street;
thence along said unnamed alley to South Third Street; thence
south along South Third Street to the southern line of the City
cemetery; thence along the southern line of the City cemetery to
South Fourth Street; thence north along South Fourth Street to
Fawn Lane; thence along Fawn Lane to the flood control levee;
thence along flood control levee to South Front Street; thence
along South Front Street to the place of beginning.
(4) All of the land bounded as follows: Beginning at the intersection of
Line Street and North Eleventh Street; thence along North
Eleventh Street to Race Street; thence west along Race Street to an
unnamed alley immediately west of Eleventh Street; thence along
said unnamed alley to Line Street; thence along Line Street to
place of beginning.
(5) All of the land bounded as follows: Beginning at the intersection of
Champ Avenue and Greenough Street; thence east along
Greenough Street 262 feet more or less to a point; thence north in a
line parallel to Champ Avenue a distance of 181 feet more or less to
an unnamed alley immediately south of Packer Street; thence east
along said unnamed alley 214 feet more or less to a point; thence
south in a line parallel to Champ Avenue to Greenough Street a
distance of 181 feet more or less; thence west along Greenough
Street a distance of 106 feet more or less to a point; thence south in
a line parallel to Champ Avenue a distance of 161 feet more or less
to a point in an unnamed alley immediately north of Masser Street;
thence west along said unnamed alley to Champ Avenue; thence
north along Champ Avenue to the place of beginning.
(6) All of the land bounded as follows: Beginning at the intersection of
North Fourth Street and Vine Street; thence along Vine Street to
North Fifth Street; thence along North Fifth Street to an unnamed
§ 175-115 SUNBURY CODE § 175-115
172:466
alley; thence along an unnamed alley to the property line of 422
North Fourth Street; thence north along the property line of 422
North Fourth Street to the northern property line of 422 North
Fourth Street; thence along the northern property line to North
Fourth Street; thence south along North Fourth Street to the place
of beginning. [Added 9-10-1990 by Ord. No. 1128]
(7) All of the land bounded as follows: Beginning at the intersection of
Fairmount Avenue and Line Street; thence along the southern side
of Fairmount Avenue in a westerly direction a distance of 620 feet
to a point on the eastern side of Race Street; thence in a southerly
direction a distance of 150 feet to a point on the northern side of an
unnamed alley; thence in an easterly direction along said unnamed
alley a distance of 620 feet to a point on the western side of Line
Street; thence in a northerly direction along Line Street a distance
of 150 feet to the point or place of beginning. [Added 8-8-1997]
(8) All of the land bounded as follows: Beginning at the corner of Race
Street and Fairmount Ave; thence along Fairmount Avenue a
distance of 40 feet to a point; thence southerly 150 feet to an
unnamed alley; thence westerly along said unnamed alley 15 feet to
a point; thence southerly parallel to Race Street a distance of 170
feet to 11th Street; thence easterly along 11th Street a distance of
55 feet to the corner of 11th and Race Street; thence along Race
Street a distance of 320 feet to the place of beginning. [Added
8-8-1997]
§ 175-115 WATER § 175-115
172:467

ARTICLE XVIII
Historic District
[Added 10-14-1996 by Ord. No. 1204; amended 9-22-2006]
§ 175-116. General provisions.
A. District created. This article creates the City of Sunbury Historic
District within the geographic boundaries of the City of Sunbury;
defines the terms used in this article; defines the boundaries of the
Historic District; creates an Historical Architectural Review Board to
advise the City Council on issuing certifications of appropriateness for
permits to erect, demolish or alter buildings within the Sunbury
Historic District; and provides for appeals for refusals and for changes
in procedures in the office of Code Enforcement necessary to carry out
the provisions of this article and for notifying the Pennsylvania
Historical and Museum Commission of the pendency of this article and
for obtaining a certificate as to the historic significance of the District
within the limits defined in this article.
B. The title of this article is the "City of Sunbury Historical District
Ordinance."
C. Statutory authorization. This article is enacted in accordance with the
provisions of the Pennsylvania enabling legislation, the Historic District
Act of June 13, 1961 (Act 167, as amended).100
D. Purpose. This article is enacted to:
(1) Protect an architecturally distinctive and historic area of Sunbury;
(2) Encourage interest in Sunbury's past;
(3) Promote the general welfare and education of the City's people;
(4) Improve property values;
(5) Enhance the City's attractiveness to residents and visitors; and
(6) Stimulate business and strengthen the City's economy.
E. Interpretation. All standards in this article are to be interpreted as
minimums required. Nothing prevents property owners from using a
higher standard as long as it shall meet or exceed the standards as set
forth in this article.
F. Conflicts with other laws. Should any provision in this article conflict
with any law of the United States or the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, the federal or state law shall govern. Such conflicts shall
not affect the validity of the remainder of this article.
100. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 8001 et seq.
§ 175-116 WATER § 175-116
172:469
§ 175-117. Definitions.
G. Repealer. All Ordinances inconsistent with this article are hereby
repealed to the extent of inconsistency only.
H. When effective. This article shall not take effect until the Pennsylvania
Historical and Museum Commission has been notified, in writing, of the
enactment of this article and has certified, by resolution, to the
historical significance of the Historic District of the City of Sunbury as
defined in § 175-117C hereof and has transmitted its certifying
resolution to the City of Sunbury pursuant to 53 P.S. § 8002. If such
enactment and certification has been established by any previous
ordinance, the effective date shall be that of the enactment and
ordination of this article by the Council of the City of Sunbury as listed
in Subsection I.
I. Review. The Council of the City of Sunbury will review this article after
the expiration of a period of one year following its effective date in
order to reevaluate it at such time and determine whether any
amendments hereto are deemed advisable or necessary. In the absence
of any such review or amendments, however, this article shall continue
in full force and effect without interruption.
A. Application and interpretation. It is not intended that these definitions
include only words used or referred to in this article. The words are
included in order to facilitate the interpretation of this article for
administrative purposes and in the carrying out of duties by the Board
of Historical Architectural Review, the City Council and the Code
Enforcement Office.
B. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following shall, for the purpose
of this article, have the meaning herein indicated:
(1) Words in the present tense include the future tense.
(2) The word "person" includes a for-profit or nonprofit corporation,
company partnership or individual.
(3) The word "building" includes "structure."
(4) The word "shall" is always mandatory.
C. Terms defined. For this article, the following words are defined:
ALTERATION — The changing of any exterior architectural feature of a
structure.
BOARD — The City of Sunbury Historic Architectural Review Board.
BUILDING — A structure with a roof supported by columns or walls and
intended for shelter or storage of people, animals or chattel.
BUILDING PERMIT — See definition of "permit."
CERTIFICATE — Certificate of appropriateness.
§ 175-116 SUNBURY CODE § 175-117
172:470
CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS — The approval statement
signed by the Council of the City of Sunbury which authorizes the
construction, alteration or razing of all or part of a building within the
Historic District and which authorizes the issuance of a building permit
for said request.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICE — The Code Enforcement Office of the
City of Sunbury.
COMMISSION — The City of Sunbury Planning Commission.
COMMONWEALTH — The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
CONDITION — The structural stability and level of maintenance of a
building.
CONSTRUCTION — Building an addition to an existing structure or
erecting or placing a structure on a property.
CONTRIBUTING BUILDINGS — Buildings at least 50 years old that
represent a vernacular architecture. Buildings that contribute to the
district's distinction yet may not be of special significance individually;
properties designated as "contributing" on the site survey update.
COUNCIL — The governing body of the City of Sunbury.
DEMOLITION — Destruction, the dismantling or tearing down of all or
part of any building or structure and all operation incidental thereto.
EVALUATION CRITERIA — Maintenance, restoration and renovation
standards to preserve the historic and architectural characteristics of
the structures in the Historic District.
EXTERIOR ARCHITECTURAL APPEARANCE — The architectural
character and composition of a structure's exterior. This includes the
building materials and the design, number, type and style of windows,
doors, fixtures, porches and appurtenant elements along with finishes
applied thereto.
HARB — The City of Sunbury Historic Architectural Review Board.
HISTORIC DISTRICT — The area of the City of Sunbury, with any
subsequent additions, created by ordinance of the City of Sunbury
pursuant to the Pennsylvania Historic District Act of June 13, 1961
(Act 167, as amended),101 subject to the regulations contained herein,
and listed on the National Register of Historic Places. Even though
Sunbury's Historic District is composed of sites, buildings, structures,
and objects that would not qualify individually, the identity and value
of the district results from the density of structures and from their
interrelationships rather than from individual, significant structures.
INTEGRITY — The degree to which a building retains its original
design, materials and character.
MAYOR — The chief executive of the City of Sunbury.
101. Editor's Note: See 53 § 8001 et seq.
§ 175-117 WATER § 175-117
172:471
§ 175-118. District description, map and boundaries.
NOTABLE BUILDINGS — Buildings at least 50 years old or those
having local historic importance or embodying the distinctive
characteristics of a type, period, or method of construction; properties
designated "notable" on the site survey update.
PERMIT/BUILDING PERMIT — A certificate issued by the Code
Enforcement Office which approves and authorizes the erection, repair,
alteration or demolition of part or all of a structure in the Historic
District, subject to the provisions of this article.
PUBLIC STREET OR WAY — Any land dedicated to public use or
passage, including, but not limited to, streets, alleys, parks, pedestrian
rights-of-way and other public rights-of-way, whether constructed,
dedicated or proposed.
RECONSTRUCTION — Remaking or rebuilding all or part of a building
not necessarily using original materials.
REPAIR — Replacing existing features with equivalent materials for
maintenance without adding, changing or modifying the original
construction or types of finishes applied thereto.
RESTORATION — Returning all or part of a building to its original state
or nearly original state by using original or nearly original materials,
including finish materials applied thereto.
SITE SURVEY — Evaluation of all properties within the Sunbury
Historic District to determine the location, ownership, tax number and
building classification. The site survey may also include approximate
date of construction, architectural style, features of historic
significance, current condition and/or integrity.
STATE — The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed, erected or placed that requires a
permanent location on the land, including walls, fences, gates and other
nonvegetative landscape elements.
SUPPLEMENTAL BUILDINGS — Buildings built less than 50 years
before the enactment of this article or that are of little or no historic or
architectural merit at this time; properties designated as "intrusion" on
the site survey update.
A. District description. Starting at a point at the intersection of North
Front Street and the northwest corner of Lot No. 1-1-19 in the City of
Sunbury, County of Northumberland, Pennsylvania; then moving in an
easterly direction along the rear of lots fronting on the north side of
Arch Street to the eastern line of the Conrail Railroad right-of-way, the
same being parallel to North Third Street; then north along said rightof-
way to the intersection with Race Street; then east to the intersection
with the eastern line of Railroad Street; then south along Railroad
Street to a point at the rear of lots fronting on the north side of Arch
§ 175-117 SUNBURY CODE § 175-118
172:472
Street; then moving in an easterly direction to the intersection with the
eastern line of North Fourth Street; then along the east side of North
Fourth Street to the intersection with the rear of lots fronting on the
north side of Market Street; then moving in an easterly direction to
the intersection with the west side of Fairmount Avenue; then along
Fairmount Avenue and the west side of Tenth Street to the rear of lots
fronting on the south side of Market Street; then moving in a westerly
direction to the west side of South Fifth Street; then south along South
Fifth Street to the south side of Chestnut Street; then west along
Chestnut Street to the southeast corner of Awl and Chestnut Streets;
then along the east side of Awl Street to the rear of lots fronting on
the south side of Chestnut Street; then moving in a westerly direction
to the intersection with the northeast corner of Lot No. 2-1-144A, then
south along the rear line of Lot No. 2-1-144A to the southern line of
Lot Nos. 2-1-144A and 2-1-144 to the intersection with South Front
Street, then north along South and North Front Streets to the point
of beginning; the same being the area more properly described as the
"Sunbury Historical District with Additions."
B. Adoption of District Map. The Sunbury Historic District Map, together
with all additions shown thereon, is hereby adopted by reference and
declared to be part of this article. Said Historic District Map shall be
identified by the signature of the Mayor, properly attested, and shall
bear the City Seal. This official Historic District Map shall be identified
by certification to the effect that: This official map of the City of
Sunbury Historic District is hereby adopted on the 22nd day of
September, 2006, as part of Ordinance No. 1249-2006 of the City of
Sunbury, Northumberland County, Pennsylvania.
C. District boundaries.
(1) District boundary lines are intended to follow or be parallel to the
right-of-way line of streets, streams and railroads; and lot or
property lines as they exist on a recorded deed or plan of record in
the Northumberland County Recorder of Deeds office at the time of
the adoption of this article, unless such District boundary lines are
fixed by dimensions as shown on the Sunbury Historic District Map
and as described in Subsection A above.
(2) Where a district boundary is not fixed by dimensions and where it
approximately follows lot lines and where it does not scale more
than 10 feet therefrom, such lot lines shall be construed to be such
boundaries unless specifically shown otherwise.
(3) In unsubdivided land or where a district boundary divides a lot, the
location of such boundary, unless the same is indicated by
dimensions, shall be determined by the use of the scale appearing
on the Map or by survey of a registered surveyor hired and paid for
by the property owner questioning or contesting the boundary
location.
§ 175-118 WATER § 175-119
172:473
§ 175-119. Historic Architectural Review Board.
A. Creation and membership. An Historic Architectural Review Board
(HARB) is hereby created and shall be composed of seven voting
members appointed by the City Council. One member shall be a
registered architect; one shall be a licensed real estate broker; two
shall be resident property owners in the Historic District; two shall have
knowledge of and interest in preservation of historic structures; one
shall be a building contractor; and one shall be a nonvoting member
representing the Code Enforcement Office.
B. Terms of office. Of the initial voting appointees to the Board, one shall
be designated until the first day of January following the date of this
article, two until the first day of the second January thereafter, two until
the first day of the third January thereafter and two until the first day of
the fourth January thereafter. Their successors shall be appointed on
the expiration of their respective terms to serve four-year terms.
C. Vacancies. The term of the registered architect, the licensed real estate
broker or the Code Enforcement Officer shall be considered vacant if
the member no longer engages in the occupation. The membership of
the resident or property owner in the district shall cease if the member
no longer resides or owns property in the district. The Board shall
promptly notify the City Council of vacancies. Vacancies shall be filled
for the unexpired term.
D. Removal of members. A Board member shall be removed based upon a
majority vote of City Council. Removal of a Board member may occur at
any time and without cause. The Board has the right to make
suggestions to City Council if removal is recommended.
E. Meetings; voting procedures. The Board shall meet once each month if
the Code Enforcement Office has submitted applications for review.
Officers, elected from the membership, shall serve annual terms and
may succeed themselves. A quorum of a majority of the Board as a
whole shall be required to conduct meetings. Affirmative action shall
require a majority vote of the quorum. No Board member shall take part
in a discussion or a vote on issuing a certificate of appropriateness for
any property in which that member has any direct or indirect interest.
Board action shall be noted and maintained as part of the required
application for building permit retained in the records of the Code
Enforcement Officer. The chairperson of the Board shall be available,
with reasonable notice, to confer with City Council regarding any
official action of the Board.
F. Expenditures for services. Within the limits of funds appropriated by
the City Council, the Board may employ or contract for technical and
clerical services. Board members shall serve without compensation,
except that the City Council may reimburse members for expenses
incurred in the performance of their duties.
G. Functions of Board.
§ 175-119 SUNBURY CODE § 175-119
172:474
§ 175-120. Building classifications; building permits; certificates of
appropriateness; notices and appeals of classifications.
(1) The primary function of the HARB shall be to advise Sunbury's City
Council on issuing certificates of appropriateness pursuant to this
article.
(2) The HARB shall apply the guidelines included in this article and
shall require plans, drawings or other information necessary to
review and recommend the certificate of appropriateness.
(3) The HARB shall adopt procedures for implementation of this
article.
(4) The Board shall participate, as requested, with the
Northumberland County Historical Society to conduct ongoing
surveys to document the historical and architectural significance of
buildings and sites in the Historic District, maintain a register of
structures and conduct public education programs.
(5) If requested, the HARB shall advise owners of properties in the
Historic District on the physical and financial aspects of
preservation, rehabilitation and reuse.
(6) The HARB may call upon experts in historic preservation and in
other technical fields for advice only if such advice is found to be
necessary by official action of City Council.
(7) The HARB shall, when requested by City Council, testify before
City Council, boards and commissions on any matter affecting
building or sites of historic or architectural significance in the City.
(8) The HARB shall keep abreast of and advise on, when requested by
the Sunbury Zoning Hearing Board or Sunbury Planning
Commission, proposed zoning amendments, special exceptions,
conditional uses and variances affecting structures and sites in the
Historic District.
(9) The City of Sunbury on behalf of HARB may accept gifts, grants,
and money for publishing educational materials, hiring consultants,
or for other activities appropriate to this article.
A. Building classifications. Structures in the Historic District shall be
classified by age and historic and architectural significance rather than
by structural stability or condition of maintenance. Properties shall be
designated as "notable," "contributing" or "supplemental."
(1) Supplemental structures: structures built less than 50 years before
the enactment of this article or having little or no historic or
architectural merit at the time of enactment of this article.
(2) Contributing structures: structures at least 50 years old that
represent a vernacular architecture. Buildings that contribute to
§ 175-119 WATER § 175-120
172:475
the district's distinction yet may not be of special significance
individually.
(3) Notable structures: structures at least 50 years old or those having
local historic importance or embodying the distinctive
characteristics of a type, period or method of construction.
B. Building permit requirement. In accordance with the City of Sunbury
Ordinance No. 1193,102 all repairs, alterations, restorations,
enlargements, demolitions, new construction or razing of structures in
the Historic District shall require a building permit.
C. Certificate of appropriateness requirement.
(1) For structures classified as "contributing" or "supplemental," a
certificate shall not be required for repairs. For structures
classified as "contributing" or "supplemental," a certificate shall be
required for the following: changes to rooflines; changes in size,
shape or number of doors, windows or other openings; changes in
exterior surface materials and/or finishes; cleaning of masonry;
changes in design, materials or demolition of porches or
appurtenant elements; or structural enlargement or demolition.
(2) Structures classified as "notable" require certificates of
appropriateness before the Code Enforcement Office shall issue a
building permit for exterior repair, alterations, additions, or
demolition.
(3) All new construction shall require a certificate. For the purpose of
this article, new construction shall include the installation of
satellite reception equipment and/or any other devices found by the
Board to be nonhistoric in nature which are visible from any
thoroughfare with a paved cartway exceeding 20 feet in width.
(4) The Historic Architectural Review Board shall base its
recommendations for certificates of appropriateness on the
evaluation criteria in Appendix A.103
D. Notice and appeal of classification.
(1) Within 90 days from the effective date of this article, every property
owner within the Historic District shall be notified of the
classification assigned to his or her property along with a brief
explanation of the classification system.
(2) Any person aggrieved by the classification assigned to his or her
property may, within 30 days of receipt of notice of classification,
file a written statement appealing the classification to the City
Council. City Council will hold a hearing on any such appeal at its
102. Editor's Note: See § 68-6, Licensing of contractors, remodelers, excavators or erectors;
insurance.
103. Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the city offices.
§ 175-120 SUNBURY CODE § 175-120
172:476
§ 175-121. Application procedures and approval processes.
next regularly scheduled meeting, reach a decision thereon either
at the meeting or within 45 days thereafter and send the appellant
a written notice of the decision. Any further appeal shall be in the
manner provided by § 175-21D of this article.
A. Procedures of Code Enforcement Office.
(1) Issuing building permits. In accordance with the City of Sunbury's
Ordinance No. 1193, the Code Office shall issue building permits
for all repairs, alterations, restorations, new construction,
enlargements, demolitions or razing of any structure or part of any
structure in the Historic District. The Code Office shall require
certificates of appropriateness before issuing building permits for
properties in the Historic District in accordance with § 175-120.
(2) Applications for permits. When the Code Enforcement Office
receives a building permit application for a property in the Historic
District, procedures for the office at that time shall be followed. The
Code Enforcement Office shall also verify the classification of the
property and the type of work to be done to determine whether a
certificate of appropriateness shall be required. If a certificate is
required, the Code Enforcement Office shall:
(a) Forward copies of the application, site plans, building plans
and specifications to the Historic Architectural Review Board.
(b) Maintain records, including details of the handling and
disposition of the application, which shall be cross-referenced
to other codes.
(c) Notify applicants, in writing, of the number of copies and types
of materials needed to allow compliance with the foregoing
and the date and time of the HARB meeting at which the
application will be reviewed.
(d) Notify permit applicants of approval or disapproval upon
written notice from the City Council.
(e) Institute proceedings at law or in equity necessary to enforce
this article in the same manner as the Building Code of the City
of Sunbury.104
(3) Hazardous structures. If a building presents a clear and present
danger to the public or has been rendered unfit for habitation
because of fire, explosion or similar cause, the terms of this article
may be temporarily waived to the extent that the applicant can
render interim, short-term repairs to insure the property is safe
and habitable under the terms of the Building Code in effect in the
104. Editor's Note: See Ch. 68, Building Construction.
§ 175-120 WATER § 175-121
172:477
City of Sunbury.105 Any changes made to the building other than
emergency repairs and any permanent alterations shall be subject
to the requirements of § 175-120.
B. Procedures of Historic Architectural Review Board.
(1) Receipt of application for permit requiring a certificate of
appropriateness. The Code Enforcement Office shall send the
HARB every application for a building permit for which a certificate
shall be required. The HARB shall review and make
recommendations to the City Council on granting a certificate. The
complete process of application to and review by the Code
Enforcement Office and the HARB shall not exceed 45 days.
(2) Board review and recommendation. The HARB shall review and
consider each application based on the evaluation criteria in
Appendix A106 and shall submit its recommendation to the City
Council in the form of a written report as prescribed in Appendix
B.107 The HARB shall take one of the following actions:
(a) Recommend approval of granting of a certificate.
(b) Recommend disapproval of granting a certificate.
(3) Notification of applicant. The Code Enforcement Office, on behalf
of HARB, shall notify the applicant, in writing, on the form
prescribed in Appendix B,108 of its recommendation within three
days of its decision. In case the Board recommends disapproval, it
shall indicate to the applicant the changes in the plans and
specifications that would protect the distinctive historic character
of the property and District. Where disapproval is recommended,
an applicant will have a period of five days from receipt of
notification of the Board's recommendation within which to
resubmit the application with any suggested change(s). The
applicant may request, in writing, an additional 15 days during
which to make changes and resubmit the application. If the
applicant makes all changes requested in the Board's
Determination, plans may be resubmitted within the prescribed
time to the Code Enforcement Office, along with a letter stating the
applicant's intention to make all changes required. The Code
Enforcement Office may then proceed with submission to City
Council at their next regularly scheduled meeting without further
Board action. If an application is not so amended, the applicant may
resubmit plans for a second and final time for Board action at their
next regularly scheduled meeting. In each case, the HARB 's
written report of recommendations shall be sent to the applicant
105. Editor's Note: See Ch. 68, Building Construction.
106. Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the City offices.
107. Editor's Note: Appendix B is on file in the City offices.
108. Editor's Note: Appendix B is on file in the City offices.
§ 175-121 SUNBURY CODE § 175-121
172:478
within three days of a decision of the HARB, whether the decision
is a recommendation of approval or disapproval and whether it
is a decision on an original or a resubmitted application. This
notification shall be deemed to be given to the applicant on the date
the written report of recommendation is mailed to the applicant if
ordinary United States mail is utilized.
(4) Report of recommendation to City Council. The HARB shall submit
a copy of its written report of recommendation to City Council for
its consideration at its next meeting. In cases where the HARB has
recommended disapproval of an original application for certificate
of appropriateness, the HARB shall not immediately submit its
report to City Council, but rather shall withhold its report to City
Council for five days from the date the applicant is notified of the
HARB's intent to recommend against granting the certificate. If the
applicant does not resubmit the application, then the report
recommending disapproval of the application shall be submitted to
City Council. If the applicant has made a written request for a
fifteen-day extension to resubmit the application, pursuant to
Subsection B(3), then the report shall not be submitted to City
Council until the expiration of that extended resubmission period.
In any event, upon receipt of resubmitted application, the HARB
shall submit its written report of recommendation to City Council
upon reaching a decision.
C. Procedures of City Council.
(1) Consideration of reports from the HARB. At a regular or special
meeting, the City Council shall consider the HARB's written report
of recommendation on a given application for a certificate of
appropriateness and shall either approve the application and issue
a certificate or disapprove the application and deny a certificate. In
determining whether to certify the appropriateness of the
application by the issuance of a certificate, the City Council shall
apply the evaluation criteria in Appendix A.109 If a certificate is
issued, such issuance will authorize the Code Enforcement Office to
issue a building permit for the work covered. If the certificate is
denied, a building permit may not be issued.
(2) Notification of decision. The applicant shall be notified, in writing,
of the City Council's decision within 10 days of its decision. If the
written notification is mailed, the date of mailing shall be deemed
the date of notification if ordinary United States mail is utilized. A
copy of the decision shall also be provided to the Code Enforcement
Office and shall be available for public inspection within three days
of the decision of City Council. Should City Council fail to notify the
applicant of its decision within the specified time, it shall be
assumed as a matter of law that City Council has approved the
109. Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the City offices.
§ 175-121 WATER § 175-121
172:479
§ 175-122. Enforcement.
issuance of a certificate, unless the applicant waives the time limit
in writing.
(3) Denial and reconsideration by City Council. When an application
has been disapproved and a certificate of appropriateness denied,
the applicant may submit a written request, on a form to be
provided therefor, for a hearing for the purpose of reconsidering
the application. The City Council shall hold such a hearing at its
next regularly scheduled meeting. The applicant shall be sent
notice not less than 10 days before the meeting at which the
hearing will be held. Council shall make a final decision and notify
the applicant thereof within 10 days of the hearing on
reconsideration in the same manner as provided in Subsection B(3)
for notification of Council's original decision. The Code
Enforcement Office shall also be notified of the final decision.
D. Aggrieved parties. Appeals. Any party aggrieved by any final decision of
the City Council made pursuant to the provisions of this article may file
an appeal with the Court of Common Pleas of Northumberland County
in accordance with Title 42 of the Pennsylvania Consolidated Statutes
(42 Pa.C.S.A. § 933).
A. Code Enforcement Officer. The Code Enforcement Officer appointed by
the City Council shall enforce the provisions of this article.
B. Notice of violation. The Code Enforcement Office shall serve notice of
violation on the person violating this article or in violation of a permit or
certificate under the provisions of this article. The notice shall direct
the abatement of the violation.
C. Prosecution of violation. If the violation is not abated within the time
specified in the notice, the Code Enforcement Office shall institute the
appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate
such violation.
D. Violations and penalties. Any person violating the provisions of or
failing to comply with this article or violating a permit issued under the
provisions of this article shall be guilty of a summary offense punishable
by a fine not exceeding $600 or by imprisonment not exceeding 90 days,
or both fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues shall
be deemed a separate offense.
§ 175-121 SUNBURY CODE § 175-122
172:480
Appendix
Chapter A180
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
§ A180-1. Short title.
This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the "Cable Television
Franchise Ordinance" or "ordinance."
§ A180-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words
and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words in the plural number include the singular number, words in
the singular number include the plural number, and words in the masculine
gender shall include the feminine gender. The word "shall" is always
mandatory and not merely directory.
CABLE TELEVISION SERVICE or SERVICE — The business of furnishing
video and/or audio programming or other information to subscribing
customers by means of a Cable Television System.
CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEM or SYSTEM — Any facility or group of
facilities which, in whole or in part, receives, modifies or originates
television, FM radio or other electrical or fiber optic signals for the purpose
of transmitting or distributing such signals by wire, cable or other means
to subscribing members of the public or to selected customers, as herein
contemplated. This definition shall include those systems which do not
occupy or cross over or under the public ways and places of the
municipality.
COMPANY — Service Electric Cablevision, Inc., its successors and assigns.
MUNICIPALITY — The City of Sunbury, Northumberland County,
Pennsylvania, acting through its duly constituted governing body.
BASIC CABLE TELEVISION SERVICE — That tier of cable television
service to which all users must subscribe in order to obtain the
transmission of local broadcast television signals and for which a
charge is made.
A.
EXPANDED BASIC CABLE TELEVISION SERVICE — A second tier of
services for which a charge is made.
B.
OPTIONAL CABLE TELEVISION SERVICE — The furnishing to cable
television service for which a per-channel charge is made additional to
that for basic cable television service.
C.
Subsections A, B and C are hereby collectively the "cable television
service."
D.
§ 175-122 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § A180-2
A180:481
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
§ A180-3. Franchise required.
From and after the enactment of this ordinance, no cable television system
shall be constructed, installed or operated in the municipality unless such
construction, installation and operation shall first have been authorized by
a duly enacted ordinance of the municipality.
§ A180-4. Grant of authority.
Having determined that the continued availability of cable television service
affords significant social, educational and entertainment benefits to the
public in the municipality, and the company has provided a high quality
of such service, has been responsive to the needs and desires of residents
of the municipality, and such continued service can best be assured by
granting a franchise to the company, and the company has the legal,
character, financial, technical and other qualifications to continue to
construct, erect, own, operate and maintain the cable television service
serving this municipality; the municipality hereby grants unto the company
the nonexclusive right and privilege to construct, erect, operate and
maintain a cable television system in, under, over, along, across or upon
the public streets, highways, sidewalks, rights-of-way and places within
the boundaries of the municipality, to the extent permitted by law. The
municipality also grants the company permission to attach or otherwise
affix or install its cables and other equipment to and in the facilities of
any public utility even though the same may occupy or cross over or under
the public ways and places of the municipality; provided, however, the
municipality shall not grant a franchise to any other person, firm or entity
to operate a system or provide service within the municipality unless such
franchise imposes at least the same terms, conditions and restrictions upon
such person, firm or entity as herein set forth.
§ A180-5. Franchise term.
This grant shall be for a period of 10 years, from January 1, 2005, to
December 31, 2014, with an option to renew same for an additional five
years. Exercise of company's option shall be written notice to the
municipality at least 90 days prior to the expiration of the then term.
§ A180-6. Acceptance of franchise.
This grant is made upon the express condition that the company, within
30 days after written notice is given to the company that this ordinance
has taken effect and becomes operative, shall file with the Secretary or
other duly authorized official of the municipality a written acceptance of
the same. When this ordinance shall have been accepted by the company,
such ordinance and acceptance shall constitute a contract between the
municipality and the company for all the uses, services and purposes set
§ A180-2 SUNBURY CODE § A180-6
A180:482
forth in this ordinance. Except as may be otherwise provided by state
or federal law, order or regulation, the rights and obligations of the
municipality and the company shall be those specified herein and shall not
be enlarged, diminished or altered by unilateral action of the municipality
during the term of the franchise or renewal thereof. The company, by its
acceptance of the provisions of this ordinance, binds itself to establish,
operate and maintain the local cable television system in order to provide
the necessary cable television service as contemplated in this ordinance.
§ A180-7. Installation and extension of system.
Company shall serve all residents of the municipality except to the extent
that low household density, adverse terrain or other factors render
providing service impracticable or technically or economically infeasible.
The company shall not be required to install or to extend the cable television
system to areas of the municipality where potential revenues from
subscribers to be served therein would produce a return insufficient to
economically justify such installation or extension. Without limiting the
generality of the foregoing, if otherwise practicable and technically feasible:
§ A180-8. Regulatory action.
The performance by the company hereunder is subject to limitations,
restrictions, or requirements now existing or which may henceforth be
imposed by law, rule, or order of the Federal Communications Commission
or other government, board, commission or authority. The company shall
not be deemed in default of any of the requirements of this ordinance to the
extent it acts in compliance with or refrains from doing anything prohibited
by such law, rule or order.
§ A180-9. Condition of street occupancy.
A. Service shall be provided at normal installation and monthly service
rates to an individual customer whose point of connection is located
within 150 feet of in-place distribution cable;
B. The company, at its cost, shall make an extension of its cable system
where the number of existing households per linear mile of cable to be
passed by the extension equals or exceeds the average number of
households passed per linear mile of existing cable plant within the
municipality.
C. In no event shall the company be required to make an extension where
the number of existing households to be passed per mile is less than 50.
The company shall not be required to install or extend its system in
areas where it cannot: obtain necessary rights-of-way over private
property at an economically feasible cost; or obtain permission to
attach its facilities to public utility poles; or obtain permission to use
necessary conduits.
§ A180-6 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § A180-9
A180:483
§ A180-10. Standards of service.
A. All transmission and distribution structures, lines, and equipment
erected by the company within the municipality shall be so located as to
cause minimum feasible interference with the proper use of streets,
alleys and other public ways, roads and places, and to cause minimum
feasible interference with the rights or reasonable convenience of
property owners who adjoin any of the said streets, alleys or other
public ways, roads and places. The company shall obtain any required
permits prior to construction.
B. In case of any disturbance of pavement, sidewalk, driveway or other
surfacing by the company, the company shall, at its expense and in a
manner approved by the municipality, replace and restore the same in
as good condition as before said work was commenced.
A. The company shall render efficient service, make repairs promptly, and
interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest time possible.
Such interruptions, insofar as possible, shall be preceded by notice and
shall occur during periods of minimum use of the system. Upon receipt
of a complaint from a subscriber(s) regarding the quality of service,
equipment malfunctions, and similar matters, the company shall
promptly investigate such complaints.
B. Where possible, the company shall commence an investigation of such
complaints within 24 hours of their receipt. Resolution of such service
complaint(s) shall be made as promptly as possible. The company shall
maintain toll-free telephone access for the receipt of service problems,
requests for repairs or customer inquiries.
C. The company shall keep a maintenance service log for a period of one
year that will indicate the nature of each service complaint, the date it
was received, and the disposition of said complaint. Upon request, this
log shall be made available for inspection by the municipality, during
normal business hours.
D. As subscribers are connected or reconnected, the company shall, by
appropriate means such as a card or brochure, furnish information to
them concerning the procedures for contacting the company, including
its name, address and local telephone number.
E. The company's construction and maintenance of its transmission and
distribution system shall be in accordance with the provisions of the
National Electrical Safety Code prepared by the National Bureau of
Standards, the National Electrical Code of the National Board of Fire
Underwriters and any applicable state and federal laws or regulations
now in effect or later enacted, regulating or affecting the company's
installation or operation.
§ A180-9 SUNBURY CODE § A180-11
A180:484
§ A180-11. Company liability, indemnification.
The company shall save the municipality harmless from all loss sustained
on account of any suit, judgment, execution, claim or demand whatsoever
resulting solely from the operation of the company in the construction,
operation or maintenance of its system in the municipality. The municipality
shall notify the company within 10 days after the presentation of any claim
or demand, either by suit or otherwise, made against the municipality on
account of any damages or losses as aforesaid resulting from the operations
of the company. Thirty days from the enactment date of this ordinance,
the company shall furnish satisfactory evidence in writing that it has in
force public liability insurance of not less than a $1,000,000 combined
single limit, duly issued by an insurance company or insurance companies
authorized to do business in this commonwealth.
§ A180-12. Restrictions on landlords.
§ A180-13. Franchise fees and payments.
A. No landlord shall demand payment from the company for permitting the
company to provide cable television service on or within said landlord's
property or premises; provided, however, that such landlord may be
entitled to reasonable reimbursement for any direct expenses incurred
by him in connection with the installation of cable television service,
and to just compensation for any permanent occupation of his property
resulting from the installation of the company's facilities therein.
B. No landlord shall interfere with the installation of cable television
facilities upon his property or premises nor shall such landlord
discriminate in rental charges, or otherwise, between tenants who
receive cable service and those who do not. No landlord shall demand
or accept payment from any tenant, in any form, for permitting cable
television service on or within his property or premises.
C. As used in this section, the term "landlord" means any individual or
entity owning, controlling, leasing, and operating, or managing leased
residential premises.
A. Beginning on January 1, 2005, and continuing during the balance of the
term hereof, as compensation for rights conferred upon it by this
ordinance, including the privilege of engaging in the business of
operating a cable television system in the municipality, the company
shall pay to the municipality an annual franchise fee equal to 5% of
gross revenue collected by the company during the same time period
from subscribers in the municipality who subscribed to cable television
service.
B. "Gross revenues" means the revenue derived by the company in the
franchise area, calculated in accordance with generally accepted
accounting principles, from charges collected for cable television
service, installation and equipment rental fees, and home shopping and
§ A180-11 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § A180-13
A180:485
§ A180-14. Publication costs.
The company shall assume the cost of publication of this ordinance as such
publication is required by law and shall pay the same upon demand by the
municipality.
§ A180-15. Separability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
ordinance is for any reason held illegal, invalid or unconstitutional by any
court of competent jurisdiction or by any state or federal regulatory agency
having jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct or
independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions of this ordinance.
§ A180-16. Assignment.
The franchise or privilege granted hereunder shall only be assignable with
the prior written consent of the municipality, which consent shall not be
unreasonably withheld, provided the company may assign, without prior
written consent, this franchise to its lenders as collateral security in
connection with its financing activities or any business entity related to the
company.
§ A180-17. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances and resolutions relating to cable
franchise ordinance, including but not limited to Ordinance No. 1050, dated
January 1, 1983, and extended January 1, 1998, are hereby repealed.
§ A180-18. Enactment date.
This ordinance is hereby duly executed and ordered into law this 27th day
of December, 2004.
television advertising revenue (using a subscriber allocation method).
Gross revenue shall not include charges or fees, such as reconnections,
change of service, refundable deposits, late fees, bad debts, investment
income, and/or assessments imposed and/or assessed by any
governmental authority, including franchise fees.
C. Payment of such franchise fees shall be made in quarterly installments.
For the period January 1 through March 31, the payment is due on or
before June 30. For the period April 1 through June 30, payment is due
on or before September 30. For the period July 1 through September
30, the payment is due on or before December 30. For the period
October 1 through December 31, the payment is due on or before the
ensuring March 31. Such fees shall be reduced by the amount of any
tax, assessment fee or other charge imposed, levied, made or collected
by the municipality upon or from the company for the privilege of
engaging in business in the municipality.
§ A180-13 SUNBURY CODE § A180-18
A180:486
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Adoption Date Subject Disposition
6-12-2006 Peace and good order
amendment
Ch. 121
7-10-2006 Peace and good order
amendment
Ch. 121
8-14-2006 Peace and good order
amendment
Ch. 121
9-22-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
12-27-2006 2007 property tax for
general revenue purposes
NCM
12-27-2006 Realty transfer tax Ch. 151, Art V
12-27-2006 Approved 2007 budget NCM
6-25-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
8-27-2007 Property maintenance Ch. 130
11-26-2007 Local services tax
amendment
Ch. 151, Art. III
12-24-2007 2008 property tax for
general revenue purposes
NCM
6-23-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
7-28-2008 Outdoor woodburning
furnaces
Ch. 53, Art. II
8-11-2008 Professional services tax Ch. 151, Art. VI
12-22-2008 Licensed occupations
amendment
Ch. 106
12-22-2008 Approved 2009 budget NCM
12-22-2008 2009 property tax rate NCM
3-9-2009 Police Pension Fund Ch. 37
5-11-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 163
•
7-27-2009
Peace and good order
amendment
Ch. 121
9-14-2009 Professional services tax
amendment
Ch. 151, Art. VI
§ A180-18 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § DL-1
A180:487
Adoption Date Subject Disposition
6-28-2010 Home rule charter general
election 2010 ballot question
NCM
10-11-2010 Curbstone market
amendment
Ch. 109
12-27-2010 2011 budget NCM
12-27-2010 2011 tax rate NCM
5-5-2011 Peace and good order
amendment
Ch. 121
5-23-2011 Zoning Map amendment NCM
8-22-2011 Zoning Map amendment NCM
9-12-2011 Zoning Map amendment NCM
11-14-2011 Police Pension Fund
amendment
Ch. 37
12-26-2011 Professional services tax
repealer
Ch. 151, Art. VI,
footnote only
1-23-2012 Peace and good order
amendment
Ch. 121
7-9-2012 Air pollution amendment Ch. 53
8-13-2012 Rental property Ch. 134
12-26-2012 2012 tax rate NCM
9-9-2013 Air pollution: open burning Ch. 53, Art. III
12-8-2014 Police Pension Fund
amendment
Ch. 37
12-22-2014 Building construction
amendment; electrical
standards amendment; fire
prevention amendment;
mechanical standards
amendment; plumbing
amendment; property
maintenance amendment
Ch. 68; Ch. 82; Ch. 88;
Ch. 110; Ch. 127; Ch.
130
12-22-2014 2015 tax rate NCM
5-11-2015 Retirement system Ch. 40
6-8-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
12-28-2015 2016 tax rate NCM
12-28-2015 2016 budget NCM
1-11-2016 Police Force amendment Ch. 35
1-11-2016 Zoning amendments Ch. 175
§ DL-1 SUNBURY CODE § DL-1
A180:488
Adoption Date Subject Disposition
7-25-2016 Floodplain management;
zoning amendment
Ch. 92; Ch. 175,
footnote only
12-12-2016 2017 tax rate NCM
12-12-2016 2017 budget NCM
1-9-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
2-13-2017 Police Force amendment;
zoning amendment
Ch. 35; Ch. 175
4-10-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
6-12-2017 Peddling and soliciting
amendment
Ch. 124
6-12-2017 Streets and sidewalks:
exercise of power to open
and alter streets
Ch. 145, Art. VII
7-10-2017 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 130
8-28-2017 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 163
8-28-2017 Vehicles, Inoperable
Amendment
Ch. 166
12-11-2017 Licensed Residential
Structures Repealer;
Property Maintenance
Amendment; Rental Property
Amendment; Zoning
Amendment
Ch. 107, Ch. 130, 134,
Ch. 175
2018 tax rate NCM
2018 budget NCM
7-9-2018 Fire Department Cost
Recovery
Ch. 86
7-9-2018 Peace and Good Order
Amendment
Ch. 121
10-8-2018 Officers and Employees
Amendment
Ch. 28
Street Vacation NCM
2-11-2019 Animals and Fowl
Amendment
Ch. 58
§ DL-1 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § DL-1
A180:489