ZONING ORDINANCE BOROUGH OF TAYLOR
LACKAWANNACOUNTY,PENNS  LVANIA

Planning Consultant:

MARVIN A. BROTTER CONSULTING SERVICES

MARCH  2005



Amended August 8, 2018
 

 
TAYLOR BOROUGH ZONING ORDINANCE



(	TABLE    OF   CONTENTS




ARTICLE  1.   TITLE AND PURPOSES

 
1.lOOTITLE
1.200 SHORT TITLE
1.300 COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVES
1.400SCOPE OF REGULATIONS
1.500PURPOSES


ARTICLE 2.  ZONE DISTRICTS AND ZONING MAP

2.100 DESIGNATION OF ZONE DISTRICTS
2.200ZONING MAP
2.300INTERPRETATION OF BOUNDARIES
2.400 DEGREE OF RESTRICTIVENESS
2.500 LIMITATION OF LAND USE ARTICLE 3.  DISTRICT REGULATIONS
 
1-1
1-1
1-1
1-2
1-3




2-1
2-1
2-2
2-2
2-2
 
Schedule I Schedule I-R


REGULATED STANDARDS (1)	
R-1	
R-1A	
R-3 (12)	
S-1 (8)	

S-2	

S-3 (9)
Minimum Lot Size (Sq.Ft)	7,000	10,000	10,000		43,560	43,560
Minimum Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit (Sq.Ft)	
7,000	
10,000	
10,000		
43,560	
43,560
Minimum Lot Frontage	70	100	100		150	150
Minimum Lot Depth	100	100	100		250	250
Minimum Yards:
Front	
25	
30	
25		
25	
25
Rear	25	30	20		50	50
Side (One) (2)	7	10	15	'	50	20
Side (Both)	14	20	30		40	40
Maximum Impervious Coverage	50%	50%	50%		10%	10%
Maximum Building Height:
Stories	
2.5	
2.5	
3.5		
2.5	
2.5
Feet	35	35	50	35	35
					



R-2	


1-Family	


2-Family	Semi-
Attach
1-Family	


3-4 Familv	


5-Family	
Garden Apt
Townhouse
Minimum Lot Size (Sq.Ft) (3)	5,000	5,000	3,000	6,000	8,000	(5)
Minimum Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit (Sq.Ft.) (4) (10)	
5,000	
2,500	
3,000	
2,000	
1,500	
3,000
Minimum Lot Frontage	50	50	30	60	80	(11)
Minimum Lot Depth	100	100	100	100	100	100
Minimum Yards:
Front	
20	
20	
20	
20	
30	
25
Rear	25	25	25	25	30	40
Side (One) (6) (2)	5	5	5	5	25	20 (7)
Side (Both) (6) (2)	10	10	10	10	50	40 (7)
Maximum Impervious Coverage	40%	40%	60%	60°/o	60%	35°/o
Maximum Building Height:
Stories	
2.5	
2.5	
2.5	
3.0	
6.0	
2.5
Feet	35	35	35	35	70	35


Schedule II-C Schedule III-M

 
Land Use Classifications
Governs minimum development dimension requirements in all Residential and Special Districts
Governs minimum  development  dimension requirements
In all Commercial and Public Districts Governs development and the use ofland in
Manufacturing Districts
 
3-2


3-8

3-9

3-10
 

ARTICLE 4.  SUPPLEMENTARY LOT, HEIGHT AND YARD REGULATIONS

 
4.lOOZONE LOT REGULATIONS
4.200 HEIGHT REGULATIONS
4.300YARD REGULATIONS
4.400MAXIMUM IMPERVIOUS COVERAGE
4.500NUMBER OF BUILDINGS RESTRICTED
4.600ACCESSORY STRUCTURES
4.700 GENERAL LANDSCAPING REGULATIONS
4.800MISCELLANEOUS BUILDING REGULATIONS
4.900 AESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
 
4-1
4-2
4-3
4-4
4-5
4-5
4-5
4-12
4-15
 

ARTICLES.	SUPPLEMENTARY  REGULATIONS  GOVERNING SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS AND CERTAIN OTHER USES	
			(
	5.100 AMUSEMENT USES	5-1	
	5.200CONDITIONAL USES	5-5	
	5.300 RESIDENTIAL  AND  RESIDENTIAL-RELATED		
	COMMERCIAL  USES	5-12	
	5.400 RETAIL AND MANUFACTURING USES	5-13	
	5.500 LARGE-SCALE DEVELOPMENTS	5-20	
	5.600 SERVICES, AUTOMOTIVE	5-25	
	5.700SERVICES, GENERAL	5-33	
	5.800 SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS AND MISCELLANEOUS  USES	5-34	
	5.9000THER USES  REQUIRING  SPECIAL REGULATIONS	5-65	

ARTICLE6.	
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS		
	
6.100 GENERAL APPLICATION	
6-1	
	6.200 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS PROCEDURES	6-1	
	6.300 REGULATION OF NUISANCE ELEMENTS	6-2	
	6.400 STANDARDS TO BE ENFORCED	6-2	

ARTICLE?.	
NONCONFORMING  USES AND BUILDINGS		
	
7.lOOCONTINUATION OF USE	
7-1	
	7.200 REGULATION OF NONCONFORMING USES	7-1	
	7.300TERMINATION OF NONCONFORMING USES	7-3	
	7.400 REGISTRATION OF NONCONFORMING USES	7-3	

ARTICLES.	
ZONING HEARING BOARD		
	
8.lOOORGANIZATION  AND PROCEDURE	
8-1	
	8.200 ZONING HEARING BOARD FUNCTIONS	8-6	
	8.300PARTIES APPELLANT BEFORE THE BOARD	8-7	
	8.400TIME LIMITATIONS	8-7	
	8.SOOZONING CHALLENGES	8-8	

ARTICLE9.	
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT		
	
9.100 ZONING OFFICER	
9-1	
	9.200ZONING PERMITS	9-2	
	9.3000CCUPANCY  PERMITS	9-4	
	9.SOOVIOLATIONS	9-6	
	9.600FEES	9-8	
 
ARTICLE 10. AMENDMENTS

 
10.100
10.200
10.300
10.400

10.500
 
PROCEDURE
PROCEDURE FOR CURATIVE AMENDMENTS
PROCEDURE FOR MUNICIPAL CURATIVE AMENDMENTS PUBLICATION, ADVERTISEMENT  AND AVAILABILITY
OF ORDINANCES
APPLICABILITY OF ORDINANCE AMENDMENTS
 
10-1
10-2
10-2

10-2
10-3
 

 
ARTICLE 11. DEFINITIONS
ARTICLE 12. INTERPRETATION AND   t6°..I! . :---
 
11-1
 

12.100	INTERPRETATION	12-1
12.200	EXEMPTIONS	12-1
12.300	VALIDITY	12-1
12.400	EFFECTIVE DATE	12-1
 
ORDINANCE NO. 3 of 2018

AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE ZONING ORDINANCE AND MAP OF THE BOROUGH OF TAYLOR TO REZONE CERTAIN PARCELS OF LAND OF IN AND AROUND OAK STREET, TAYLOR, PA FROM C-2 A COMMUNITY COMMERCIAL TO C-3 HEAVY COMMERCIAL, ALL SUCH REZONED LANDS CONTAINING APPROXIMATELY 90 ACRES, MORE OR LESS.

Whereas, the Borough of Taylor is a duly ordained political subdivision (the "Borough"); and

Whereas, the Borough has duly enacted a Zoning Ordinance inclusive of a Zoning Map (the "Ordinance"); and

Whereas, the Borough has a need for new commercial uses and structures that reflect the employment and commercial needs of the residents including commercial uses as allowed in a C-3  zone  reflective of the needs of the community and the surrounding uses; and

Whereas, the Borough, after recommendation of the Taylor Borough Planning Commission, desires to rezone various lands in the Borough from Community Commercial and  C-2A Community Commercial To C-3 Heavy Commercial in order to better provide for the health, safety and welfare of the residents; and

Whereas, for the public good and welfare, it is in the best interest of the Borough to amend the aforesaid Ordinance and Map.

BE IT HEREBY ORDAINED AND ENACTED by the Council of the Borough of Taylor, Lackawanna County, Pennsylvania by the authority granted to Boroughs under the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and by authority of and pursuant to the provisions of Act of 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247 of the General Assembly of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, approved July 31, 1968, as reenacted and amended, 1988 Dec 21, P.L. 1329, No 170, §2 known and cited as the "Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code," and the Borough Code as follows:

THE TAYLOR ZONING ORDINANCE, AS AMENDED,  IS HEREBY AMENDED AS FOLLOWS:

SECTION 1- Map Amendment.

Change the zoning district classification of the following area as currently shown on the Taylor Zoning Map, as amended, including inter alia, Section 2.200, as noted below:
All that certain piece, parcel or plot of land situated in the Borough of Taylor, County of Lackawanna, and Commonwealth of Pennsylvania bounded and described as follows:
 
Beginning at a point along the northerly side of Oak Street (S.R. 3012), said point also being common to the intersection of the northerly side of Oak Street and the easterly line of the now or formerly Erie-Lackawanna Railroad, said line also being common to the westerly line of the Stauffer Industrial Park Road;

Thence from said point of beginning, in a northerly direction approximately 525 feet along the easterly side of the now or formerly Erie-Lackawanna Railroad and the westerly line of the Stauffer Industrial Park Road to a point;

Thence in an easterly direction, crossing said Stauffer Industrial Park Road to a point on the easterly line of said road, said point being a corner common of lands now or formerly The Development Authority of the Borough of Taylor (DABT) (PIN 166.08-02-0001) and lands now or formerly Clement Rinaldi (PIN 166.08- 01-000102);

Thence in an easterly direction along the common line of said DABT and Rinaldi lands to a corner common to said DABT lands and lands now or formerly DDRC Realty Company (PIN 166.08-02-0021);

Thence in a southeasterly direction along a line common to said DABT and DDRC Realty lands and then passing through a portion of said DDRC Realty lands along the southerly line of Parcel 2 of DDRC Realty to a point of intersection with the easterly line of now or formerly Old Main Street, extended;

Thence in a southerly direction along the easterly line of Old Main Street and crossing Oak Street (S.R. 3012) to its intersection with the northerly line of now or formerly Erie-Lackawanna Railroad;

Thence proceeding in an easterly direction along the northerly line of now or formerly Erie-Lackawanna Railroad and crossing present-day North Main Street
(S.R. 3013) to its intersection with the easterly line of said North Main Street;

Thence along the easterly line of said North Main Street in a southerly direction to its intersection with the southerly line of said now or formerly Erie-Lackawanna Railroad;

Thence continuing along the same line of the now or formerly Erie-Lackawanna Railroad in a westerly direction crossing North Main Street to the northeasterly corner of a lot identified as New Lot 2 on the Taylor Colliery Parcel 1 Minor Subdivision No. 2 as recorded in the Lackawanna County Recorder of Deeds Office to Map Book 6AM, Pages 9149 to 9152, said point being common to the northwesterly corner of New Lot 3 of the same subdivision;

Thence along the easterly line of said New Lot 2 by its various courses and distances to the southeasterly corner of said New Lot 2;
 

Thence in a southeasterly direction along the roadway commonly known as the "Bypass  Road" through the remaining  lands of the  Development Authority  of the Borough of Taylor (DABT), identified as New Lot 1 on the previously noted Taylor Colliery Parcel 1 Minor Subdivision No. 2 to the southwesterly corner of lands now or formerly Coaltown Really, LLC (PIN 166.11-01-0001.01);

Thence in a southeasterly direction along said lands, now or formerly owned by Coaltown Realty, LLC, to the westerly line of the North Main Street;

Thence in a southwesterly direction along the westerly line of the North Main Street approximately 600 feet to its intersection with the centerline of Keyser Creek;

Thence leaving the line of North Main Street in a westerly direction approximately 350 feet through the remaining lands of the Development Authority of the Borough of Taylor (DABT), previously identified above, to the northerly top of bank of the storm water management basin within the same DABT lands;

Thence following along the top of bank of said storm water management basin in a westerly and then southwesterly direction to its intersection with an existing rock-lined storm water channel on said DABT lands;

Thence continuing through the remaining lands of the Development Authority of the Borough of Taylor (DABT), previously identified above, in a westerly direction approximately 1,050 feet along the centerline of said rock-lined storm water channel, to the easterly line of North Washington Street;

Thence in a northeasterly direction along the easterly line of North Washington Street to a point being the southwesterly corner of lands now or formerly The Development Authority of the Borough of Taylor (DABT) (PIN 166.07-02-0028);

Thence along the boundary of said DABT lands in a southeasterly direction to the southeasterly corner of said lands;

Thence in a northeasterly direction along said lands of the DABT to the northeasterly corner of said DABT lands, said corner being in the southerly line of the former Pine Street, now vacated;

Thence along said southerly line of the former Pine Street extended in a southeasterly direction to the easterly line of Third Street;

Thence along the easterly line of Third Street in a northeasterly direction to the southwesterly corner of lands now or formerly Joseph J. and Jacklyn Roberts (PIN 166.07-04-0008), said corner also being common to the lands of the DABT (PIN 166.11-01-0001 );
 

Thence in an southeasterly direction along the line common to said Roberts lands and said DABT lands to the southeasterly corner of said Roberts lands, said corner also being common to the lands of the now or formerly Cord Mickavicz (PIN 166.07-04-0009);

Thence along the property boundary of the said Mickavicz lands in a southeasterly direction along a line common to the lands of the DABT (PIN 166.11-01-0001 ), also identified as New Lot 1 on the previously noted Taylor Colliery Parcel 1 Minor Subdivision No. 2, to the southeasterly corner of said Mickavicz lands;

Thence continuing along the property boundary of the said Mickavicz lands in a northeasterly direction along a line common with a second lands now or formerly Erie-Lackawanna Railroad to a point on the property line of lands of the DABT (PIN 166.07-04-0017), commonly known as Disposition Parcel #3;

Thence in a southeasterly direction along the property line of said lands of the DABT and common to the northerly line of said second lands now or formerly Erie-Lackawanna Railroad to the point of intersection with the lands now or formerly Erie-Lackawanna Railroad first referred to above;

Thence in a northeasterly direction crossing said first Railroad lands to a point of intersection with the easterly side of the now or formerly Erie-Lackawanna Railroad first referred to above;

Thence in an northerly direction along the easterly side of the now or formerly Erie-Lackawanna Railroad first referred to above and crossing Oak Street (S.R. 3012) to a point of intersection with northerly side of Oak Street (S.R. 3012), said point being the point of beginning.

A  copy  of  the  Zoning   Map  Amendment	is  attached  hereto  as  Exhibit  1, incorporated herein by reference and made a part hereof.

SECTION 2 - Location of Ordinance.

In all other respects, the Zoning Ordinance of the Borough of Taylor, as amended, shall remain in full force and effect, and is  incorporated herein by reference and made a part hereof; copies of the full text of the Zoning Ordinance, Zoning Map, and amendments are on file for inspection and copying with the Borough Secretary at 122 Union Street, Taylor, PA 18517.The Zoning Ordinance and this Amendment are incorporated by reference into the official Ordinance Book of the Borough and on the official Zoning Map with the same force and effect as if duly recorded therein.

SECTION 3 - Severability.
 

The provisions of this ordinance are severable. If any part of this ordinance is declared to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, the validity of the remaining provisions shall be unaffected thereby. It is the intention of the Borough of Taylor that this ordinance would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid part not been included.

SECTION 4- Effective Date.

This Ordinance shall be effective upon adoption or at the earliest date permitted by law.

ORDAINED AND ENACTED by Borough Council of the Borough of Taylor this
h day of August, 2018.

 
ATTEST:

Atta & GlAr11M
Kristi A. Evans, Secretary
 
BOROUGH OF TAYLOR SORO   GH COUNCIL

By:    -/!-lliU-#-J/-
 


 
EXAMINED AND APPROVED this 81
 

day of August, 2018.
 


 
Theodore Praschak, Mayor
 
MAPLE MANOR

























Lincoln  Heights Recreational Area









City
of
Scranton




EXHIBIT 1	5/1/18
 
ARTICLE  I




TITLE AND PURPOSES





1.100	TITLE


"An Ordinance to limit and restrict to specified districts or zones and to regulat therein, buildings and structures according to their construction and the nature and extent of their use, and the nature and extent of the uses of land in the Borough of Taylor and providing for the administration and enforcement of the provisions herein contained and fixing penalties for the violation thereof'.



1.200	SHORT TITLE


This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the "Taylor Borough Zoning Ordinance".



1.300	COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVES

The Borough of Taylor has enacted a Zoning Ordinance, of which this statement is a part, in accordance with the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. The adoption and enforcement of these regulations is intended to provide the municipality with procedures which will assist in directing its growth and development in accordance with local needs and goals.

Pertinent local goals which these regulations are intended to bring to fruition relate to such factors as land use, population density, streets and traffic and other community facilities and utilities, generally as defined in the Taylor Borough Comprehensive Plan.

More specifically, it is intended to:

1.	Create a pattern ofland uses which is compatible and harmonious, where a suitable environment may be created for residential, commercial and industrial functions.  The protection of our present and future residential areas is a prime concern; as well as the reservation and protection oflands which are considered desirable and suitable for commercial and industrial uses, but not those
industrial uses which will emit nuisances which would have an adverse affect on any part of the community.





/-{
 
2.	Maintain a density of population which can feasibly be served by the streets and other public facilities which presently exist or can be reasonably provided by the municipality.

3.	Direct the types of development and the intensity of development in such a manner as will not place an unreasonable burden on the capacity oflocal streets and other public facilities.

4.	Preserve the character, appearance and integrity of the community in keeping with the present pattern and character of development.

5.	Protect the flood plain by prohibiting the forms of development which would restrict the flow of the streams and/or result in extensive loss oflife or property.


 
1.400
 
SCOPE OF REGULATIONS

1.410		Administration and Enforcement. This ordinance includes provisions for the administration and the enforcement of the ordinance and such other provisions as are deemed necessary to implement the purposes of this ordinance and the purposes of Act 247 as amended.

1.420	Flexibility and Innovation. This ordinance includes provisions to encourage innovation and to promote flexibility, economy and ingenuity in development, including subdivisions and land developments as defined in Act 247 as amended. Such regulations provide authorization to increase the permissible density of population and intensity of uses based upon expressed standards and criteria set forth herein.

1.430		Development Features Regulated. This ordinance includes provisions regulating:

(!)	Uses ofland, watercourses and other bodies of water
(2)	Size, height, bulk, location, erection, construction, repair,
maintenance, alteration, razing, removal and use of structures
(3)	Areas and dimensions ofland and bodies of water to be occupied by uses and structures, as well as areas, courts, yards, and other open spaces and distances to be left unoccupied by uses and structures
(4)	Density of population and intensity of use
(5)	Protection and preservation of natural resources
(6)	Special Exceptions
(7)	Variances
(8)	Conditional Uses









l -'°-
 
1.500
(
 
PURPOSES


These regulations are deemed necessary to achieve the following purposes:
 

 
1.510
















1.520




1.530







1.540
 
To promote, protect and facilitate any or all of the following:  the public health, safety, morals, and the general welfare: coordinated and practical community development and proper density of population: emergency management preparedness and operations, airports, and naiional defense facilities, the provision of adequate light and air, access to incident solar energy, police protection, vehicle parking and loading space, transportation, water, sewerage, schools, recreation  facilities, public grounds, the provision of a safe reliable and adequate water supply for domestic, commercial, or industrial use, and other public requirements: as well as preservation of the natural, scenic and historic values in the environment and preservation  of forests, wetlands, aquifers and floodplains.

To prevent one .or more of the following: overcrowding of land, blight, danger and congestion in travel and transportation, loss of health, life or property from fire, flood, panic or other dangers.

To provide for the use of land within the municipality for residential housing of various dwelling types encompassing all basic forms of housing, including single-family and two-family dwellings, and a reasonable range of multifamily dwellings in various arrangements, mobile homes and mobile home parks:

To accommodate reasonable overall community growth, including population and employment growth, and opportunities for development of a variety of residential dwelling types and nonresidential .uses.
 


 
1.600
 
EXEMPTIONS

This Ordinance shall not apply to any real property, lands, or rights-of-way of the
. Borough of Taylor or uses thereon, including, by way of explanation but not limitation, any buildings; structures, facilities, improvements, and other appurtenances thereon.














l-3
 


ARTICLE 2



ZONE DISTRICTS AND ZONING  MAP


2.100 DESIGNATION OF ZONE DISTRICTS

In accordance with the Municipality's Master Plan, and with consideration of the character of the Municipality and its various parts, and the suitability of the various parts for particular uses and structures, the Borough of Taylor is hereby divided int.a 15 Zoning Districts, differentiated according to permitted uses and building regulations, as follows:

R-1	One-Family   Residential
R-lA	One·Family Residential, Low Density R·2	General Residential
R-3	General Residential & Community Commercial.
C-1	Neighborhood Commercial
C·2	Community   Commercial/C.B,D, C-2A	Community   Commercial
C-3	Heavy  Commercial
C·3A	General   Commerci   I M-1	Light   Manufacturing   -
M-2A	General  Manufacturing M-2	Heavy Manufacturing
S-1	Open Space
S-2	Conservation
S·3	Special Purpose


In ·addition to the 15 Zoning Districts listed above, the Borough also has a Flood Plain (FP) Conservation District Where applicable on the Zoning Map, this zone appears as an overlay to the Districts   established  above, Permitted uses and building regulations  in this zone are subject to the same requirements  as the zone over which this overlay is placed, and the supplemental  regulations  governing the Flood Plain as described in Section 5,890,

2.200	ZONING MAP

The location a·nd boundaries .of said zones are hereby established as shown on the Official Zoning Map of the Borough of Taylor dated January 2005 on file in the office of the Secretary of the Borough, Said official Zoning Map, together with any map inserts, Is hereby made a part of this Ordinance as ifthe same were all fully described and set forth herein.
2·1
 


(	2.300 INTERPRETATION  OF BOUNDARIES


2.310	Designation of Zone Boundaries


The zone boundary lines are intended to follow the right-of-way lines of streets and roads, existing lot and property lines, the mean and/or flood level of water bodies and· Borough Boundary lines, all as shown on the Zoning Map; but where a zone boundary line does not follow such a line, its location is shown on the Zoning Map by a specific dimension expressing its distance from a street or road line, or other noundary line as Indicated, or by a reference to a contour line delineated on the United States Geological Survey Maps.

2.320	Determination of Locations of Boundaries

In the event of uncertainty as to the true location of a zone boundary line in a particular	.
Instance, any decision of the Zonin.g Officer may be appealed before the Zoning Hearing Board by any affected property owner. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Hearing Board to render its  determination  with  respect thereto.
2.330	Div'1sion of Lot or Parcel In Single Ownership	I

!		Where a ·zone boundary line divides a loi or parcel in single ownership at the time of the passage of this Ordi ance, any use authorized  or permitted  in either zone may be extended a distance not to exceed fifty (50) feet beyond the boundary of the zone in which such use is authorized or permitted.

2.400	DEGREE OF RESTRICTIVENESS


The phrase "more restrictive uses" as employed in this Ordinance shall mean the following:
a.	Those uses permitted In an S-1Zone are most restrictive.
b.	All  other uses  are  less restrictive  in the order they  are permitted  in the Zones  In the sequence shown: R-1.A, R-1, R-2, R-3, C-1, C-2, C-2A, C-3, C-3A,S-2, M-1, M-2, M-2A and 5-3.
c.	Where a use is specifically enumerated In a le.ss restrictive zone, such use shall not be permitted in a more restrictive'Zone unless It Is specifically enumerated as a permitted use therein.

2.500 LIMITATIONOF LAND USE


Except as provided  in the Ordinance, no building or part thereof or other structure shall be erected, altered, added to or enlarged, nor shall any land, building, structures or premises  be used, designed or intended to be used for any purpose other than the uses hereinafter listed as permitted  in the zone in which such building or premises are located.
2-2
 



ARTICLE3




DISTRICT REGULATIONS





SCHEDULES

Tue attached schedules set forth the restrictions and controls intended to regulate development in each Zone District. Regulations governing the Flood Plain District are included in Section 5.890 hereof.



SCHEDULE I

Land Use Classifications.



SCHEDULE I-R

Schedule I-R governs minimum development dimension requirements in all Residential and Special
.   Districts.



SCHEDULE II-C

Schedule II-C governs minimum development dimension requirements in all Comm!')rcial Districts.



SCHEDULE III-M

Schedule III-M governs minimum development dimension requirements in all Manufacturing Districts.
















3-l
 




APPROVAL  LEVELS
 
TAYLOR  BOROUGH SCHEDULE I
LAND USE CLASSIFICATIONS
X/PRINCIPAL PERMITTED	CU/CONDITIONAL USE	SE/SPECIAL EXCEPTION	A/ACCESSORY
 

ZONING DISTRICT



































3-2
 


 




APPROVAL  LEVELS
 
TAYLOR  BOROUGH SCHEDULE I
LAND USE CLASSIFICATIONS
X/PR!NCIPLE PERMITTED  -	CU!CONDITIONAL USE	SE!SPEC!AL EXCEPTION	AlACCESSORY
 

 	ZONING  DISTRICT 	


































 
(a)	No major body repair work is permitted in C-2 zones ( b) No catertng halls shall be allowed in C-2 zones
( c) Auto Auctions in C-2A Zone only
 




3-3
 
�



 



APPROVAL LEVELS	X/PRINCIPAL PERMITTED
 
TAYLOR  BOROUGH SCHEDULE  I
LAND USE CLASSIFICATIONS
CU/CONDITIONAL USE	SE/SPECIAL EXCEPTION
 




A/ACCESSORY
 

 

USE COMMERCIAL AND OTHE:R
(Continued)	S-1
Churches and Similar Religious	.
Institutions
Civic and Social Organizations, Clubs
and Lodoes	'
Clothes Cleaning, Laundry-
Neiqhborhood
Clothes Cleaning, Laundrv - Industrial
Contractors' Yards
Convenience Stores, No Gas	.
 


S-3
 
ZONING DISTRICT
R-1,	C-2,
R-1A  R-2   R-3	C-1  C-2A  C-3 C-3A M-1  M-2 M-2A
.
.	SE	SE	X	X

.
SE	SE	X	X	X	X

.
X	X
X	X
X	X	X
.	X
 


REFERENCE SECTION

5.160, 5.612

5.612
 








 
Flea Markets, enclosed
Forestrv	X	X	X
Golf Course	SE
 
X	X
X	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	5.490	.

.
 
 Golf Driving Range	SE	X	X	5.612 	
·	Grennhouses and Nurseries,
 
Commercial
 
X	X	X
 
 Heavy Equipment Sales & Storaqe	X	X	X 	
 
Laundromat
 
X	X	X	X	5.612
 
 Helicopter Landinq Pad	SE  SE	SE   SE	SE 5.870 	
Hospital & Other Med.ical Care
 Facilities	SE    SE	SE	SE	5.160, 5.612, 5.621
 Hotel/Motel	SE  .SE  SE	5.320, 5.612, 5.621 	
 
Junk Yard
Laboratory, Te�ting, Industrial	-
 
SE  5.450
X	X	X
 
 Laboratorv, Testino, Medical	X	. 	
3-4
 




APPROVAL LEVELS	X/PRINClPAL PERMIT.TED
 
TAYLOR  BOROUGH SCHEDULE I
LAND USE CLASSIFICATIONS
CU/CONDITIONAL  USE	SE/SPECIAL EXCEPTION ZONING  DISTRICT
 




A/ACCESSORY
 
































 

•	such as book binding, bottlrng, musical and
•• Including institutions for children & age
 
.
precrsron
 

instruments
 

. .


3 - 5
 










---------------- -------
 

 




APPROVAL LEVELS	X/PRINCIPAL  PERMITTED
 
TAYLOR BOROUGH SCHEDULE I
LAND USE CLASSIFICATIONS
CU/CONDITIONAL USE	SE/SPECIAL EXCEPTION ZONING DISTRICT
 




A/ACCESSORY
 





































3 6
 




APPROVAL LEVELS	X/PRINCIPAL PERMITTED
 
TAYLOR BOROUGH SCHEDULE I
LAND USE.CLASSIFICATIONS.
CU/CONDITIONAL USE	SE/SPECIAL EXCEPTION	A/ACCESSORY
 

ZONING  DISTRICT






























e



3-7
 
TAYLOR  BOROUGH SCHEDULE I - R
RESIDENTIAL AND SPECIAL DISTRICT BUILDING  REGULATIONS





































Notes;
(1) Except as otherwise regulated for assessory uses, for special exceptions, including large-scale
developments, and for housing for the elderly.
(2)	On corner lots, the side yard should be not less than 25 feet
(3)	No mobile home park shall be erected on parcel of less than five (5) acres.
(4)	The minimum lot area per dwelling in a mobile home park shall be 5,000 sq.ft.
(5)	Reference Section 5.312 (1)
(6)	Where two (2) or moire multi-family structures are on the same zone lot, no building wall shall be located closer to another building than a distance equal to the height of the talier building ·of the two, but in caseless than fifty (50) feet.
(7)	End Units only, and they shall be not less than 20 feet each
(8)	No buildings may be erected in S-1 zones
(9) Conditional Uses shall conform with the building regulations for M-2 uses as set forth in Section 3.425 hereof; provided, however, that the minimum lot size for Sanitary Landfills shall be not less than fifty (50) acres.
(10)	Housing for the elderly shall be not less than 1,000 Sq. Ft. per dwelling unit
(11)	300 feet for garden apartments and 15 feet for town houses

(12)	For residential use(s)  in the  R-3 District, the regulations  on Schedule  1-R forthe  entire Table pertaining to all residential  uses in the  R-2 District shall also have application  to  all residential  uses in the  R-3 District.	· Residential  uses  referred to  herein relate to   1-Family;  2-Family;  semi-attached   1-Family; 3-4  Family;  5-Family or more;Garden Apt. Town House, and the criteria related to same and shown on the Table
3-8
 


(


TAYLOR    BOROUGH SCHEDULE 11-C
COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS BUILDING REGULATIONS

















(






Notes

( 1) None required except on corner lots whic;h shall comply with the requlrments of Section 4.330,


( 2) Except as otherwise regulated for accessory structures, special exceptions, including large scale developments and where commercial and manufacturing uses abut resid<>ntial districts, yards or buffer zones shall be provided in accordance with section 4.350 hereof.


( 3 ) In a C-2A zone, Auto Auctions require a mininJUOl Of 2 Acres for Land Development.












3-9
 


TAYLOR BOROUGH SCHEDULE IIl-M
MANUFACTURING AND INSTITUTIONAL DISTRICTS BUILDING  REGULATIONS


REGULATED STANDARDS	M-1, M-2, M-2A  (1)
Minimum Lot Size	One Acre
Minimum Lot Width	150 Ft.  (2)
Minimum Lot Depth	200 Ft.
Minimum Yards:   (3)
Front	25 Ft.
Rear	40 Ft.
Side (each) (one)	20 Ft.
Side (each) (both)	40 Ft.
Maximum Building Height:
Stories	4
Feet	60
 
Maximum Impervious Coverage
 
80%
 


Notes:


(1)	Except as otherwise regulated for accessory uses and for
special exceptions, including large-scale developments, and for conditional uses.

(2)	Except as otherwise required to minimize point of access and egress on major thoroughfares.

(3)	Except where greater setbacks are required when abutting a residential district.











3 10
 














4.100
 
ARTICLE4
(




SUPPLEMENTARY LOT, HEIGHT AND YARD REGULATIONS






ZONE LOT REGULATIONS
 

 
4.110





















4.120.
 
Existing Zone Lots of Record

In any District a structure may be erected on a non-conforming zone lot of official record at the effective date of this Ordinance irrespective of its area or width, the owner of which does not own any adjoining property which would create a conforming lot if all or part of said property were combined with the subject zone lot, provided, however, that no lot or lots in single ownership shall hereafter be reduced so as to create one (1) or more nonconforming lots, and provided, further, that on any nonconforming lot no side yard shall be less than ten (10) feet unless a lesser side yard is permitted in Article III; provided further that the rear yard of any such lot shall in no case be less than twenty (20) feet, and the front yard shall be as required in Subsection 4.320 hereof.

In any R-District, the only principal permitted use on a nonconforming lot shall be a single-family dwelling.

Minimum Lot Sizes Where There is No Central Water or Sewer

Unless the regulations of the district in which they are located or other State or local regulations require greater lot areas or lot widths, the following regulations shall apply:

4.121	Lots Not Serviced with Public Water or Sewer. Lots not served by a public water or sanitary sewer system shall have a minimum width of 100 feet at the building line and a minimum area of 20,000 square feet per dwelling unit.

4.122	Lots Not Served with Public Sewer. Lots served by a public water system and an individual on-lot sewage disposal system, such as a septic tank, shall be not less than 75 feet wide at the building line nor less than 10,000 square feet in area per dwelling unit.








Y-t
 
4.130










4.140














4.150







4.160
 
Lot Frontage


The minimum lot frontage of any lot shall be measured along the minimum building setback line as required for the district where located. The width of any lot in any district, except "C" and "M" Districts, shall not be less than thirty (30) percent of the depth of said lot at the front lot line, provided however, that no lot need exceed a width of three hundred (300) feet.

Comer Lots

A clear sight triangle shall be established as set forth in the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of the Borough of Taylor; provided, however, that all intersecting public right-of-way lines, no obstructions to vision (other than an existing building, post, colunm or tree) exceeding 30 inches in height above the established grade of the street at the property line shall be erected or maintained on any lot within the triangle formed by the intersecting public right-of-way and a line drawn between points along such street lot lines not less than thirty (30) feet distant from their points of intersection.

Through Lots

Where a single lot under individual ownership extends from a street to an alley, the widest street shall be deemed the street upon which the property fronts and no principal structures and no dwelling shall be erected on the rear of such a lot.

Required Area or Space Cannot be Reduced

The area or dimension of any zone lot, yard, parking area or other space shall not be reduced to less than the minimum required by this Ordinance; and if already less than the minimum required by this Ordinance, said area or dimension may be continued and shall not be further reduced.
 



4.200	HEIGHT REGULATIONS

4.210	General Application

No building or structure shall have a greater number of stories than are permitted in Article 3 hereof, provided, however, that the aggregate height of such buildings or structures shall not exceed the number of feet permitted in Article 3, except as follows:
 
4.220	Permitted  Exceptions


Height limitations stipulated elsewhere in this Ordinance shall not apply to open amusement areas, barns, silos, schools, church spires, belfiies, cupolas and domes, monuments, water towers, utility poles, chimneys, smoke-stacks, flagpoles, radio and television towers, masts and aerials; or to parapet walls extending not more than four (4) feet above the limiting height of the building.

Where structures are permitted to exceed 2 Y, stories or 35 feet, their height may be increased to the height authorized in Article 3 hereof, only as a Special Exception in accordance with the provision of Section 5.810. Such structures, however, may only be authorized when it can be shown that adequate fire protection will be available, and that such modification shall be approved by the Zoning Hearing Board subject to review by the Borough Planning Commission.



4.300	YARD  REGULATIONS

 
4.310















4.320
 
Side Yards of Comer Lots

Any comer lot delineated by subdivision after the adoption of this Ordinance shall provide a side street setback line which shall not be less than the minimum front yard required on any adjoining lot fronting on a side street; provided, however,  that the side street setback line of any comer lot as it existed at the time of adoption of this Ordinance or any comer lot shown on any subdivision plat which received final approval prior to the 1973 adoption of this Ordinance shall not be less than one-half (Ya) of the depth of the minimum front yard required on any adjoining lot fronting on a side street; provided, however, that a clear-sight
triangle shall be maintained as required herein. Front Yard Exception
Except on comer lots, when an unimproved lot is situated between two (2) improved lots, each having a principal building within twenty-five (25) feet of  any side lot line of such unimproved lot, the front yard may be reduced to the greatest depth of the front yard of the two (2) adjoining improved lots, provided, however that when any lot shall front on a right-of-way which is proposed, on the Municipality's Official Map, to be widened, the front yard of such lot shall be as required by Article 3 hereof, and shall be measured from such proposed  future right-of-way.   Inno event, however, shall the front yard be less than fifteen (15) feet.










'-1-3
 
4.330	Front Yard of Comer Lot


The front yard of any comer lot shall be established on the wider of the two (2) streets abutting said lot, except when the existing pattern of development is contrary to this requirement as evidenced by more than fifty (50%) percent of the existing structures fronting on the narrower street. The front yard may be established on either of the two (2) abutting streets when they are of equal width.

4.340	Projections into Required Yards


Certain architectural features may project into required yards as follows:


a.	Cornices, canopies, eaves, and other similar architectural features may project into a side yard a distance of two (2) feet; provided, however, that where a side yard exceeds a width of twelve (12) feet, such extension may be increased by 2 inches for each I-foot by which the yard exceeds a width of 12 feet.

b.	Fire Escapes may project into side and rear yards; provided, however, that projections into side yards shall not exceed four (4) feet six (6) inches.

c.	Bay windows, balconies, fireplaces, uncovered stairways and necessary landings, and chimneys may project a distance not exceeding four (4) feet, provided that such features do not occupy, in the aggregate, more than one­ third (1/3) of the length of the building wall on which they are located.

d.	Open patios, open decks, or open porches may be located only in rear yards; provided, however, that no such patio, deck, or porch shall be closer to any property line than three (3) feet.

4.350	Additional Yards Required Where "C" and "M" Uses Abut R-Districts

All uses first permitted in C-1 or less restrictive districts, which abut, at the lot line or on the same street, an "R" District, shall provide yards, where they abut, in accordance with the yard requirements for such "R" Districts which they abut, or the yards required for the district where the use is first permitted, whichever is greater.



4.400	MAXIMUM IMPERVIOUS COVERAGE

Land coverage by principal and accessory buildings or structures and by other impervious surfaces such as asphalt and concrete on each zone lot shall not be greater than is permitted in Article 3 or other pertinent sections of this Ordinance which may impose greater restrictions on coverage. Such greater restrictions will apply.






 
 


4.500	NUMBER  OF PRINCIPAL BUILDINGS RESTRICTED


There shall be not more than one (1) principal dwelling structure nor more than two (2) accessory structures, including a private garage on each residential zone lot except as otherwise provided herein for dwelling groups, large scale developments, planned unit developments, and seasonal or transient dwelling facilities.



4.600	ACCESSORY  STRUCTURES


4.610	Maximum Permitted Height


One and a half (1-1/2) stories or eighteen (18) feet. 4.620	Minimum Yard Regulations
4.621		Unattached Accessory Structures in R-Districts. Accessory structures, which are not attached to a principal structure, may be erected within one (1) of the side yards or within the rear yard, but not in the front yard, in accordance with the following requirements.

a.	Side Yard ------------------------ same as for principal structure b. Rear Yard ----------------------------------------------------- 5 feet;
provided, however that no structure shall be located within a
triangle formed by connecting points that are ten (10) feet distant from the intersection of the rear and side property lines.
c. Not closer to a principal structure than------------------ 10 feet

4.622		Attached Accessory Structures in R-Districts. When an accessory structure is attached to the principal building, it shall comply in all respects with the setback requirements of this Ordinance applicable to the principal building.

4.623	Non-Dwelling Accessory Structures in Other Districts. Non-dwelling accessory structures shall comply with front and side yard requirements for the principal structure to which they are accessory.



4.700	GENERAL LANDSCAPING  REGULATIONS

4.710	Reserved









 
 
4.720

(
 
Off-street Parking and Loading Areas in C and M zones
 
4.721






4.722
 
Location of Off-street Parking and Loading Areas

No parking space shall be nearer to any property line or right-of-way line than 10 feet.

Landscaping Off-street Parking Lots

a.	Parking lots should be effectively landscaped with trees and shrubs to reduce the visual impact of glare, headlights, and parking lot lights; to delineate driving lanes; and define rows of parking. Furthermore, parking lots should be adequately landscaped to provide shade in order to reduce the amount of reflected heat and to improve the aesthetics of parking lots. A minimum of six percent (6%) of any parking lot facility shall be devoted to landscaping, inclusive of required trees.

b.	The use of small, ornamental trees in parking lots should be avoided, since these trees will never grow tall enough to provide shade and will block store signs and clear sight triangles. Canopy trees will grow tall enough so that signs can be seen under their branches.

c.	Except for lots for the display of new and used cars, all parking lots with thirty (30) or more stalls shall be landscaped according to the following regulations:

1)	The ends of all parking rows shall be divided from drives by planting islands.

2)	Large parking lots shall be divided by planting strips into smaller parking areas of no more than 100 stalls.

3)	For each row of parking, planting islands shall be a minimum of nine feet by eighteen feet (9' x 18') in area, underlain by soil (not base course material); mounded at no more than a 4:1 slope, nor less than a 12:1 slope; and shall be protected by curbing or bollards. Each planting island shall contain one shade tree plus shrubs and/or
groundcover to cover the entire area.

4)	All planting strips shall be a minimum of 4.5 feet wide.
Strips shall run the length of the parking row, underlain by soil, and shall be mounded at no more than a 4: 1 slope, nor
 







 
 
less than a 12:1 slope, and shall be protected by curbs, wheel stops, or bollards.  Planting strips shall contain plantings of street-type shade trees at intervals of 30 to 40 feet, plus shrubs and/or ground cover to cover the entire area at maturity. Where planting strips shall exceed a width of twelve (12) feet, the herein-described  shrubbery and ground cover requirements may be reduced to lawn grass ground cover.

5)	Plant materials shall be in accordance with the provisions of Section 4.734 hereof.

6)	All parking areas shall have at least one (1) tree of not less than one-and-one-half-inches caliper for every ten (10) parking spaces in single bays and one (1) tree of not less than one-and-one-half-inches caliper for every twenty (20) parking spaces in double bays.

d.	All parking lots shall be screened from public roads and from adjacent properties as required in Section 4.732 and 4.733 hereof.

e.	Trees that have low growing branches, gum or moisture that may drop on vehicles, blossoms, thorns, seeds or pods that may clog drainage facilities shall be avoided. Trees may include those referenced in Section 4.722 or as recommended by the PA Bureau of Forestry. Trees such as Norway Maple and Amur Cork trees shall be prohibited.

f.	Interior landscaping shall not be required for any lots ofless than 30 spaces.

 
4.723
 
Lighting Off-street Parking Lots

a.	For all parking areas, driveways and walkways, all pole mounted luminaries shall be low maintenance poles and fixtures; and, all branch circuiting for lighting shall be installed below grade.

b.	The placement oflight standards shall be coordinated with the landscape plan to avoid a conflict with the effectiveness oflight fixtures.

c.	Lighting shall be directed away from adjacent residential uses and residential zones, and shall be shielded from fugitive skyward emissions.






L/-7
 

(


4.730



4.731
 
d.	All applicants shall submit a lumen plan documenting these requirements.

Buffer and Screening Requirements in Commercial, Manufacturing and Industrial Zones

All land developments shall provide the following types of buffer/screening treatment that is applicable to the use and the environment of the subject development, as follows:

a.	Property line buffers that act to integrate new development with its surroundings and to separate incompatible land uses.

b.	Site element screens that act to minimize or eliminate views to certain site elements located within 100 feet of property lines or road right-of­ ways (either public or private).

4.732	Property Line and Right-of-way Line Buffer Requirements

a.	Property line and right-of-way line buffers shall be required for the following types of development and as otherwise specified herein.

1.	All nonresidential development adjoining a Residential Use or a Residential Zone.

2.	All mobile home parks.

b.	An on-site investigation by the applicant shall determine the adjacent land uses along each property boundary.  In the case of vacant land, the existing zoned uses shall be used.  The existing or zoned uses shall be noted on the plan.  In the case of several permitted uses on a site, the most restrictive requirements shall apply. The municipality shall have final approval of interpretation ofland uses or zoning map.

c.	Buffer Area Location and Dimensions

1.	A buffer area of not less than 25 feet in width shall be established along all property lines, and right-of-way lines unless otherwise specified herein; provided, however, that in C-1 zones, a buffer area shall be not less than five (5) feet and screening may be in the form of a fence, trees, and/or shrubs.
 
2.	The buffer area may be included within the front, side, or rear yard setback.
3.	The buffer area shall be a continuous pervious planting bed consisting of trees and shrubs, grass or groundcover.
4.	Parking is not permitted in the buffer area.
5.	Site element screens are permitted in the buffer area.
6.	Storm water basins are permitted in the buffer area. 4.733	Site Element Screens
a.	Site element screens shall be required in all proposed land developments around the following site elements:
1.	Parking lots.
2.	Dumpsters, trash disposal, or recycling areas.
3.	Service or loading docks.
4.	Outdoor storage.
5.	Vehicle storage.
6.	Sewage treatment plants and pump stations.
7.	Other unenclosed uses of a similar nature, and enclosed uses such as rear facades facing public right-of-way.

b.	Screen Location.   The site element screen shall be placed between the site element and the property line or right-of-way, and shall be designed to block views to the maximum extent	


I.
	possible.  The screen shall be located as close as possible to the	
	site element and shall surround the element without impeding
function or encroaching on clear sight triangles.	

c.	
Screen Tvoes. Any of the following types of screens may be	
	utilized in those cases where they will achieve the objective of
blocking certain uses from public view.	

I)	Evergreen or Deciduous Shrubs

2)	Double Row of Evergreen Trees

3)	Opaque Fence - A six-foot opaque fence surrounding the site element on at least 3 sides; such a fence shall not be subject to the provisions of Section 4.841 hereof.

4)	Architectural  Extension  of the Building-An  eight-foot minimum height architectural extension of the building (such as a wing wall) shall enclose service or loading docks.  The building materials and style of the extension shall be consistent with the main building.







 
 
5)	Berm with Ornamental Trees - A two- to three-foot-high continuous curvilinear berm with ornamental trees. The maximum slope of the berm shall be 3:1.

6)	Evergreen Hedge

7)	Low Wall - A wall of brick or stone (not concrete block), at least 50 percent opaque, not less than three nor more than four feet inheight.

d.	Existing healthy trees, shrubs, or woodlands may be substituted for part or all of the required plant material at the discretion of the governing body. The minimum quantities and/or visual effect of the existing vegetation shall be equal to or exceed that of the required buffer.

e.	Existing topographic conditions,  such as embankments or berms, may be substituted for part or all of the required property line buffers at the discretion of the governing body.  The minimum visual effect shall be equal to or exceed that of the required screen.

f.	The applicant may propose the use of alternative screen types or changes in plant materials or designs which fulfill the intent of this Ordinance, with the approval of the Planning Commission.

g.	Plant materials shall meet the specifications of Section 4.734 hereof.

 
4.734
 
Plant Materials

a.	General Location Requirements

1)	The location, dimensions, and spacing of required plantings should be adequate for their proper growth and maintenance, taking into account the sizes of such plantings at maturity and their present and future environmental requirements, such as wind, soil, moisture, and sunlight.

2)	Plantings should be selected and located where they will not contribute to conditions hazardous to public safety. Such locations include, but are not limited to, public street rights-of-way, underground and aboveground utilities, and






L.J-10
 
clear sight triangle areas required for unobstructed views at street intersections.

b.	Design Criteria


1)	The required plant material shall be distributed over the entire length and width of the buffer area.

2)	Buffer plant material may be arranged symmetrically (formal) or asymmetrically (informal) and may be grouped to form plant clusters. However, informal groupings that reflect the natural character of the region are encouraged.

3)	Plants shall be spaced to provide optimum growing conditions.

4)	A variety of tree species is required.

c.	Substitutions In accordance with the following guidelines, wherever possible, existing vegetation shall be retained and utilized as a buffer or a screen in accordance with the following guidelines:

1)	Existing healthy trees, shrubs, or woodlands may be substituted for part or all of the required plant material at the discretion of the governing body. The minimum quantities and/or visual effect of the existing vegetation shall be equal to or exceed that of the required buffer.

2)	Existing topographic conditions, such as embankments or berms, in conjunction with existing vegetation, may be substituted for part or all of the required property line buffers at the discretion of the governing body. The minimum visual effect shall be equal to or exceed that of the required buffer or screen.

d.	Plant Material Specifications. The following requirements are minimum standards which shall apply to all plant materials or transplanted trees as required under this Ordinance; additional plant materials, berms, or architectural elements may be included in the plan at the applicant's discretion.

I)		All plants shall meet the minimum standards for health, form, and root condition as outlined in the American Association of Nurserymen (AAN) Standards.
 
2)	All plant material shall be hardy and within the USDA Hardiness Zone applicable to Lackawanna County, Pennsylvania.

3)	Canopy trees, sometimes called shade trees, shall reach a minimum height and spread of 30 feet at maturity as determined by the AAN Standards and shall be deciduous. New trees shall have a minimum caliper of two and a half inches at planting.

4)	Ornamental trees or large shrubs shall reach a typical minimum height of 15 feet at maturity, based on AAN Standards. Trees and shrubs may be deciduous or evergreen and shall have a distinctive ornamental character such as showy flowers, fruit, habit, foliage, or bark. New ornamental trees shall have a minimum height of 6 feet or one and a half inch caliper. New large shrubs shall have a minimum height of two and a half to three feet at time of planting.
5)	Small shrubs may be evergreen or deciduous and shall have a minimum height at maturity of 4 feet based on AAN Standards. New shrubs shall have a minimum height of 18 inches at time of planting.

6)	Evergreen trees shall reach a typical minimum height of20 feet at maturity based on AAN Standards for that species and shall remain evergreen throughout the year. New evergreens shall have a minimum height at planting of six feet.

e.	Additional Plant Material Guidelines. Plant material features should be:

1)	Able to thrive in the existing soil or soil that can be amended to reasonable specifications.

2)	Strong wood, not prone to breakage in wind or ice storms.

3)	Fruitless or otherwise free of parts that fall and could damage vehicles, clog drains, or make pavement slippery.
4)	Tolerant to excessive heat, de-icing salt and air pollution.

5)	Free of unacceptable levels of disease or insect pests, including aphids that coat objects below with sticky "honeydew."






4-1';}.
 

6)	Fits the site aesthetically and serves an intended function	( (shade, screen, focal point, etc.)

7)	Not less than 50% of ground cover shall include organic vegetation such as mulch, grass, and shrubs.

f.	There shall be evidence of a permanent commitment to maintain landscaped areas in a good, weed-free condition.



4.800	MISCELLANEOUS BUILDING REGULATIONS

4.810	Uses to be Enclosed

All "C" and "M" uses, except for off-street parking and loading facilities, service stations, transportation terminals, storage yards, sanitary land fills, junk yards and new and used car lots shall be conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building.  In addition, restaurants may provide window service for take-out or for outdoor dining only as a special exception. Outdoor seating, however, shall be only on private property; it shall not be in the public right-of-way, unless the Borough Planning Commission reviews a land development proposal for such a use and determines that it would not interfere with pedestrian circulation.  In addition, no part of any outdoor dining facilities shall be nearer to any residential property than I 00 feet; and, such dining facilities, where they abut shall be screened from such adjacent residential properties in accordance with the screening requirements of Section 4.730 hereof.

4.820	Unenclosed "C" and "M" Uses

Unenclosed "C" and "M" uses identified in Section 4.810 hereof, shall be located not less than I 00 feet distant from any Residential District, except as otherwise provided herein.

4.830	Special Regulations for Housing for the Elderly

4.831		Maximum Density.  Inany R-District where housing shall be designed exclusively for occupancy by elderly persons,* the minimum lot area required per dwelling unit shall be 1000 square feet of net land area per dwelling unit.

* Persons shall be considered to be elderly who meet the definitions of "elderly" as set forth by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development; in the absence of such standards, however, elderly persons shall be all persons 60 years of age or older.








4-13
 












4.840
 
4.832




4.833




Fences
 
Maximum Building Height. Buildings to be erected for housing for the elderly may be erected to a maximum height of six (6) stories or seventy (70) feet, whichever is less.

Off-Street Parking. Accessory off-street parking required to serve housing for the elderly shall be provided in an amount of not less than one (1) space per 3 "elderly" dwelling units.
 

4.841	Privacy Fences

a.	In front yard spaces and along all property lines between the front yard setback line and the front yard line, there shall be no solid fence other than shrubs or other similar vegetation; provided, however, that no fence or vegetation shall exceed a height of three (3) feet. Within side yards, and along side yard lot lines, no solid fence or vegetation shall exceed a height of six (6) feet. Within rear yards, between the rear wall of any structure and the rear lot line, no solid fence shall exceed a height of six (6) feet. No such fence shall create a visual obstruction which is in conflict with the requirements of this ordinance for a clear sight triangle as specified in Section 4.140 hereof. A solid fence shall be any fence where more than 50% of the face of the fence is solid.

b.	Where this ordinance requires a fence to be more than four (4) feet in height, such as 4.733 c.3., 5.452 and 5.473d., such higher fence shall be provided, but it shall not be a solid fence of more than four (4) feet in height as specified in Section 4.84la. hereof; and, provided further, that no such fence shall create a visual obstruction which is in conflict with the requirements of this ordinance for a clear sight triangle as specified in Section 4.140 hereof; except as otherwise required in Section 5.452.



c.	Shrubs along side and rear property lines shall be maintained at a height not to exceed four (4) feet.

d.	Any fence between the facing walls of residential structures shall be 100% open fences such as a cyclone fence; but no such fence shall exceed a height of eight (8) feet.

 
4.842
 
Screening Fences. Unenclosed nonresidential uses not excepted in Section 4.720 hereof shall be screened from public view and from







L.j-1'-I
 
adjacent properties in accordance with the provisions of Section 4.720 hereof.

4.843		Condition of Fences.  All fences, hedges, walls, and shrubs must be maintained in good condition.  When adjoining an R-District, no advertising shall be permitted on any side of a fence facing the residential district.

4.844		Installation of Fences.  When any fence is installed, the supporting posts shall be located on the inside of the fence, facing the property to be fenced; and, the finished side of the fence shall face the adjoining property and/or right-of-way.

4.845	No fence shall be located nearer to a rear property line that abuts a street right-of-way line or an alley right-of-way line than two (2) feet; provided, however, that no fence exceeding thirty (30) inches in height shall be located within a required clear sight triangle in accordance with Section 4.140 hereof.

 
4.850
 
Enclosure of Porches or Decks

In any new construction, no porch or deck shall extend into any required yard except open patios and decks as provided under Section 4.340 d. No open patio, deck, or porch which has been constructed within any required yard prior to the date of this Ordinance shall be enclosed, except as follows:

a.	On an interior lot where such porch shall be located in a front yard and the enclosure of such porch would be on a property where such enclosure would not extend beyond the front wall of the building or porch of any adjoining property.
b.	On a comer lot, the same provisions described in Section 4.850 (a) shall
apply.  In addition, the enclosure of a front porch must also be in accordance with Section 4.140, concerning the clear sight triangle.

c.	The enclosure of a front porch in a required front yard of either a comer lot or an interior lot shall not be allowed if such property adjoins an undeveloped zone lot in separate ownership.
 


4.900	AESTHETIC  CONSIDERATIONS

4.910	Orientation of Buildings

4.911		Individual Buildings on Public Rights-of-Way. The front facade ofa building shall face the road/right of way which it abuts; provided,






 
 
however, that if it is located on a comer parcel, it shall face the widest road; provided, however, that if both roads are of equal or near equal width, it may face on either road, unless the existing pattern of development has predetermined  the road that shall be faced; and, provided  further that on a comer lot, the structure may be sited at an angle to face the comer.

 
4.912
 
Large Scale Developments with Interior Circulation. When a development is designed to be served by an interior pedestrian or vehicular circulation system, buildings may face the interior roadways; provided, however, where such an orientation results in the rear or the side(s) of such buildings being within 100 feet of a public right-of­ way, then such rear and/or side walls shall be screened from the public right-of-way in accordance with Section 4.733.
 

 
4.920
 
Aesthetic Design Standards for Commercial and Manufacturing Uses
 

 
4.921




















4.922
 
Aesthetic Goals. All development and construction, in the form of buildings, structures or additions and exterior alterations thereto, and other site improvements and alterations, including paving, lighting and landscaping, at or for each site shall be designed and constructed to achieve the following goals:

a.	To prevent the erection of poorly designed, constructed or proportioned structures, and structures built of improper or unsuitable materials.
b.	To increase and secure the spectrum of attractive business
establishments, improvements and facilities on appropriate locations within building sites.
c.	To foster a high quality of development to enhance the value of
existing development as well as to enhance the attractiveness of vacant land for future development.
Aesthetic Design Standards

a.	Construction Materials. All construction in the form of new buildings or additions and exterior alterations shall be consistent with original construction or of comparable materials to harmonize with the external design, both as to quality of workmanship and materials of existing structures. No new structure shall contain less than 50% external masonry, glass, dryvit or similar type of construction materials, except that the facades of manufacturing and warehousing buildings may consist of metal materials.  The buildings and structures shall not be of woodface composition. The fronts of all buildings and structures shall not expose concrete block composition, other than






'-1-14>
 
decorative concrete block.



b.	Waste Disposal

1)	No Lot shall be used as a dumping ground for trash.

2)	All trash of any nature, shall be securely stored in covered sanitary containers. All containers and other equipment, and the areas and enclosures, for the storage and disposal of trash, shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition.

3)	All trash shall be properly and securely contained within each site and properly and regularly removed therefrom, and disposed as may be required by state and federal law, regulation and other requirements and standards governing same.

4)	"Trash" shall mean to include all papers, discards, waste, rubbish, refuse and garbage, of any kind or nature whatsoever, and any malodorous and objectionable materials lying around or stored at each site but not customarily used in its then present condition in the business or activities of the site occupants.

c.	Mechanical/Electrical Equipment. All mechanical/electrical equipment not enclosed in a structure or building (e.g. on-grade, roof-top, etc.) shall complement, enhance and be compatible with the design and construction of the buildings and structures on each site. The color scheme of such equipment shall complement and be compatible with the color scheme of the building's exterior.

d.	Landscaping

I)	All terrain, grounds, area left in natural state, or areas not covered by building or paving, shall be landscaped, seeded, and otherwise maintained in a good, clean condition having aesthetic appeal.

2)		Each Site and the landscaped areas shall be kept clean and free of any and all litter, refuse, and papers of any type.  No litter, refuse or paper accumulations whatsoever shall
occur, be placed on or remain at each Site.








4-ll
 
3)	Each site shall be developed, improved, used and maintained to preserve and foster as much of the existing mature natural growth as is practically possible.































































 
 

ARTICLES

SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS GOVERNING SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS AND CERTAIN OTHER USES



5.100	AMUSEMENTUSES

 
5.110




















5.120
 
Amusement Center, Bowling Alley, Dance Halls and Similar Places of Amusement

a.	Such uses shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed structure, except amusement parks.

b.	Parking areas shall be screened from adjoining residential properties in accordance with Subsection 4.720.

c.	A principal structure shall be not less than twenty (20) feet from any property line, or such greater distance as may be otherwise required in the district where located or as set forth in Section 4.350.

d.	There shall be no offensive noise or vibration; such elements may be emitted only in accordance with the performance standards set forth in Article 6.
(
Outdoor Recreation Facilities
 

a.	Such uses shall include golf courses, ice-skating rinks, ski areas, swimming pools, tennis courts and other similar uses.

b.	Unenclosed public or commercial recreational facilities shall be located not less than twenty-five (25) feet from any property line except where greater distances are otherwise required herein and shall be effectively screened from adjoining dwelling uses in accordance with the provisions of Section 4.730.

c.	Illuminated signs and other lights shall be directed away, or shielded from adjoining residential properties in such a way as not to disturb the occupants thereof.

d.	No public address system is permitted except where such system will not be audible at any residential property line.

e.	Private swimming pools, permanent and portable, which shall be accessory to a principal non-commercial dwelling use shall be regulated as follows; except that these regulations shall not apply to portable swimming pools which shall be not more than 3 feet in height nor more than 15 feet in length or diameter.
 
I)	May be erected only on the same zone lot as the principal structure.


2)	Shall be distant not less than ten (10) feet from the principal structure nor less than ten (10) feet from all property lines, except in R-2 zones where the minimum distance from property lines shall be 8 feet; and they shall not be located within a required front yard.

3)	The pool is intended and is to be used solely for the enjoyment of the occupants of the principal use of the property on which it is located, and their guests, and no fee shall be charged.

4)	The swimming pool, or entire property on which it is located, shall be so walled or fenced as to prevent uncontrolled access by children from the street or from adjacent properties, said wall or fence to be not less than four (4) feet and maintained in good condition.

Above-ground pools with an attached fence or deck/fence combination are exempt from the above regulation, if:

a)	The fence is equipped with a gate that can be closed with a child-proof latch when the pool is not in use; and

b)	The height of the fence above the entrance level of the pool is not less than thirty (30) inches.

5)	The terms "wall or fence" above shall not be construed to mean the side wall of an above ground pool

6)	All pumping, cleaning, filtering, and screening devices and water supply and discharge shall be of a type and source approved by local and/or State Health Department authorities.

 
5.130
 
Essential Services, Enclosed or Permanent Structures

Such uses are intended to include facilities for sewage treatment, electric substations, transformers, switches, and auxiliary apparatus as well as public service buildings such as police and fire stations. Where such uses are proposed to be located in a Residential District, they shall be subject to the following regulations:

5.131	Such facility shall not be located on a residential street (unless no other site is available), and shall be so located as to draw a minimum of vehicular traffic to and through such streets.

5.132	The location, design and operation of such facility shall not adversely affect the character of the surrounding residential area.
 





 
 
5.133	Adequate fences, barriers and other safety devices shall be provided, and shall be landscaped in accordance with the provisions of Section 4.730.



5.134	Noise emitted from electric substations shall not be greater than permitted in accordance with the performance standards set forth herein.

 
5.140


















5.150







5.160











5.170
 
Essential Services, Open


Such uses shall be limited to the erection, construction, alteration, or maintenance, by public utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies, of underground or overhead gas, electrical, steam or water transmission or distribution systems, collection, communication, supply or disposal systems, including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants, and other similar equipment and accessories in connection therewith reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by such public utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies or for the public health or safety or general welfare.  Such uses shall not include sanitary landfills and related uses such as staging areas or other means of solid waste disposal. Where applicable, the landscaping regulations of Section 4.700 shall apply.

Fire and Police Stations


Such facilities shall be permitted in all zone districts: provided, however, that they shall be permitted in R-Districts only if such facilities are necessary to serve the surrounding area.

Hospitals, Churches, or other Religious or Philanthropic Institutions

All such uses shall be located on a public street which shall have a pavement width of not less than 20 feet, and they shall maintain a minimum 10-foot wide landscaped strip in accordance-with the provisions of Section 4.700 on all property lines abutting R­
Districts and all residential streets. Such uses shall not be located or designed in such a manner as would be detrimental to the privacy, convenience and property values of nearby residential development.

Nursery School. Day Care Center for Seven (7) or More Children

a.	Such uses shall be situated on a zone lot of not less than 20,000 square feet, except where a greater area is otherwise required herein, and shall be screened in accordance with the provisions of Section 4.700. Such use shall provide evidence of required State permits.

b.	Child Day Care Centers and Group Day Care Homes shall also comply with the following minimum space and site requirements:






5-3
 
(1)	Each facility shall have a minimum of 40 square feet (372 square decimeters) of indoor space for each child, measured wall to wall inclusive of space occupied by cupboards, shelves, furniture, and equipment, but exclusive of halls, bathrooms, offices, kitchens, locker rooms, and related areas.

(2)	Each facility shall have a minimum of 65 square feet (604 square decimeters) of accessible outdoor play space for each child. Outdoor play space is considered accessible if it is no more than Y,mile (.8 kilometer) from the building. The following exceptions to the space requirements shall be permitted:

(a)	a minimum of32.5 square feet (302 square decimeters) 50% less space of accessible outdoor play space shall be required for each infant; a
minimum of 48.89 square feet (453 square decimeters) 25% less space of accessible outdoor play space shall be required for each child from age
18-24 months;

(b)	less outdoor space if it is offset by a large indoor activity room, as long as the 65 square feet (604 square decimeters) per child requirement is met and the indoor activity room provides for equivalent activity as outdoor play space; and

(c)	less outdoor space if it is scheduled for alternate use, provided that the 65 square feet (604 square decimeters) per child requirements is met for
each child based on the number of children using the space at any one
time.

(d)	ifthere are unsafe areas, such as open drainage ditches, wells, holes, or heavy street traffic, in or near the outdoor play space, there shall be fencing to restrict children from these areas.

 
5.180










5.190
 
Public and Parochial Schools and Colleges and Private Schools and Colleges for Academic Instruction

In any R-district, such uses, including play areas shall be located not less than 100 feet from any lot line, except where greater distances are otherwise required herein.
Schools will be located on or within close proximity to roads having a pavement width
of not less than 20 feet.

Community Buildings, Social Halls, Lodges, Fraternal Organizations, Clubs and Other Non-Commercial  Recreational  Establishments

5.191	All buildings must be a minimum of20 feet from the rear lot line.

5.192	There shall be no external evidence of any gainful activity. Access to any space used for gainful activity shall be from within the building.
 
5.193	Any such use shall be located on a street having a pavement width of at least 30 feet, or shall be able to provide access without causing heavy traffic on local residential streets.

5.194	Applicants shall prove that such uses proposed to be located in R-Districts will serve primarily the residents of the surrounding neighborhood and that no other satisfactory location exists.



5.200	CONDITIONAL USES

 
5.210














5.220
 
General. Conditional Uses shall be allowed only in the districts where they are designated, and only upon a determination by the Borough Council that they comply with the standards and criteria set forth herein.

5.211		Additional Requirements.  The Borough Council may, upon a review of the application including the environmental assessment, establish such additional requirements for the development and the operation of the conditional use as may be required to protect the public health, safety and general welfare of the community; provided, however, that no such conditions and safeguards shall relate to offsite transportation or offsite road improvements.

Administrative Procedures


5.221	Application. Application for a Conditional Use shall be made directly to the governing body. Applications shall be in accordance with Section 9.220 hereof and as otherwise specified herein.  All such applications shall be referred to the Planning Commission for review; and, no such application shall be finally authorized until the Planning Commission has submitted its review findings, or until 30 days after referral to the Planning Commission, whichever occurs first.

5.222	Procedure. The governing body shall hold hearings on and decide requests for conditional uses in accordance with such standards and criteria set forth
herein. The hearing shall be conducted by the board or the board may appoint
any member or an independent attorney as a hearing officer. The decision, or, where no decision is called for, the findings shall be made by the board. However, the appellant or the applicant, as the case may be, in addition to the municipality, may, prior to the decision of the hearing, waive decision or findings by the board and accept the decision or findings of the hearing
officer as final. In granting a conditional use, the governing body may attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards, in addition to those expressed in the ordinance, as it may deem necessary to implement the purposes of this act in the zoning ordinance.
 







 
 
5.223	Timing


(a)	The governing body shall render a written decision or, when no decision is called for, make written findings on the conditional use application within 45 days after the last hearing before the governing body.  Where the application is contested or denied, each decision shall be accompanied by findings of fact or conclusions based thereon, together with any reasons therefor.  Conclusions based on any provisions of any ordinance, rule or regulation shall contain a reference to the provision relied on and the reasons why the conclusion is deemed appropriate in the light of the facts found.
(b)	Where the governing body fails to render the decision within the period required by this subsection or fails to commence, conduct or complete the required hearing as provided in Section 908(1.2) of the MPC, the decision shall be deemed to have been rendered in favor of the applicant unless the applicant has agreed in writing or on the record to an extension of time.  When a decision has been rendered in favor of the applicant because of the failure of the governing body to meet or render a decision as hereinabove provided, the governing body shall give public notice of the decision within ten days from the last day it could have met to render a decision in the same manner as required by the public notice requirements of this act.  Ifthe governing body shall fail to provide such notice, the applicant may do so.
(c)	Nothing in this subsection shall prejudice the right of any party opposing the application to appeal the decision to a court of competent
jurisdiction.  A copy of the final decision or, where no decision is called for, of the findings shall be delivered to the applicant personally or mailed to him no later than the day following its date.

 
5.230
 
Standards and Criteria for Conditional Uses

5.231	General Criteria

a.	That the use is so designed, located and proposed to be operated that the public health, safety, welfare and convenience will be protected.

b.	That the use will not cause substantial injury to the value of other property in the neighborhood where it is to be located.

c.	That the use shall be compatible with adjoining development and the proposed character of the zone district where it is to be located.

d.	That adequate landscaping and screening is provided as required in Section 4.700 and as otherwise provided herein.
 








 
 
e.	That adequate off-street parking and loading is provided and ingress and egress is so designed as to cause minimum interference with traffic on abutting streets.

f.	That the use conforms with all applicable regulations governing the district where located, except as may otherwise be determined for large­ scale developments.


g.	That the use is compatible with the Borough's Comprehensive Plan.

h.	An environmental assessment shall be submitted with all applications for conditional uses in accordance with Section 5.240 hereof.

5.232	Standards

a.	Traffic. The proposed development shall not be located on a site where primary access to the site is from a minor street designed primarily to provide vehicular access to abutting properties. The development shall be designed in a manner which will not be injurious to the safe and convenient flow of vehicular traffic. A traffic plan, with estimates of the number of vehicles shall be submitted to the Borough.

b.	Performance Standards. The proposed development will comply with the performance standards specified in Article 6 hereof and such additional performance standards that shall be specified by the Borough Council to protect the health, safety and welfare of the Borough.

c.	Permits. There shall be provided evidence of all required State and Federal permits.

d.	Distance from.Existing Development. No Conditional Use shall be nearer to existing development than 2000 feet or such greater distance as may be required to assure the health, safety and welfare of the Community.

e.	Transfer of Products and Waste.  Vehicles used in the transfer of waste shall be designed to preclude the accidental dumping of any part of such wastes while in transit; and, transportation routes shall be designed to minimize traversing densely populated areas except for waste pick-ups.

 
5..240
 
Environmental Assessment

5.241	General. All applications for a Conditional Use must be accompanied by an Environmental Assessment as specified herein; provided, however, that upon the request of the developer, components of the Environmental Assessment may be waived by the Borough Council when such components are deemed
 






 
 
unnecessary for certain Conditional Uses.

5.242	Purpose.  The purpose of the Environmental Assessment is to provide the Borough Council with sufficient information to determine if the proposed use will be harmful or beneficial to the Municipality; and to determine corrective actions if needed to mitigate potential adverse environmental impacts.

5.243	Assurances.  Due to the importance of securing professional, objective data in the Environmental Assessment, the selection of the professionals to be engaged in its preparation shall be subject to the approval of the Borough Council.  The developer will further provide the Borough Council with assurances, adequate to protect the Borough from violations of non­ compliance with measures required to mitigate identified adverse environmental impacts.

5.244	Content of the Environmental Assessment

a.	Description of the Proposal

Describe the proposed or recommended actions, its purpose, where it is to be located, when it is proposed to take place, and its interrelationship
with other projects or proposals, including information and technical data
sufficient to permit assessment of environmental impact by the Borough.

b.	Description of the Environment

Include a comprehensive description of the existing environment without the proposal and the probable future environment with the proposal.
This description should focus both on the environmental details most
likely to be affected by the proposal and on the broader regional aspects of the environment, including ecological interrelationships.  Particular attention should be given to the potential effects of past or present use of the site as a repository for toxic or hazardous wastes.

c.	The Environmental Impact of the Proposed Activities

Describe the environmental impacts of the proposed action.  These impacts are defined as direct or indirect changes in the existing environment, both beneficial or detrimental.  Whenever possible these impacts should be quantified.  This discussion should include the impact not only upon the natural environment but upon land use as well. Provide separate discussion for such potential impacts as man-caused accidents and natural catastrophes and their probabilities and risks. Specific mention should also be made of unknown or partially understood impacts.







 
 
d.	Mitigating Measures Included in the Proposed Action

Include a description of measures which are proposed to be taken or which are required to be taken to enhance, protect, or mitigate impacts upon the environment, including any associated research or monitoring.

e.	Any Adverse Effects which Cannot be Avoided Should the Proposal be Implemented

Include a discussion of the unavoidable adverse impacts described in 5.244c and 5.244d, above, and an analysis of who or what will be affected and the degree of impact.

f.	The Relationship Between Local Short-Term Use of Man's Environment and the Maintenance and Enhancement of Long-Term Productivity

Describe the local short-term use of the environment involved in the proposed action in relation to its cumulative and long-term impacts and give special attention to its relationship to trends of similar actions which would significantly affect ecological interrelationships or pose long-term risk to health or safety. Short-term and long-term do not refer to any fixed time period, but should be viewed in terms of the various
significant ecological and geophysical consequences of the proposed
action.

g.	Any Irreversible and Irretrievable Commitments of Resources Which Would be Involved in the Proposed Action Should it be Implemented

Describe, and quantify where possible, any irrevocable uses of resources, including such things as resource extraction, erosion, destruction of archaeological or historical sites, elimination of endangered species' habitat, and significant changes in land use.

h.	Alternatives to the Proposed Action

Identify alternatives to the proposed action, and describe the environmental impacts, both beneficial and adverse, of the various alternatives considered.

5.245	Outline Considerations for Developing Environmental Assessment

a.	Description of the Proposal

I.	Who is proposing the action?
2.	What is the nature of the action to be taken?







S-'i'
 
3.	What is it designed to accomplish?   What identified needs will be met and to what degree?

4.	Where will it take place?

5.	When will it take place?  Indicate phasing of acquisition and development activities, if applicable, and timetables for completion.

6.	How does it fit in with local planning efforts, comprehensive plans, etc.

b.	Description of the Environment


1.	Present and past land uses of the site and of the surrounding area.

2.	Special topographic features which may be present.

3.	Describe the site's surface and subsurface geologic characteristics.

4.	Describe the nature of the soils in the area, particularly their fertility and susceptibility to erosion.

5.	Describe the area's water resources, with specific reference to
ground water, water quality, aquifers and aquifer recharge areas, and areas subject to flooding.

6.	Describe the area's vegetation, including species composition, distribution, commercial utility and aesthetics. Special reference should be made to unusual or unique species.

7.	Describe the nature of existing transportation routes in the immediate area and the accessibility to the project site.

c.	Environmental Impact of the Proposed Action

1.	What will be the effect on land uses in the area?

2.	Will the project affect a site listed on the National Register of Historic Places?

3.	In what way will soils and topography be affected?  Consider such things as soil compaction, erosion, exposure of slopes, excavation which may create unstable slope/soil configurations, cutting and filling, removal of topsoil, paving, loss of existing natural landscape qualities, blockage of viewlines to landmarks, blockage of view corridors, etc.





 
 
4.	Will solid wastes be generated?  How and where will they be disposed of? Indicate what types and volumes will be generated and how and where it will be stored prior to disposal and method of disposal. Discuss removal of clearance, demolition, and
construction wastes.

5.	How will water resources be affected?  Consider the water table, runoff, sewer systems, rivers and streams, water supply, etc. Indicate content of any effluent which will be discharged.  Address loss of floodwater absorption capacity in natural absorption areas, effects on stream volume, velocity, and seasonal flows, diversion or blockage of surface water, alterations of natural watercourses, introduction or increase of effluents or toxic, hazardous, or radioactive substances to runoff or water bodies, effects on aquatic life, any blockage or impairment of access to watercourses, effects
on groundwater recharge, release of groundwater supply, withdrawal of groundwater supplies, blockage of groundwater flow, contamination of groundwater supply, effect on water temperatures, sedimentation, changes in levels of water bodies.

6.	How will vegetation be affected?  Discuss the removal of ground cover, loss of valuable local species, loss of wildlife habitat, introduction of vegetation which will spread to adjacent lands, introduction of exotic vegetation, creation of areas of highly visible, drying, or decaying vegetation.

7.	How will fauna be affected?  Consider habitat destruction, reduction of population, impact caused by human intrusion, mobility restrictions, food chains, etc.

8.	How will transportation routes be affected?  Consider congestion, hazards, capacities of affected roads and intersections and traffic to be generated, generation of truck traffic.

9.	Effect on air quality and ambient noise level?  Include what odors will originate; types and concentrations of gases, vapors, particulates, and smoke; noise and vibration levels at property lines and the level of heat and/or glare.  Indicate levels of electromagnetic radiation at property lines. Indicate effects on local temperatures
and wind circulation and whether there are any plants, animals, or materials in the area that are particularly susceptible to expected emissions.  Indicate the nature, concentration and quantity of radioactive material to be discharged to the environment, pathways for entering the environment, dose to populations and biota, and possible concentrations through food chains.





5-tl
 
I 0. Describe management practices proposed for the area.

d.	Mitigating Measures Included in the Proposed Action

Describe actions or measures which will be taken to avoid or alleviate adverse environmental effects. Include reference to erosion control methods and adherence to air, noise or water pollution control techniques and standards.

e.	Unavoidable Adverse Effects


Ifadverse effects have been identified under other sections of the Environmental Impact Stndy and cannot be mitigated, they should be again identified here. Describe who or what will be affected, and to what degree. Quantify wherever possible.

f.	Relationship Between the Local Short-Term Use of Man's Environment and the Maintenance and Enhancement of Long-Term Productivity

What are the impacts of the proposal in the context of other similar projects?  In what way will futnre generations be affected by the currently proposed actions?

How do the immediate and long-range impacts on the area with the project compare with the immediate and long-range impacts without the project?
g.	Any Irreversible and Irretrievable Commitments of Resources

Describe any irrevocable commitments of resources resulting from implementation of the proposal.  An evaluation must be made of the
.extent to which the proposed action curtails or restricts the range of possible resources uses.  Such commitments may occur because of resources extraction, erosion, destruction of archaeological, geological or historic featnres, destruction of fragile habitat or endangered species habitat, unalterable changes in land use, and resources used in project development.

h.	Alternatives to the Proposed Action

Identify alternatives which may be considered, including modification of the present proposal and different approaches to gaining the same result.

The beneficial and adverse effects of the alternatives should be discussed, along with the reasons for rejection.  where appropriate, consideration should be given to alternate construction methods which





 
 
may avoid environmental degradation.



5.300	RESIDENTIAL AND RESIDENTIAL-RELATED COMMERCIAL USES

5.310	Townhouse and Garden Apartment Dwellings


5.311	All two-family, garden apartment, townhouse and other multi-family development sites shall be provided with an existing or approved public and/or community type water supply and sanitary sewer system, approved by appropriate local and/or State health authorities having jurisdiction. Excepted from this regulation is the development of a two-family dwelling on an individual zone lot.

5.312	Minimum Lot Area, Coverage and Yard Reguirements for Garden Apartments and Town Houses

(1)	Minimum Lot Size.  Garden apartment development shall not be erected on a zone lot ofless than five (5) acres.  The provisions of this section shall not apply to conversion from single-family or two-family to multi­ family dwellings; such conversion shall be subject to the provisions of Article 3, Schedule I hereo£

(2)	Yards.

(a)	Front Yard: no structure shall be located nearer to a front street property line than forty (40) feet.
(b)	Rear Yard: no structure shall be located nearer to a rear property line than fifty (50) feet.
(c)	Side Yard: no structure shall be located nearer to a side property line than fifty (50) feet.
(d)	No building wall shall be located closer to another building than a distance equal to the height of the taller building of the two, but in no case less than fifty (50) feet.

5.313	Maximum Number of Dwelling Units.  Garden apartments shall not exceed eight (8) dwelling units per structure.

5.314	Permanent Open Space. In addition to the yard, setback, and off-street parking requirements of this Ordinance, garden apartment developments shall provide a minimum of 10 percent of the gross area of the site to be permanently set aside for open recreation area, which shall be for the
common use of the residents thereof.

5.315	Off-Street Parking. Provision for off-street parking shall be as required in Section 5.600.





 
 
5.320	Motels, Motor Courts, Motor Hotels and Similar Uses

5.321	Such uses shall have a minimum area for each unit of occupancy of 150 square feet and shall include a minimum of one (1) bedroom and an enclosed bathroom containing a bathtub or shower, commode and lavatory and be supplied with hot and cold running water.

5.322	Illuminated signs and other lights shall be directed away from or shielded from adjoining residential properties in such a way as not to disturb the occupants thereof.

5.323	Such uses shall not be closer than two hundred (200) feet to an R-District, shall be located on a secondary or collector street, and shall provide ingress and egress so as to minimize traffic congestion.

5.330	Group Housing for Handicapped.  Group housing for handicapped persons is permitted in all residential zones, and shall comply with the following standards:

5.331	It must include supervision by not less than one (1) person.

5.332	It must be operated by a not-for-profit charitable institution or by a governmental agency. It shall not be operated as a business.

5.333	It shall not be hazardous to the health, safety and welfare of the residential neighborhood where it is to be located.

5.334	Such uses shall not be a residence for transients.  There shall be no fixed length of time for occupancy by the residents.

5.335	It must show evidence of such licensing as maybe required by the Pennsylvania Department of Public Welfare.

5.340	Assisted Living Facilities.  Assisted Living Facilities shall comply with the following site standards:

a.	Minimum of two (2) acres.

b.	Setbacks of 50 feet from all property lines.



5.400	RETAIL AND MANUFACTURING USES

5.410	Drive-In and Drive-Through Eating and Drinking Places (Special Exception)

Such businesses, where persons are served in automobiles shall be not closer than two






 
 
hundred (200) feet to an   R-District and shall be located on a major public street and shall provide ingress and egress so as to minimize traffic congestion, and shall comply
with the following:	(
5.411		A minimum of eight (8) on-site vehicular waiting spaces are required for occupied vehicles waiting for window service.

5.412	The above spaces shall not interfere with parking spaces intended for non­ drive through customers, internal circulation or pedestrian safety.

5.413		A site development plan shall be submitted showing building placement and dimensions, vehicular and pedestrian access, internal circulation, landscaping, and size and location of signage. The site plan shall also include a circulation plan which shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Planning Commission that there is sufficient space and adequate turning radii to allow vehicles to pass safely around lanes of waiting vehicles.

5.414	Trash receptacles shall be provided outside of restaurants for patron use.

 
5.420







5.430








5.440






5.450
 
Bakeries

Bakeries first permitted in any C-1 District shall be located no closer to an R-District than fifty (50) feet and goods produced on the premises shall be sold only at retail on the premises.

Retail Uses in M-1 District

Such uses, designated in Schedule I hereof, shall be permitted only where the applicant proves that such use is or will be necessary to serve manufacturing uses and will not adversely affect the industrial development of adjoining land. Where such uses are permitted, the minimum lot size requirement shall be 10,000 square feet.

Manufacturing.Uses

Manufacturing uses in any "M" District, when abutting an R-District, shall be screened from such district in accordance with the provisions of Section 4.700.

JunkYardsandSimilarStorage Areas-Including AutomobileWrecking

5.451		Such uses existing at the date of adoption of this ordinance may continue their operations, but shall terminate within one year of the adoption of this Ordinance unless they comply with the following provisions: New junk yards shall be permitted only in M-2A zones and only as Special Exception Uses.

5.452	All junk yards shall be completely screened from roads and developed areas with a solid fence or wall six (6) feet or more in height, maintained in good
 
condition, and painted, except for masonry construction, or in accordance with Section 4.700 hereof.  Materials stored shall not be visible at any property line. Such a fence shall not be subject to the provisions of Section 4.841 hereof.


	No operations shall be conducted which shall cause a general nuisance or endanger the public health of the surrounding neighborhood.

	No highly inflammable or explosive material shall be stored in bulk above ground, with the exception of fuel tanks or drums which are directly connected with heating appliances.  Inflammable and explosive material storage shall be in compliance with all applicable Federal and State laws and regulations.

	All materials or wastes causing fumes or dust, constituting a fire hazard, or attractive to rodents or insects, may be stored outdoors only in enclosed containers.

	No area shall be developed as a junk yard where the physical properties of the site, such as topography, preclude the feasibility of adequately screening such premises from public view.

	No junk yard shall be located on a public right-of-way that provides junk yard frontage of more than 1000 feet on, or along, such right of way.

	No such use shall be nearer to a residential zone lot than five hundred (500) feet.

	Any junk yard shall be not less than 100 feet from the nearest right-of-way line.

 
5.460
 
Excavation of Topsoil. Gravel. or Mineral Deposits

5.461		Excavation.  Any excavations for the removal of topsoil, gravel or mineral deposits of any kind, must be enclosed by a fence located at least ten (10) feet from the sides or perimeter of the excavation.  All such excavation must be adequately drained to prevent the formation of pools of water.  The side walls of all such excavations shall slope at an angle no steeper than one (1) foot of vertical distance for each two (2) feet of horizontal distance.

5.462		Rock Crushing and Processing.  A rock crusher or processing plant shall not be located nearer than one (1) half mile to any residence.

5.463		Culm Bank Removal.  Culm bank removal shall be permitted only as a Special Exception in the zone district or districts where it is so authorized in Article 3 hereof, subject to all of the criteria, conditions, and procedures





-{lo
 
governing Special Exceptions and the following:


a.	Such use shall be permitted only as a temporary use.

b.	All such uses shall comply with the applicable provisions of Sections
5.460 and 5.470; provided, however, that the term "strip mining" shall include the term "culm bank removal"; and, such use shall be governed by the regulations applicable to Special Exceptions instead of Conditional Uses. In addition, such use shall be governed by the Performance Standards set forth in Article 6 hereo£

c.	Temporary Use Permit.  A temporary use permit shall be issued by the Zoning Officer only upon authorization by the Zoning Hearing Board. Such temporary permit shall authorize such use for a period of not more than one (1) year; provided, however, that a separate application shall be submitted for each additional year subsequent to the first temporary permit; and, provided further that there shall be an aggregate of not more than five (5) temporary one (1) year permits issued for any such reclamation site.  Ineach instance the Zoning Hearing Board shall hold a public hearing on the request and shall consider the impact of the preceding temporary permit on the environs of the subject property.

d.	Revocation of Permit.  Ifit is determined by the Zoning Hearing Board that the operation of such use is in violation of the terms and conditions set forth in this ordinance and any other terms and conditions set forth in the temporary use permit, such violations shall be abated within 72 hours of such determination.  Failure to abate such violation shall result in the revocation of the permit therefor.

5.464	Grading and Erosion Control

a.	Applicability.  The provisions of this section shall be applicable to grading activity involving 50 or more cubic yards of cut and/or fill on any parcel of 0.5 acre (21,780 square feet) or more, whether or not such parcel is proposed for a subdivision or a land development.

b.	Application Requirements. All applications for activities governed by this section shall be submitted to the Planning Commission Engineer for review and approval prior to the issuance of a zoning permit. All such applications shall be accompanied by an additional fee of not less than
$200.00 payable to the Borough of Taylor in order to cover the cost of review by the Planning Commission Engineer; provided, however, that in the event that the cost of engineering review shall exceed $200.00, the Borough shall invoice the applicant for any shortfall relating to such engineering fees. No zoning permit shall be issued without affirmative review by the Planning Commission Engineer.





 
 
c.	Exemptions. A separate zoning permit is not required for fill or grading specifically approved under another zoning permit, under a subdivision or land development approval or as part of a Borough approved flood control project.

d.	Application Contents. Zoning Applications for activities governed by this section shall also include:
1)	A grading plan with contour intervals of not more than five (5) feet, including the name and the seal of the responsible professional who prepared the plan.

2)	A Storm Water Management Plan, including calculations to show any changes that may occur in the rate and volume of runoff following the completion of grading activities, including the name and the seal of the responsible  professional.

3)	Such plans and calculations shall be prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Borough's Storm Water Management
Ordinance.

4)	The application shall also include the name of the owner and the proposed use of the land following grading.

e.	Erosion Control. All zoning permits are granted on the condition that State erosion and sedimentation regulations and any officially submitted erosion and sedimentation plans are fully complied with. The Zoning Officer or Planning Commission Engineer may require the submittal of an erosion and sedimentation control plan with review by the County Conservation District wherever soil will be disturbed. Failure to comply with such regulations or plans shall be cause for suspension of zoning permits.

f.	Unstable Slopes. Slopes shall not be created that would have the serious threat of instability, in the determination of the Planning Commission Engineer. The Zoning Officer may require applicants to provide certification from a Professional Engineer that finished slopes greater than 4: 1 will be stable.

g.	Drainage. The ground adjacent to a building shall be graded so that surface water will be drained away from such building.  Any fill or grading shall only occur in such a way that it does not increase the flow of stormwater onto public streets, without approval by the Planning Commission Engineer or PennDOT as applicable.

h.	Grading. Grading, filling, dumping of clean fill, excavation or






 
 
movement of materials shall be completed to avoid an unsightly appearance and to prevent interference with drainage, streets or utilities. Any fill placed on a site shall be leveled off and properly sloped, seeded, and mulched within 3 months of placement,  except for soil stockpile areas shown on an approved erosion and sedimentation control plan in accordance with the current edition of Chapter 102, Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Requirements  of the Pennsylvania Department  of Environmental Protection.

 
5.470
 
Mining Operations


5.471		Procedure. All types of mining operations shall be considered a temporary use ofland and may be permitted by the Borough Council as a Conditional Use in the S-1 and M-2 Districts in accordance with the procedures established herein for Conditional Uses.  Such use shall only be authorized as a temporary use for a period of not more than five (5) years.  Such temporary use maybe extended for periods of up to 5 years each; provided, however, that each such request for an extension shall be in accordance with the
procedures for any new application for a Conditional Use. Any such request for an extension of authorization shall be initiated not less than 120 days prior to the scheduled termination of the temporary use.

5.472	Special Provisions for Strip Mining

a.	The operator of any and all strip mining operations existing within the Borough at the time of passage of this Ordinance shall apply for a permit as required under the terms of this Ordinance.  Said application shall not include any such strip mining which will be completed within 60 days of the passage of this Ordinance.

b.	All applications for strip mining permits shall be filed with the Zoning Official and shall include the following:

1.	A map in duplicate drawn to scale of not less than one inch equals 200 feet, which outlines the entire proposed area to be strip mined and shows the surface features, including buildings, dwellings, schools, railroads and highways within a distance of 500 feet from the perimeter of the proposed strip mining operation.  In addition, said map will indicate the approximate or proposed depth of said strip mining and the number of surface acres of land proposed to be stripped.

2.	A bond payable to the Borough of Taylor conditioned on saving the Borough and its officials of and from any and all claims, suits or demands caused by any blasting.  The amount of said bond shall be set by an engineer designated by the Council, but in no case shall the
 





 
 
amount be less than $1500 per acre ofland to be stripped.  Such bond shall be signed by the applicant and a corporate surety licensed to do business in the State of Pennsylvania, or the applicant may elect to deposit cash or United States Securities in lieu of surety bond.  Upon covering the exposed surface and approval thereof by the Engineer, the Borough will release the applicant and his surety from their bond.

3.	A certificate of insurance with limits of $100,000 for personal injuries and $300,000 for property damage for the benefit of all persons who might be injured or suffer property damage as a result of said strip mining operations.

4.	A surface water management plan and a storm drainage plan.

5.473	Restrictions.  Any person, firm, or corporation desiring a permit shall file, on a form supplied by the Zoning Official, a signed statement agreeing to compliance with the following regulations:

a.	All strip mining operations shall be backfilled and all overburden material shall be replaced in a manner which will restore the premises to an equal or similar grade as existed on the original site before the commencement of the proposed strip mining operation.

b.	The perimeter of any strip mining operation shall not be nearer than 100 feet to any school, church, dwelling, building or highway.

c.	Operations for drilling and for excavating purposes shall not be operated earlier than 7:00 A.M. nor later than 8:00 P.M. during each day and such activities shall not be operated on Sundays.

d.	Ifrequired by the Borough Council to ensure the public safety and welfare of persons and property in the immediate vicinity open excavation and pits shall be enclosed with a fence of not less than six (6) feet in height.

5.474		Compliance with State Regulations.  No permit issued under the provisions of this Ordinance shall become effective until any required license or permit is secured from the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.

 
5.480




5.490
 
House Trailers and Manufactured Homes

Trailers on wheels shall be permitted only in mobile home parks. Forestry Activities
 






 
 
Forestry activities, including land clearance, shall be permitted in all zones as a principle permitted use only in accordance with the provisions of this section. Applications for a permit for land clearance activities shall be accompanied by an engineer's report documenting the additional runoff to be generated by the activity. The engineer's report shall also include a soil erosion and sedimentation plan as well as a storm drainage plan. The soil erosion and sedimentation plan shall be approved by the Lackawanna County Conservation District and the storm drainage plan shall be approved by the Borough Engineer. The storm drainage plan shall provide a facility
for the detention of any runoff which may be generated by this activity in excess of the runoff prior to the clearance of the land.

5.500	LARGE-SCALE DEVELOPMENTS

Large-scale developments as defined herein shall be permitted as a Special Exception and shall be developed in accordance with the following requirements:

5.510	Conformity with Comprehensive Plan

The proposed large-scale development shall conform to the municipality's Comprehensive Plan in terms of general location.

	Large-scale Residential Developments

The purpose of this Section shall be to permit the large-scale development of housing in such a manner as to provide for the flexibility of design and arrangement of dwelling structures which would achieve the objectives of this Ordinance but would
not be bound by the standards established for individual lot by lot developments.  Such
developments, shall however, be subject to the broader standards set forth below.

	Spacing and Orientation of Residential Developments.  Spacing between buildings and orientation in residential building groups shall be as follows:

a.	In buildings containing multiple dwelling units, walls containing main window exposures or main entrances, shall be so oriented as to insure adequate light and air exposures.

b.	Such buildings shall be so arranged as to avoid undue exposure to concentrated loading or parking facilities and shall be so oriented as to preserve visual and audible privacy between adjacent buildings.

	Vehicle and Pedestrian Circulation.  Adequate provision for vehicle and pedestrian circulation shall be designed as follows:

a.	Safe and convenient arrangement of walks, roadways, driveways, and off-street parking and loading space.







 
 
b.	Separation of general vehicle traffic from pedestrian walks and public transportation loading places.
(
c.	A building group may not be so arranged that any temporary or permanently inhabited building is inaccessible by emergency vehicles.

	Paving and Drainage. The developer shall install throughout any proposed large scale residential development, hard-surfaced streets, which shall include curbs or gutters, catch basins and storm sewers.

Maximum allowable grades on these streets are as follows:

Primary Streets	4%
Secondary Streets	-	7%
Minor Streets	12%

	Development Standards

a.	Minimum Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit

1)	Single-Family Detached. Although the average minimum lot area per dwelling unit shall not be less than the minimum area requirement for the District where the development is located, the size of each lot may be reduced as needed, to not less than two-thirds of the minimum required in the R-1 District, but the average area per dwelling unit, within each development section including open space shall not be less than the minimum otherwise required for the R­ District where located.

2)	Two-family Dwellings, Garden Apartments and Other Multi-family Dwellings. The average minimum lot area per dwelling unit shall not be less than the minimum area required for each respective type of dwelling structure in the district where such principal permitted uses are first permitted.  The dimensions of each individual lot may, however, be	reduced by not more than one-third of the minimum requirement, provided that the average lot area per dwelling unit within each development district shall not be less than the area otherwise required.

b.	Minimum Lot Size

There shall be no minimum lot size requirements for any housing types other than the average minimum lot area required for such dwellings as described in Subsection 5.524 a. hereof.

c.	Minimum Lot Frontage






 
 
The only minimum lot frontage requirement shall be as follows:

I)	I-family and 2-family dwellings, detached: 100 feet
2)	I-family and 2-family dwellings, semi-detached: 80 feet for each side
3)	I-family dwellings, attached (town-houses): 20 feet per dwelling unit plus an additional 25 feet at each end of all rows
4)	Multi-family garden apartments:  None
5)	Other multi-family dwelling structures:  None



d.	Minimum Lot Depth


No lot for any residential structure or group of residential structures shall have a lot depth ofless than 100 feet.

e.	Minimum Front Yards


The minimum front yard for all residential structures shall be 25 feet; provided, however, that the minimum front yard requirement may be reduced by not more than 20 percent if the developer shall provide adequate justification  acceptable to the Zoning Hearing Board.

f.	Minimum Side Yards and Other Distances Between Buildings

Minimum side yards for all single-family dwellings shall be as specified in Schedule I-R hereof for I-family dwellings in the R-1 District where located. There shall be no side yard requirements for all other residential structures, except as follows:

1)	Side Yards adjoining public rights-of-way or other thoroughfares shall be not less than 25 feet.

2)	All other distances between buildings shall be as set forth under Section 5.312 and 5.521 hereof.

g.	Maximum Impervious Coverage

There shall be no maximum impervious coverage limitation on a lot-by­ lot basis; provided, however, that the overall coverage ofland by buildings within any development section shall not exceed 50% of the net land area (excluding land used for rights-of-way).

5.525	Supporting Commercial Facilities







 
 
Local retail and service commercial facilities, including those uses designated as principal permitted uses in a C-1 Commercial District may be permitted in a Large-scale Residential Development provided that such commercial development including required off-street parking, off-street loading and landscaping shall not exceed 10 percent of the net land area of the large-scale residential development; provided that such uses shall not include automobile service stations, bars, cocktail lounges, and similar uses; and, provided  further, that the location of such commercial facilities shall be approved by the Planning Commission.

5.526	Esthetic Considerations

Due to the potential impact of a large-scale development on the municipality as a whole; and since the developer is provided the opportunity to modify otherwise minimum development standards, the Zoning Hearing Board may withhold the overall approval of such projects as well as the approval of reduced standards pending their review and approval of the proposed overall design, arrangement and layout of the buildings to be erected, including the exterior design of such buildings to insure that the architectural character of the large-scale development area will be compatible with that of the adjoining areas.

 
5.530
 
Large-Scale Commercial  and Manufacturing Development

5.531	Spacing and orientation of Commercial and Manufacturing Developments.
Spacing between buildings and orientation in commercial and industrial building groups shall be as follows:

a.	Exterior walls of opposite buildings shall be located no closer than a distance equal to the height of the taller building.

b.. A building group may not be so arranged that any permanently or temporarily inhabited building is inaccessible by emergency vehicles.

5.532		Signs and Lighting. All signs and lighting devices shall be of a type and design that will not conflict with traffic control signs and lights and shall be so oriented that they do not produce glare on the highway or adjacent residential development.

In any commercial development of 5 acres or more, identification signs may be erected in accordance with the provision of Section 5.850 hereof, except as follows:

a.	There shall be not more than one (1) such sign for each commercial establishment, but there may be a maximum of one additional sign identifying the large-scale development and the occupants thereof;





5-d.<-/
 
provided, however, that where there is more than one (1) main entrance, such signs may be erected at each entrance.
(
b.	Signs identifying a large-scale commercial development may be free­ standing or attached to a wall or fence.

c.	Any free standing sign shall be located at the entrance way of the use which it identifies. No such free-standing sign shall extend more than 30 feet above the mean ground level where it is located.

d.	No sign identifying a building group shall have an area of more than 10 percent of the vertical wall area of the front of the building nor shall the total area of the sign of each tenant exceed 10 percent of the vertical building wall area of the front of the space occupied by the tenant.

e.	The lesser dimension of any sign shall not exceed five (5) feet, provided, however, that for large-scale development signs, this provision shall not apply.

f.	Except for signs identifying the large-scale development, all signs shall be attached to the principal buildings.

g.	No business sign shall project more than two (2) feet from the building facade to which it is attached.

h.	No business sign shall be erected or maintained upon the roof of a building nor shall any sign extend above the roof of a building a distance of more than five (5) feet, provided, however, that a business sign may be affixed to a parapet. It may not extend above the top of the parapet, except that it may extend not more than five (5) feet above the roof of the building and no such sign shall project more than one (1) foot from the parapet.

i.	The area of any sign shall include the entire face of the sign and any structural work incidental to its erection and/or decoration. Ifthe sign is composed of individual letter, figures or designs, the space between and around such letter, figures, or designs shall be considered as part of the area.

j.	Plans showing proposed location and design of all signs, including direction traffic signs and parking signs shall be submitted to the Planning Commission for its review and recommendation to the Zoning Hearing Board which shall be responsible for approval. In granting such approval, special attention shall be given to considerations of safety and convenience of traffic movement, and the appropriate and harmonious
. relationships between buildings, structures, and signs, both on the site






 
 
and in adjacent areas.


k.	Proper arrangement of signs and lighting devices with respect to traffic control equipment and adjacent residential districts shall be observed.

I.	Directional signs indicating the location of the occupant(s) may be erected and maintained, provided, however, that the size of such sign shall not exceed an area of six (6) square feet nor a length of four (4) feet, and provided further that there shall be not more than one (I) such sign for each entrance to any premises.

5.533		Planting and Screening.  Inbusiness building groups abutting or within one hundred (100) feet of residential districts, fences, walls or year-round screen planting shall be provided when necessary to shield adjacent residential districts from parking lot illumination, headlights, heat, blowing papers and dust and to reduce the visual encroachments of commercial architecture, signs and activity.

 
5.540
 
Justification for Exception


Where such exceptions are requested, they shall be granted solely for the purpose of promoting an integrated site plan no less beneficial to the residents or occupants of such developments as well as of neighboring properties than would be obtained under the normal requirements of this Ordinance.
 


5.600	AUTOMOTIVE SERVICES

5.610	Off-Street Parking

In all districts, except the C-2 District, in connection with every manufacturing, business, institutional, recreational, residential or any other use, there shall be provided, at the time any building or structure is erected or is enlarged or increased in capacity, off-street parking space open to the public at no charge for automobiles in accordance with the requirements set forth herein.

5.611		Size and Access. The minimum dimensions of parking spaces and aisles shall be as set forth in Table I hereof. Except in the case of dwellings, no parking area shall contain less than 3 spaces.

There shall be adequate provisions for ingress and egress to all parking spaces. Access to off-street parking areas shall be limited to several well­ defined locations and in no case shall there be permitted unrestricted access along the length of the street or alley upon which the parking area abuts.

No off-street parking lot shall be located in the front yard of any residential lot, unless it is within the side yard of such lot.






 
 
No point of ingress or egress shall be nearer, one to the other, than 300 feet, except where inadequate highway frontage precludes the feasibility of complying with this requirement.

Table I

	Parking		Aisle	
	Stall	Stall		
Angle of
Parking	Width*
(feet)	Depth (feet)	One-Way (feet)	Two-Way (feet)

90	9.0	18		20		24	
60	9.0		19		18		21
45	9.0		18		15		20
Parallel	9.0		22		12		20

* For handicapped-accessible parking spaces, the minimum width shall be not less than 13.5 feet.


Table II

Total Parking in Lot	Required Accessible Spaces

 
1to25 26 to 50
51 to 75
76 to 100
101to150
151 to 200
201to300
301to400
401 to 500
501to1000
1001 and over
 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
2 percent of total
20 plus 1 for each 100 over 1000
 


5.612		Number of Parking Spaces Required. The number of off-street parking spaces required shall be as set forth in Table III following in accordance with the definition of "floor area" as set forth in Article 11 hereof, provided further that in any R-District, on any lot having an area of one (1) acre or less, private garage space may be provided for not more than four (4) motor vehicles.  Space for one (1) additional motor vehicle may be provided for each one-fifth (1/5) acre by which the area of the lot exceeds one (1) acre.

In any case of a building, structure or premises, the use of which is not specifically mentioned herein, the provisions for a use which is so mentioned and to which said use is similar, in the opinion of the Zoning Hearing Board, shall apply.






 
 
5.613	Off-Site Facilities.  All permitted and required accessory off-street parking
(	spaces, open or enclosed, shall be located on the same zone lot as the use to
which such spaces are accessory, except that such spaces may be provided elsewhere but shall be provided with a radius of no greater distance than 400 feet from the zone lot, and provided further, that required spaces are provided off the site in accordance with the provisions set forth herein and that such spaces shall be in the same ownership as the use to which they are accessory and shall be subject to deed restrictions filed in an office of record, binding the owner and his heirs and/or assigns to maintain the required number of spaces available throughout the life of such use, and such spaces shall conform to all regulations of the district in which they are located.





















































 
 
TABLE III

USES	MINIMUM REQUIRED PARKING SPACES
I
I.	Churches and Schools	I for each 3.5 seats in an auditorium or for each 17 classroom seats, whicheve.
is greater.

2.	Business and Professional Offices and Banks,	I for each 200 square feet of floor area. except Medical and Dental Offices

3.	Community Buildings, and Social Halls	I for each JOO square feet of floor area. ***

4.	Country Clubs, Golf Courses	I for each 200 square feet of floor area occupied by all principal and accessory
structures, except those used for parking pul)loses.  **/ ***

5.	Single-family Dwellings	2 for each family or dwelling unit.

6.	Motels, Hotels, Rooming Houses and Bed &	I for each rental unit. ***
Breakfasts
7.	Apartments, Townhouses and Garden Apartments * 1.5 for each dwelling unit.

8.	Mortuaries	3 for each I 00 square feet of parlor area.

9.	Hospitals, Nursing and Convalescing Homes	I for each 3 beds plus I for each employee in the maximum working shift.

10.	Manufacturing and Industrial		I space each for every  2 employees on largest shift, plus I for each company vehicle based at plant

11.	Medical or Dental Clinics, or Offices	5 spaces for each Doctor and 3 spaces for each Dentist plus I space for each
employee in the maximum working shift.

12.	Restaurants and Night Clubs	I for each 2.5 seats plus I for each employee in the maximum working shift (
•
13.	Bars and Beer Parlors	I for each 25 square feet of liquor service area plus I for each employee in a
maximum working shift.

14.	Retail Stores, Store Groups, Shops, and Personal	In all C-Districts, where required, I space shall be provided for each 200 square
Services	feet of floor area.

15.	Wholesale Establishments,  or Warehouses		I for each I employee in maximum working shift, but not less than 25% of building floor area.

16.	Outdoor Recreational Facilities	An adequate number of spaces should be provided so that all vehicles located at
the facility can be accommodated in existing parking lots and not on the
Borough's roads.

17.	Auctions, Galleries	5 for each 500 square feet of floor area.

18.	Bowling Alleys	5 for each alley plus 1 for each employee in the maximum working shift. ***

19.	Movie Theaters, Auditoriums and Sport Stadiums	1 for each 2.5 seats.

20.	Nursery School, Child Day Care Center and Group	Minimum of 1 off-street parking space for each employee Day Care Home

21.	Laundromats	1 for every 2 machines.

22.	Car Washes	Queuing capacity for I 0 vehicles for each wash stall.

23.	Auto, Gas/Service/Repair	1 for each employee, plus 3 per service bay, plus 1 space for each 300 sq.ft. of
retail sales area






 
 

I



2		
TABLE III  (Continued)
			
USES	
MINIMUM REQUIRED PARKING SPACES
	4.	Auto/Truck, Recreational Vehicle or Boat Sales	
I for each employee, plus I for each 10 vehicles on display

25.	
Furniture or Appliance	
I for each employee, plus I for each 300 sq.ft. of sales floor area

26.	
Private or Membership Clubs or Lodges	
I for each employee, plus I for each 6 members or 6 persons of total capacity

27.	
Driving Ranges, Miniature Golf	
I for each employee, plus I per tee

 
*
**
***
 
Except Elderly housing where  I parking space for each 3 dwelling units shall be provided. there shall be not less than 20 off-street parking spaces for each use.
Facilities which provide food and/or beverages are also required to meet the additional regulations for Resiaurants and Bars.
 




















































 
 

5.620	Off-Street Loading


In any district, in connection with every building, or building group or part thereof hereafter erected and having a gross floor area of five thousand (5,000) square feet or more, which is to be occupied by manufacturing, or commercial uses, or distribution of material or merchandise by vehicles, there shall be provided and maintained, on the same zone lot with such building, off-street loading berths in accordance with the requirement of Table IV following.

5.621		Size and Location.  Each loading space shall be of sufficient size to accommodate vehicles that are likely to utilize the berth, but not less than 10 feet in width, 25 feet in length and 14 feet in height, and may occupy all or any part of any required yard, except where located adjacent to any R-District where they shall be set back a minimum of 6 feet from any such property line.



TABLE IV


	

USES	SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR AREA	REQUIRED OFF-STREET LOADING BERTHS	

1.	
Schools	
15,000 or more	
1	(
\

2.	
Hospitals	
From 10,000 - 30,000	
1	
	(in addition	For each additional		
	to space for	30,000 or major		
	ambulance)	fraction thereof.	1 additional	

3.	
Undertakers	
5,000	
1	
	and Funeral	For each additional		
	Homes	5,000 or major		
		fraction thereof.	1 additional	

4.	
Hotels & Offices	
10,000 or more	
1	

5.	
Retail,	
From 10,000 -  25,000	
1	
	Commercial,	From 25,000 - 40,000	2	
	Wholesale,	From 40,000 -  60,000	3	
	Manufacturing,	From 60,000 - 100,000	4	
	Storage&	For each additional		
	Miscellaneous	50,000 or major		
		fraction thereof	1 additional	





S-31
 
5.630













5.640














































5.650
 
Joint Facilities for Parking or Loading


Off-street parking and loading facilities for separate uses may be provided jointly if the total number of spaces so provided is not less than the sum of the separate
requirements for each use and provided that all regulations governing the location of
accessory spaces in relation to the use served are adhered to. Further, no accessory space or portion thereof shall serve as a required space for more than one use unless otherwise approved by the Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with the purposes and procedures set forth herein.


Development and Maintenance of Parking and Loading Areas


Every parcel of land hereafter used as a public or private parking area or loading area including a commercial parking lot shall be developed and maintained in accordance with the following requirements:

5.641		Screening and Landscaping.  Off-street parking areas for more than five (5) vehicles and off-street loading areas shall be effectively screened on each side which adjoins or faces premises situated in any R-District, or institutional premises, by a solid fence or hedge.  Such fence or hedge shall be not less
than four (4) feet nor more than six (6) feet in height and shall be maintained in good condition without any advertising thereon. Any space between such fence or hedge and the side lot line adjoining premises, or the front lot line facing premises, in any R-District shall be landscaped with grass, hardy shrubs or evergreen ground cover and maintained in good condition.

5.642	Minimum Distances and Setbacks. No off-street parking or loading area or part thereof for more than five (5) vehicles shall be closer than twenty (20) feet to any dwelling, school, hospital or other institution for human care located on an adjoining lot.  Ifnot in an R-District but adjoining such district, the parking area shall be set back not less than ten (10) feet from the established street right-of-way line within fifty (50) feet of any R-District.

5.643		Surfacing. Any off-street parking or loading area shall be surfaced with an asphaltic or cement binder pavement or similar durable and dustless surface which shall be so graded and drained as to dispose of all surface water accumulated within the area, and shall be so arranged and marked as to provide for the orderly and safe loading, parking and storage of self-propelled vehicles.

5.644	Lighting. Any lighting used to illuminate any off-street parking or loading areas shall be so arranged as to reflect the light away from any adjoining R­ District, including any residential property within 100 feet of the light source.

Service Stations and Parking Lots







5-3;;)_
 























































5.660
 
5.651	LocationofEstablishmentsandAccessThereto. Vehicular Service Stations, commercial parking lots for five (5) or more motor vehicles, automobile
repair shops, or any vehicular access thereto are regulated as follows:	(

a.	Shall not be located within 100 feet of any boundary line of any R­ District; provided, however, that where the rear lot line ofthe property shall be less than 100 feet distant from an R-District there shall be established along such rear lot line a buffer zone which shall be landscaped in accordance with the provisions ofSection 4.700 hereof; and, no part of any parking space shall be less than 20 feet from any residential property line.

b.	Shall not be located within two hundred (200) feet of property dedicated to or intended for schools, playgrounds, churches, hospitals, public libraries and institutions for dependents or for children, when located along the same street or road and in the same block as said properties.

c.	Vehicular access to the above automotive uses shall be well defined driveways and shall not be closer to the intersection of any two (2) street lines than fifty (50) feet.

d.	A site development plan shall accompany all applications and shall show building and fuel pump placement and dimensions, parking, landscaping, internal circulation, and the size and location of signage.
(

e.	All vehicular servicing activities except for those normally performed at fuel pumps shall be performed within completely enclosed buildings.

f.	Fuel pumps shall not interfere with parking spaces or internal circulation and shall be located at least thirty (30) feet from all parking areas.

g.	A minimum width of two hundred and fifty (250) feet at the building setback line is required.

h.	No vehicular service station or parking garage shall be permitted where any gasoline or oil pump, or oil draining pit or visible appliance for any such purpose is located within twenty-five (25) feet of any street right-of­ way line.

Commercial or Recreational Vehicle Parking 5.661	Prohibited in R-Zones.
 
Off-Street parking of Tractor-Trailers shall be prohibited in all
residential zones; provided, further, that there shall not be more than one
(1)	cab per dwelling unit on any zone lot and that such cab shall be
 
owned or operated by the resident of such dwelling unit.
b.	Commercial machinery and equipment
c.	Buses


5.662	Truck/Trailer Parking in Commercial Zones

a.	Trucks/trailers, accessory to a principal use, awaiting loading or unloading, may be stored on the same zone lot as the principal use to which they are accessory if waiting to be loaded or unloaded; provided, however, that such trucks/trailers may not be stored on such sites for a period of more than seven (7) consecutive days. Such trucks, if they require a wait of more than 24 hours may only be stored for such periods beyond 24 hours if they are stored in designated C-3 zones in areas not less than 200 feet distant from any public right-of-way.
b.	The use of trucks/trailers, containers and similar facilities as a
warehouse, for future display and/or future sale shall be permitted only in manufacturing zones or in enclosed structures in a C-3 zone as set forth
in Section 4.810 hereof.
c.	The materials that are permitted to be stored in such containers shall be subject to the same limitations as specified for self-storage buildings in Section 5.950 hereof.

 
5.663
 
Truck/Tractor-Trailer  Storage Areas


a.	Any tractor trailer which shall be parked for more than 24 continuous hours on any parcel in a C-3 Zone, shall be set back from any right-of­ way line a distance of not less than 200 feet.
b.	The materials that are permitted to be stored shall be subject to the same limitations as specified for self-storage buildings in Section 5.922.
 


5.700	SERVICES, GENERAL

 
5.710








5.720
 
Animal Hospitals, Kennels, Pounds and Similar Uses

In any zone district where permitted, no such use shall be located closer than one hundred (100) feet to any	R-District, restaurant, or hotel, and shall show that
adequate measures and controls shall be taken to prevent offensive noise and odor. No
incineration of refuse shall be permitted on the premises. Animals in Residence Districts
No animals other than customary household pets shall be kept in residence districts. Household pets shall be limited to a maximum of four (4) per family in R-Districts and shall not include ponies or horses or any animals suitable for human consumption.
 







 
 
5.730










5.740
 
Cemetery. Crematory, Mausoleum

Any of these uses shall provide entrance on a street or road with ingress and egress so	(
designed as to minimize traffic congestion, and shall provide a minimum six (6) foot high fence, evergreen or evergreen type hedges or shrubs, at intervals of not more than six (6) feet, or provide a minimum twenty (20) feet of permanently maintained· planting strip on all property lines abutting any R-District or residential street.

Mortuaries

Mortuaries may be permitted as a special exception in those zone districts where they are enumerated in Article 3, hereof, provided that all required parking is made available; the outward appearance of the building does not detract from the residential area where it may be proposed; and it is to be located on a street where the collection and movement of vehicles participating in a funeral procession will not adversely affect the major or secondary vehicular circulation pattern of the community.
 


5.800	SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS AND MISCELLANEOUS USES

5.810	Special Exceptions


Special Exceptions, as enumerated in Article 3, shall be permitted only upon authorization by the Zoning Hearing Board. The Board may refer such applications to the Planning Commission for their review and recommendations. Approval of such uses shall be authorized only if they are found to comply with the following requirements and other applicable requirements as set forth in this Ordinance.

a.	That the use is a permitted Special Exception as set forth in Article 3 hereof.

b.	That the use is so designed, located and proposed to be operated that the public health, safety, welfare and convenience will be protected.

c.	That the use will not cause substantial injury to the value of other property in the neighborhood where it is to be located.

d.	That the use shall be compatible with adjoining development and the proposed character of the zone district where it is to be located.

e.	That adequate landscaping and screening is provided as required in Section 4.700 and as otherwise provided herein.

f.	That adequate off-street parking and loading is provided and ingress and egress is so designed as to cause minimum interference with traffic on abutting streets.

g.	That the use conforms with all applicable regulations governing the district where





5-?:5
 
located, except as may otherwise be determined for large-scale development.

 
5.820
 
Miscellaneous Uses


5.821		Conversions, Year-Round Dwellings. Conversion ofresidential structures to provide additional dwelling units shall be permitted only in R-2 and R-3 and Districts, provided that:

a.	The minimum lot area per dwelling shall be as required for the zone district where the zone lot to be converted shall be located.

b.	Where such conversion is undertaken there shall be provided on the same zone lot parking space in accordance with the provisions of Section
5.600 hereof

c.	Such structure shall contain not less than 1,700 square feet ofliving space and no dwelling unit therein shall contain less than 850 square feet ofliving space.

d.	Every dwelling unit shall have two (2) means of egress in case of fire.
Ingress and egress shall not be permitted through another dwelling unit.

5.822		Non-Dwelling Structures. Non-dwelling  structures maybe converted to other non-dwelling structures which shall be of equal or greater restrictiveness than the use being converted.  No non-dwelling structure having plate glass windows shall, however, be converted to a residential use unless such windows are removed from the structure; and, no such building which has already been converted shall be further converted to provide for additional dwelling units unless the plate glass windows are removed.

5.823		Radio and Television Towers, Masts and Aerials.  Such uses shall be subject to all applicable criteria for the approval of Special Exceptions, Section 5.810 hereof and all applicable regulations of the F.C.C. and other applicable Federal and State Regulating Body as evidenced by their approval of all plans thereof.

5.824.	Telecommunications Facilities

a.	Conditions That Apply to the Location of all Telecommunications Towers and Telecommunications Facilitv Buildings

1.	All applications for the location of Telecommunications Towers and Telecommunications Facility Buildings are subject to the requirements of the Taylor Borough Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, and are subject to the Site Plan Review by the Planing Commission and Approval by the Borough Council.






5-3LP
 
2.	The Telecommunications  tower shall be designed and constructed to all applicable standards of the American National  Standards
Institute, ANSI/EIA-222-E manual, as amended.
3.	A soil report complying with the standards of Appendix I, Geotechnical Investigations, ANSI/EIA-222-E manual, as amended, shall be submitted to the Borough to document and verify design specifications of the foundation for the Telecommunications Tower, and anchors for the guy wires if used.

4.	Telecommunications Towers shall be designed to withstand wind gusts of at least 100 miles per hour.

5.	A Telecommunications Tower may not be located on a lot that is listed on a historic register or in an officially designated state or federal historic district.

6.	The applicant for the placement of a Telecommunications Tower shall be required to submit to the Borough evidence of the need for the Telecommunications Tower and that the applicant has exhausted all alternatives to constructing a Telecommunications Tower. Applicants are required to prove need by:

(a)	Demonstrating via written evidence that, in terms oflocation and construction, there are no existing towers, Telecommunications  Towers, buildings, structures, elevated tanks or similar uses able to provide the platform for the Telecommunications Antenna; and,

(b)	Providing evidence, including coverage diagrams and technical reports, demonstrating that co-location on existing Telecommunications  Towers is not technically possible in order to serve the desired need.  Co-location is not possible if:

(I)	Planned equipment would exceed the structural capacity of existing Telecommunications  Towers within the Borough, considering existing and planned use of those Telecommunications Towers, and existing Telecommunications  Towers cannot be reinforced to accommodate planned or equivalent equipment at a reasonable cost; or

(2)	Planned equipment will cause radio frequency (RF) interference with other existing or planned  equipment for the Telecommunications  Tower, and the interference cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost; or





5-37
 
(3)	Existing or approved Telecommunications Towers do not have the space on which planned equipment can be placed so it can function effectively and at least in parity with other similar equipment in place or planned; or

(4)	Other reasons make it impractical to place the equipment planned by the applicant on existing and approved Telecommunications  Towers.

7.	Telecommunications Towers shall be no closer than five hundred
(500) feet from another Telecommunications Tower, nor less than 500 feet from a Residential zone or a residential structure.

8.	Telecommunications Towers shall be subject to a minimum setback from all overhead electric transmissions lines of a distance equaling the height of the tower.

9.	The applicant shall present documentation that the· Telecommunications Tower is designed in accordance with all applicable state and federal regulations.  Except as required by the Federal Aviation Administration, or other Federal or state agencies, no Telecommunications Tower may use artificial lighting or strobe lighting at night.

10.	An applicant for a Zoning Permit for a Telecommunications Tower must execute an agreement with the Borough, in a form legally sufficient to the Borough, requiring the removal of the Telecommunications Tower within one (1) year after the Telecommunications Tower ceases to function as such.

.  11.  Except when located on the roof of a building, a security fence, of not less than eight (8) feet, and no greater than ten (10) feet, shall completely enclose the Telecommunications  Tower.  A fence of not less than eight (8) feet and no greater than ten (10) feet shall also completely enclose the anchored locations of guy wires, if used. This fencing shall be constructed of chain link fencing.

12.	Except when located on the roof of a building, the applicant shall submit a landscaping plan. Sites in which Telecommunications towers are located shall be required to comply with the following landscaping  requirements:

(a)	Landscaping and planting of an approved design shall be provided for a depth often (10) feet along all public rights-of­ way abutting the lot where the Telecommunications Tower is






S-3<l
 
located. This requirement may be waived by the Zoning Hearing Board, provided that there is existing acceptable vegetation along the public rights-of-way abutting the lot.

(b)	Landscaping, consisting of trees and shrubs, shall be required at the perimeter of the security fences and the Telecommunications Facility Building.  Evergreen trees often (10) feet height at planting, and growth of a minimum of fifty (50) feet at maturity, shall be planted a maximum of fifteen (15) feet from each other around the perimeter of the security fence. Areas between the trees shall be interspersed with approved shrubbery planting of a height of not less than five (5) feet.

(c)	Landscaping, consisting of approved evergreen trees often (10) feet height of planting, at a maximum of fifteen (15) feet from each other shall be required along all property lines abutting an existing residence, school, park or church. This requirement may be waived by the Zoning Hearing Board provided the abutting property owner(s) submit in writing to the Borough that they are waiving their right to this landscaping, or the Zoning Hearing Board may waive this requirement ifthere is existing acceptable vegetation along the property lines.

13.	A minimum of two (2) parking spaces shall be required.  Spaces shall meet the applicable requirements of Section 5.610 hereof.

14.	Telecommunications Towers shall be fully automated and unattended on a daily basis.  The site shall be visited only for periodic maintenance.

15.	The Telecommunications Facility Buildings shall be identified as an Accessory Buildings, and the applicable regulations for the host zoning district shall apply.

16.	Guy wires, if utilized, must be anchored no closer than twenty-five
(25) feet from any property line. Guy wires shall not cross or encroach any overhead telephone or electric power lines.

17.	Tower height shall be measured from the top of the foundation to the top point of the tower or the top point of the Telecommunications Antenna, whichever is higher.

18.	Internal access to the Telecommunications tower shall be provided by a minimum twelve (12) foot width cartway with a durable and dustless surface, such as concrete or a bituminous concrete surface for a minimum of fifty (50) feet from any public or private street.





5-39
 
The length of the cartway beyond this fifty feet shall, at a minimum, be surfaced with a durable and dustless gravel surface. The vehicular access to the Telecommunications Tower and Telecommunications Facility Building, shall, whenever feasible, be provided along existing circulation driveways.

19.	Setbacks: Telecommunications Towers shall be required to be set back from adjacent property lines a minimum of one and one-half (1.5) times the height of the Telecommunications Tower.  Such distance shall be measured in a straight line from the Telecommunications Tower to the property line.  This setback shall be increased if a zoning district with a higher setback requirement abuts the property in which the Telecommunications Tower is located.  In that situation, the largest setback requirement shall apply.

20.	A Telecommunications Tower shall be no higher than one hundred seventy five (175) feet.

21.	There shall be no more than one Telecommunications Tower on one lot.

b.	Conditions on the Location and Placement of Telecommunications Antennas

Telecommunications Antennas may be attached to any nomesidential building or structure that is a permitted use in the district, including but not limited to, a church, a municipal or govermnental building or facility, a building owned by a utility, or a Telecommunications Tower. Subdivision and Land Development Review is not required by the Planning Commission or the Governing Body for the location of Telecommunications Antennas on a building.  The following conditions shall be met:

1.	No more than one (1) Telecommunications Antenna may be attached to any nomesidential building as a Permitted Use.  A permit for one
(1)	Telecommunications Antenna on one building may be issued by the Zoning Officer after a review of the requirements stated in this Section.

2.	The location of two (2) or more Telecommunications antennas on any nomesidential building shall be considered as a Special Exception.  There shall be a minimum distance equal to the height of the Telecommunications Antenna located on a nomesidential
building and the location of any additional Telecommunications Antennas.





5-40
 

3.	The location of one (1) or more Telecommunications Antennas on any non-occupied structure, such as a Telecommunications Tower, a water tank, or an observation tower shall be considered as a	
	Principal Permitted Use. Permit(s) for Telecommunications	
	Antenna on non-occupied structures may be issued by the Zoning	
	Officer after a review of the requirements stated in this Section.	
	Subdivision and Land Development Review is not required by the	
	Planning Commission or the Borough Council for the location of	
	Telecommunications Antenna on a non-occupied structure.	

4.	
Height Limits: No telecommunications antennae shall exceed a	
	height of twenty (20) feet above the structure or building to which it	
	is attached.	

5.	
The top point height of any Telecommunications Antennas located	
	on a Telecommunications Tower shall not exceed the height	
	requirements for Telecommunications Towers stated in this	
	Ordinance.	

6.	
Setback: Telecommunications Antennas located on buildings and	
	structures shall be required to be set back from all property lines a	
	minimum of the front yard setback requirement of the host district
plus the height of the Telecommunications Antenoa.	
i

c.	Telecommunications Towers and Telecommunications Antennas that are Related to the Operations of a Principal Use on the Same Lot

The following regulations shall apply to Telecommunications Towers and Telecommunications Antennas that are related to the operations of a principal use in any zoning district:

1.	No subdivision ofland shall be required for the placement of a Telecommunications Tower on any lot where the use of that Telecommunications tower relates to the operations of a principal use on that lot.

2.	Telecommunications Antennas located on any building or structure where the use of that Telecommunications Antenna relates to the operations of a principal use on that building or structure shall be considered as Principal Permitted Uses in all zoning districts where they are authorized, and shall not require Site Plan and Land Development Approval from the Governing Body.

d.	Exclusion of television and radio towers from height regulations




54\
 
The height regulations prescribed herein shall not apply to church spires, belfries, monuments, tanks, water and fire towers, stage towers or scenery lofts, cooling towers, ornamental towers, and spires, chimneys, silos, elevator bulkheads, smokestacks, conveyors and flagpoles, except where the height of such structures will constitute a hazard to safe landing and takeoff of aircraft at an established airport.

e.	Telecommunications Facilities, Residential


1.	Punmse. The following regulations governing antennae are designed to protect the aesthetic environment of the vicinity where they are to be located as well as to protect the public health, safety and welfare. The provisions of this Section 5.824 shall not apply to a T.V. Satellite Dish Antennae and Other Antennae having a diameter of 36 inches or less.

2.	Permit Requirements. A special Satellite Reception Permit shall be required only for specific situations described below in Sections 5.824e.3. and 5.824e.4.

3.	Allowed Locations.   In C-districts and M-districts they shall be allowed anywhere on the site or on the building.   In R-districts they shall be limited to the rear yard.   Ifthe applicant adequately documents that reception is infeasible in the rear yard they may be located in any side yard.  If, however, reception is infeasible in either of these areas, they may be located on the roof of the building to which they are appurtenant.   Ifthey are to be located on the roof of the building, a special Satellite Reception Permit shall be required as specified in Section 5.824e.2. hereof.

4.	Size and Height. InC-districts and M-districts, there shall be no restrictions regarding their size or height. In all R-districts, however, except as otherwise provided herein, they shall not exceed a diameter of 12 feet or a height of20 feet. However, where such height and/or size restrictions preclude the
feasibility of reception, these dimensions may be exceeded, but
a special Satellite Reception Permit shall be required.

5.	Additional Requirements

(a)	Except in a C-district or M-district, satellite television antennas shall be located and designed (to the extent reasonably feasible) to reduce visual impact on surrounding properties.





 
 
(b)	Antennae shall meet all manufacturers' specifications, be of non-combustible and corrosive-resistant material, and be erected in a secure, wind-resistant manner.

(c)	Every antenna must be adequately grounded for protection against a direct strike oflightning.

(d)	Every Antenna, except those on roofs, shall be effectively screened from the adjoining premises and/or public right­ of-way.
5.825	Adult Entertainment

Adult Businesses/Regulated Uses. Adult Businesses are permitted only as a Special Exception Use only in the C-3 zone district.

(1)	Legislative Findings. In adopting these standards which apply to adult businesses, the Borough Council has made the following findings in regard to the secondary effects on the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Danville Borough. The findings are based on evidence concerning the adverse secondary effects of adult uses on the community presented in hearings and in reports made available to the Borough Council, and on findings incorporated in the cases of City of Renton v. Playtime Theaters, Inc., 475 U.S.41 (1986), Young. v. American Mini
Theaters, 426 U.S. 50 (I 976), and Northend Cinema. Inc., v. Seattle, 585
P. 2d 1153 (Wash. 1978), and in re: appeal of Bucks, Bass and Balls Inc .. d/b/a LaDolce Vita from the Deemed Denial by the Zoning Hearing
Board of Springbrook Township in the Court of Common Pleas of
Lackawanna County, Civil Action - Law No. 97-CV-5379 and 100 Lackawanna Jurist 223 (1999), and City of Erie, et al v. Pap's A.M. TDBA "Kandyland" (Slip Opinion - Supreme Court of the United States) No. 98-1161 decided March 29, 2000, and on studies in other communities including, but not limited to, Phoenix, Arizona; Minneapolis, Minnesota; Saint Paul, Minnesota; Manatee County, Florida; Houston, Texas; Indianapolis, Indiana; Amarillo, Texas; Los Angeles, California; Austin Texas; Seattle, Washington; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma; Beaumont, Texas; and New York City, New York; and also on findings found in the Report of the Attorney General's Working
Group on the Regulation of Sexually Oriented Businesses, June 6, 1989,
State of Minnesota.

The June 6, 1989 Report of the Attorney General's Working Group on the Regulation of Sexually Oriented Businesses from the State of Minnesota, and the November 1994, City of New York Adult Entertainment Study, each summarize a number of studies from around the country as follows:





5-46
 
Minneapolis
X		The effects of sexually oriented businesses on the crime rate index is positive.
X	There is a close association between adult businesses, crime rates, and low housing values.

St. Paul
X		A significant correlation exists between the location of adult businesses and neighborhood deterioration.

Indianapolis
X		Real estate appraisers overwhelmingly (80%) felt that an adult bookstore would have a negative effect on residential property values within one block of the site.
X		71% believed there would be a detrimental effect on commercial property values in the one- block radius.
X		Major crimes such as criminal homicide, rape, robbery, assault, burglary, and larceny, occurred at a rate 23% higher in areas with adult businesses.
X	The sex related crime rate, including rape, indecent exposure, and child molestation, was 77% higher is such areas .

Phoenix
X	Property crimes were 43% higher in areas with adult businesses. X	The sex crime rate was 500% higher in those areas.

Whittier, California
X	Higher occupancy turnover rates were documented in commercial and residential areas adjacent to adult businesses.
X	Numerous reports of excessive noise, drunkenness and pornographic litter associated with adult businesses were identified.

The Minnesota Working Group concluded that a comprehensive approach is required to reduce or eliminate  the impacts of sexually oriented businesses. Zoning and  licensing regulations are needed to protect  residents from  the intrusion of  "combat zone" sexual crime and harassment into their neighborhoods. 1

The New York City study concluded that numerous studies in other locations found that adult entertainment uses have negative secondary impacts such as increased crime rates, depreciation of property values.

1Report of the Attorney General's Working Group on the Regulation of Sexually Oriented Businesses, State of Minnesota, June 6. 1 989, p. 2.





 
 























































67.
 
deterioration of community character and the quality of urban life.2

Municipalities typically allow adult uses in heavy commercial and	(
industrial districts. The New York City study reported that:

A study in the Town of Islip, NY formed the basis of zoning regulations that allow adult uses only in Industrial I Districts by special exception.

The Indianapolis, Indiana study recommended that adult uses should be allowed only by special exception in commercial districts oriented beyond a neighborhood. and not within 500feet of a residential. school,
church, or park property line, or historic area.3

A study conducted by the Manatee County, Florida, Planning and Development Department recommended that adult uses be limited to commercial locations at least 500feet from a residential district and 2, 000feet from churches. schools, child carefacilities and public recreation areas.4

The ordinance adopted in 1992 by Jackson, Mississippi, limits topless bars and other adult businesses to areas zoned for light industrial uses and requires distances ranging from 250 to l ,000 feet from residential uses and commercial facilities.

Regulations in many Long Island, New York, communities attempt to protect residential and commercial areas by allowing adult uses only in low-visibility Industrial districts.5

Recent events and alleged criminal activity at an adult business in a nearby community document that secondary effects of adult businesses can affect rural areas as well as urban areas. (Hip Hop Club, Hamlin, Pa.)

The concern over sexually transmitted diseases is a legitimate health concern of Danville Borough which demands reasonable regulation of adult businesses and adult uses in order to protect the health and well­ being of the citizens.


2Adult Entertainment Study. Department of City Planning. City of New York, November 1994. p.



31bid., p. 5.

41bid., p. 8

5 lbid., p. 9





5-4S-
 
Certain employees of sexually oriented business regulated by this Ordinance as adult theaters and cabarets engage in higher incidents of
(	certain  types  of  sexually oriented  behavior  at these businesses  than
employees of other establishments.


Sexual acts, including masturbation, and oral and anal sex, occur at sexually oriented businesses, including adult book stores, adult novelty shops, adult video stores, adult motion picture theaters, or adult arcades, and especially those which provide private or semiprivate booths or cubicles for viewing films, videos, or live sex shows.  Offering and providing such space, encourages such activities, which create unhealthy conditions. Numerous studies and reports have determined that semen is found in the areas of sexually oriented businesses where persons view "adult" oriented films.

Persons frequent certain adult theaters, adult arcades, and other sexually oriented businesses for the purpose of engaging in sex within the premises of such sexually oriented businesses.  At least fifty (50) communicable diseases may be spread by activities occurring in sexually oriented businesses, including, but not limited to, syphilis, gonorrhea, human immunodeficiency virus infection (AIDS), genital herpes, hepatitis B, non B amebiasis, salmonella infections and shigella infections; and, the incidence of many of these diseases is on the mcrease.

Sanitary conditions in some sexually oriented businesses are unhealthy, in part, because the activities conducted there are unhealthy, and, in part, because of the unregulated nature of the activities and the failure of the owners and the operators of the facilities to self-regulate those activities and maintain those facilities.

Classifying adult businesses as Special Exception Uses is a reasonable means of accountability to ensure that operators of adult businesses comply with reasonable regulations and conditions, and to ensure that operators do not knowingly allow their establishments to be used as places of illegal sexual activity or solicitation.

There is convincing documented evidence that adult businesses, because of their very nature, have a deleterious effect on both the existing businesses around them and the surrounding residential areas adjacent to them, causing increased crime, the downgrading of property values, and the decline of the overall character of the community.  A number of municipal studies, including the 1986 Austin, Texas study, have demonstrated this.

It is generally recognized that adult businesses, due to their nature, have





S-t..tto
 
serious objectionable operational characteristics, Particularly when they are located in close proximity to each other, thereby contributing to neighborhood blight and downgrading the quality of life in the adjacent area. A number of municipal studies, including the 1986 Austin, Texas study, have demonstrated this.

The Borough Council desires to minimize and control these adverse secondary effects and thereby protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizenry, protect the citizens from increased crime, preserve the quality oflife, preserve property values and the character of the surrounding community.

Based on the zoning principal established by the courts that all legitimate uses must be permitted somewhere in the community, adult uses should be permitted. Nevertheless,  such uses must be regulated in terms of time, place and manner. In other words, the location and outward operation should be regulated, while remaining "content neutral" in terms of free speech protected by the First Amendment.

Specific standards for setbacks, visibility and signs must be included to protect adjoining residential, educational and other uses from the negative secondary impacts of any adult use.

(2)	Intent
(

It is the intent of this Section 5.825 (2) to:

(a)	Regulate adult business in order to promote the pubic health, safety and welfare by minimizing the secondary effects on the community which are associated with such businesses, and which include
· difficulties  for Jaw  enforcement,  trash  disposal,  deleterious  effects
on business and residential property values, increased crime (particularly the corruption of morals of minors and prostitution).

(b)	Prevent the concentration of regulated uses in order to minimize the secondary effects of such uses.

(c)	Designate a zoning district where adult businesses are permitted, and establish reasonable, content-neutral standards applicable to such uses.

(d)	Have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials including sexually oriented or adult materials.

(e)	Not totally restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented





5-41
 
materials or adult materials protected by the First Amendment of the Bill of Rights of the U.S. Constitution
(
(f)	Not deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market.

(g)	Not condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material, or to encourage any violation of the PA Crime Code or PA Obscenity Code.

(3)	Special Exception Use in the C-3 District

Adult businesses are classified as Special Exception Uses in the C-3 Commercial District, which provides a suitable area for the development of such uses away from areas with concentrated residential development.

(4)	Definitions

(a)	Adult Arcade. Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or token-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five (5) or fewer persons per machine
at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished
or characterized by the depicting or describing of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas". An "Adult Arcade" shall be considered a "Regulated Use" for the purpose of this Ordinance.

(b)	Adult Bookstore. Adult Novelty Store or Adult Video Store: An establishment having a substantial part of its business, offering for sale or rental for any form of consideration, any one or more of the following: books, magazines, and other periodicals or other printed matter or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, or video reproductions, slides or other visual representations which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or related to "specified sexual activities", or "specified anatomical areas," or instruments, devices or paraphernalia which
are designed for use in connection with "specified sexual activities,"
or an establishment with a segment or section devoted to the sale or display of such material, where that segment or section exceeds an area of I 0% of the sales space in such an establishment or 50 square feet, whichever is greater.

The term Adult Bookstore shall include but not be limited to an Adult Video Store, and all such uses shall be considered a "Regulated Use" for the purpose of this Ordinance.





5-'-1i
 
(c)	Adult Business/Regulated Use. All of the following shall be considered "Adult Businesses/Regulated Uses":

(i)	The use of a building or land for a business which has obscene materials as a substantial or significant portion of its stock-in­ trade.

(ii)	The use of a building or land for a business which involves the sale, lease, trade, gift or display of drug paraphernalia as a substantial or significant portion of its stock-in-trade.

(iii)	Any nightclub, bar, restaurant, arcade, theater, or any other establishment that conducts live performances as part of its business that are characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by specified sexual activities", or films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions in which a substantial portion of the total presentation time is devoted to the showing of material that is characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas", or where any "specified sexual activities" are conducted for economic gain or any other form of consideration.

(iv)	Any of the following as defined herein:

1.	adult arcade
2.	adult bookstore or adult video store
3.	adult live entertainment use or facility
4.	adult motel
5.	adult motion picture theater
6.	adult theater
7.	cabaret
8.	Drug paraphernalia stores
9.	escort agency
10.	massage parlor
11.	nude model studio
12.	sexual encounter center



(d)	Adult Live Entertainment Use or Facility: A commercial use (including, but not limited to a use selling food or beverages) including live entertainment involving:

(i)	Persons (which may include, but is not limited to, waiters, waitresses, contractors, dancers, clerks, bartenders or others)





 
 
appearing in a state of nudity; or,


(ii)	Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or simulated or actual "specified sexual activities";" or,

(iii)	Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"

An "Adult Live Entertainment Use or Facility" shall be considered an "Adult Business" for the purpose of this Ordinance.

(e)	Adult Motel: A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which:

(i)	Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration and as part of the consideration provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; or

(ii)	Offers sleeping rooms for rent three (3) or more times in one calendar day.

An "Adult Motel" shall be considered an "Adult Business" for the purpose of this Ordinance.

(f)	Adult Motion Picture Theater: A commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas "

An "Adult Motion Picture Theater" shall be considered an "Adult Business" for the purpose of this Ordinance.

(g)	Adult Theater: A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment which regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity or in live performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or "specified sexual activities".  An "Adult Theater" shall be considered an "Adult Business" for the purpose of this Ordinance.





5 50
 
(h)	Cabaret. An adult club, restaurant, theater, hall or similar place
which features topless dancers, go-go dancers, exotic dancers,	( strippers, male or female impersonators or similar entertainers
exhibiting specified anatomical areas or performing specified sexual
activities.


(i)	Drug Paraphernalia:   Any objects, devices, instruments, apparatus or contrivances, whose primary and traditionally exclusive use is involved with the illegal use of any and all controlled substances under Pennsylvania Law.

G)		Drug paraphernalia stores. Any retail store selling paraphernalia commonly related to the use of any drug or narcotic of which the sale, use or possession of is subject to the provisions of "The Controlled Substance Drug, Device and Cosmetic Act", 1972, April 14, P.L. 233, No. 64, 51 et seq., 35 P.S. Section 780-101 et seq., including but not limited to, water pipes, pipe "screens", hashish pipes, "roach clips", "coke" spoons, "bongs" and cigarette rolling paper, except that this shall not be deemed to include the sale of cigarette rolling papers by a store that also sells loose tobacco or the sale by prescription of implements needed for the use of prescribed drugs or narcotics.

(k)	Escort: A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another person.

(1)	Escort Agency: A person or business association or establishment which furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business purposes for a fee, tip, or other consideration.

(m)	Massage: The performance of manipulative exercises using hands and/or a mechanical or bathing device on a person(s)'s skin other than the face or neck by another person(s) that is related to certain monetary compensation, and which does not involve persons who are related to each other by blood, adoption, marriage or official guardianship.

(n)	Massage Parlor: A person or business association or establishment which furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish as one of its primary business purposes for a fee, tip, or other consideration a massage which involves the exposure of any "specified anatomical areas" or the conduct of any "specified sexual activities", except





5-Sl
 
where such service is provided by a certified masseur/masseuse.

(o)	Nude Model Studio: Any place where a person who appears in a state of nudity exhibiting "specified anatomical areas" is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration.

(p)	Nudity or a State of Nudity The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering or the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering or any portion thereof below the top of the areolae.

(q)	Obscene Materials: Any literature, book, magazine, pamphlet, newspaper, paper, comic book, drawing, photograph, figure, image, motion picture, video tape, sound recording, article, instrument or any other written or recorded matter which depicts or describes any "specified anatomical areas" and/or "specified sexual activities".

(r)	Sexual Encounter Center: A business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its primary business purposes, offers for any form of consideration:

(i)	Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite sex;

(ii)	Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or semi-nude.

A "Sexual Encounter Center" shall be considered an "Adult Business" for the purpose of this Ordinance.

(s)	Specified Anatomical Areas: Any of the following:

(i)	Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areolae.



(ii)	Human male genitals in a discemable turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.

(t)	Specified Sexual Activities: Any of the following:

(i)	The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic




s--sa
 
region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts.

(ii)	Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy.

(iii)	Masturbation, actual or simulated.

(iv)	Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in Subsections "a", "b" and "c" of this definition.

(5)	Standards In addition to the other applicable provisions hereof, the following standards shall  apply to adult businesses:

(a)	No regulated use shall be permitted within three thousand (3,000) feet of any other existing regulated use; and/or,

(b)	No regulated use shall be permitted within five hundred (500) feet of any	establishment that sells alcoholic beverages; and/or,

(c)	No regulated use shall be permitted within five hundred (500) feet of any residentially zoned district, or any of the following residentially related uses:

(i)	Group care facility

(ii)  Commercial enterprises catering primarily to persons under 18 years of age

(iii) Churches, chapels, convents, rectories, religious article or religious apparel stores;

(iv)	Schools, up to and including the twelfth (12th) grade, and their adjunct play areas;

(v)	Public recreational facilities, and public libraries;

(vi)	All other public buildings and offices.




(d)	For the purposes of this section, spacing distances shall be measured as follows:

(i)	From all property lines of any "regulated use" in Section (4) (c) above;





 
 
(ii)	From the outward line or boundary of all residential zoning districts;

(iii)	From all property lines of any uses identified in 5.825 (5) (a) through 5.825 (5) (c) above.

(e)	Enlargement - Any enlargement or expansion of an existing, legally created adult business shall be considered a Special Exception Use subject to the provisions of this Section 5.825 and all other applicable standards of this Zoning Ordinance.

(f)	Limit of One (1) Use - It shall be a violation of this Ordinance for any person to cause or permit: the operation, establishment, or maintenance of more than one (1) adult business in the same building, structure or portion thereof, or an increase of floor area of any adult business in any building, structure, or portion thereof that contains another adult business.

(g)	Nonconformity - Any adult business lawfully operating on the date of enactment of this Ordinance that is in violation of any of the provisions of this Section 5.825 shall be deemed a nonconforming use.  Such nonconforming uses shall be increased, enlarged, altered or extended, only in accord with Article 7. Nonconformances, and all other applicable standards of this Ordinance.  The use may be changed to a conforming use.  However, under no circumstances shall a nonconforming use as regulated by Article 7 hereof be changed to any type of adult business without applying for such change of use as a Special Exception.

(h)	Change of Use -Whenever an existing regulated use is proposed to be changed to another permitted regulated use, the applicant shall request  consideration as another regulated use in accordance with the procedures set forth herein for such special exceptions.

(i)	Location of New Neighboring Uses - An adult business lawfully operating as a conforming use shall not be rendered a
nonconforming use if, subsequent to the grant of a Special Exception
permit, a use from which an adult business is required to provide a
setback under this Section 5.825 is developed within the required setback distance.  Any additions or expansions of the adult business use shall comply with all setbacks required by this Section 5.825.

G)	Alcohol - No adult business shall be operated in combination with the sale and/or consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises.






 
 
(k)	No regulated use shall permit the admission of minors to their regulated business establishment, and the sale of regulated services or materials to minors is also prohibited.

(1)	No regulated use shall operate between the hours of2 A.M. and 8
A.M. from Monday to  Friday, nor between the hours of 3 A.M. and 8 A.M. on Saturdays, nor between the hours of 3 A.M. and noon on Sundays.

(m)	Exemption for Modeling Class: It is a defense to prosecution under this Section 5.825 that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated:

(i)	By a proprietary school, licensed by the State, or an academically accredited college or university;

(ii)	By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior  college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation;

 
























5.830
 
(iii)	In a structure -
1)	which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure
and no other advertising that indicates a nude person is	I
\
available for viewing; and
2)	where, in order to participate in a class, a student must enroll at least three (3) days in advance of the class; and
3)	where no more than one (1) nude model is on the premises
at any one time; or

(iv)	By an organization which qualifies under Section 501(c)(3) of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code as a non-profit organization or foundation.

(6)  Signs and Other Visible Messages. All regulated uses shall be permitted signs and visible messages based on the allowable sign area of the zoning district in which they are located; provided:

Home Occupations

Permitted home occupations operated in any dwelling unit may be operated only if it complies with all of the following conditions:

5.831		Where Permitted.  Within a single dwelling unit, or in a building or other structure accessory to a dwelling unit and only by the owner-occupant thereof with not more than two (2) additional persons (including family members)




S-55"
 
employed in the home occupation; provided, however, that the total number of persons employed in the home occupation shall not exceed four (4) regardless of their place of residence.

5.832		Evidence of Use.  Does not display or create outside the building any evidence of the home occupation, except that one (1) unanimated, non­ illuminated sign having an area of not more than two (2) square feet shall be permitted on each street front of the zone lot on which the building is situated.

5.833		Extent of Use.  Does not include more than one (1) home occupation; and does not utilize more than twenty (20%) percent of the gross floor area of the dwelling unit (except foster family care), and except that professional offices may utilize not more than fifty (50%) percent of the gross floor area of the dwelling unit.

5.834	Permitted Uses.  Includes not more than one (1) of the following uses:

a.	Professional offices in accordance with provisions of Section 5.610 for off-street parking.

b.	Rooming and/or boarding of not more than two (2) persons, except that the rooming and/or boarding of diseased or mentally ill persons is prohibited.  Adequate off-street parking shall be provided pursuant to Section 5.610 hereof.

c.	Custom dressmaking, tailoring, millinery.

d.	Foster family care (for not more than four (4) children simultaneously).

e.	Commercial photography and other similar uses.

f.	Barber shop and beauty parlor other than a tanning salon with not more than 1 non-resident employee.  Adequate off-street parking shall be provided pursuant to Section 5.610 hereof.

g.	Tutoring for not more than four (4) students simultaneously.  Provided that the sound produced is not audible at any property line.  It is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling unit for residential purposes.

h.	Catering, mail order and other similar uses which would not have an adverse effect on the residential neighborhood where they are located; and, provided further that said uses shall be subject to the provisions of Sections 5.831, 5.832, 5.833 and 5.610 hereof.







b -s lo
 
1.	Licensed family day care home for four (4), five (5) or six (6) non­ resident children; and no non-resident employees shall be permitted. Such use shall have a minimum lot area of 10,000 sq. ft. except where a greater area is required.

j.	No-impact home businesses in accordance with Act 247 as amended.

k.	Massage therapists provided that all therapists shall have national certification.

 
5.840






































5.850
 
Outdoor Storage Areas

Such uses shall not abut existing residential development, a residential  street or any
R-District and the operation thereof shall be governed by the following provisions and any other conditions as may be required by the Zoning Hearing Board to protect the public health, safety, comfort, convenience, and general welfare and especially with regard to abutting properties and the occupants thereof.

5.841		Inflammables and Explosives. No highly inflanunable or explosive liquids, solids or gases shall be stored in bulk above ground, except as permitted by state and federal regulations. Tanks or drums of fuel directly connecting with heating devices or appliances located on the same premises as the tanks or drums of fuel are excluded from this provision.
5.842		Fencing and Setbacks. All outdoor storage facilities shall be enclosed by a fence or wall adequate to conceal such facilities and the contents thereof from adjacent property. Such walls and fences shall be distant not less than 10 feet from any property line and shall be distant not less than 25 feet from any public street.

5.843		Deposit of Wastes. No materials or wastes shall be deposited on any premises in such form or manner that they may be transferred off such premises by natural causes or forces.

5.844		Other Hazardous Materials. All materials or wastes which might cause fumes or dust or which constitute a fire hazard or which may be edible by or otherwise be attractive to rodents or insects shall be stored outdoors only in closed containers.




Signs may be erected, reconstructed and maintained only when in compliance with the following provisions and the Building Code of the Borough of Taylor.

5.851		Signs in Residential, Conservation and Institutional Districts. The following types of non-illuminated, non-advertising signs are permitted in all Residential Districts as follows:
 






 
 
a.	Nameplates  and Identification  Signs


I.	Signs indicating the name or address of the occupant, or a permitted home occupation, provided that they shall not be larger than two (2) square feet in area. Only one such sign per dwelling unit shall be permitted except in the case of comer lots where two such signs (one facing each street) shall be permitted for each dwelling unit.

2.		For buildings other than dwellings a single identification sign not exceeding six (6) square feet in area and indicating only the name and address of the building and the name of the management may be displayed, provided that on a comer lot two such signs (one facing each street) shall be permitted.

b.	Sale or Rental Signs. Signs advertising the sale or rental of the premises upon which they are erected by the owner or broker or any other person interested in the sale or rental of such premises, and signs bearing the word "sold" or "rented" with the name of persons effecting the sale or rental may be erected or maintained, provided:

1.	The size of any such sign is not in excess of six (6) square feet; and


2.	Not more than one (1) sign is placed upon any property unless such property fronts upon more than one street, in which event one (1) more sign may be erected on each additional frontage.

c.	Institutional Signs. Signs of schools, colleges, churches, hospitals, sanatoria, or other institutions of a similar public or semi-public nature may be erected and maintained, provided:

1.	The size of any such sign is not in excess of 20 square feet; and

2.	Not more than one (1) such sign is placed on a property, unless such property fronts upon more than one street, in which event two such signs may be erected, one on each frontage.

d.	Signs Accessory to Parking Areas. Signs designating entrances or exits to or from a parking area and limited to one sign for each such exit or entrance and to a maximum size of two (2) square feet each shall be permitted for each direction of traffic flow. One sign per parking area designating the conditions of use and identity of such parking area and limited to a maximum size of nine (9) square feet shall be permitted, provided that on a comer lot two such signs shall be permitted, one facing each street.







 
 

e.	Development Signs.  Signs advertising the sale or development of the	
	premises upon which they are erected, when erected in connection with	
	the development of the premises by a builder, contractor, developer, or	(
	other persons interested in such sale or development, may be erected and maintained, provided:	

1.	The size of any sign is not in excess of 20 sq. ft.

2.	Not more than two (2) signs are placed upon any property, unless such property fronts upon more than one street, in which event two
(2) such signs may be erected on such frontage; and

3.	Any such signs except signs identifying the development shall be removed by the developer within thirty (30) days of the final sale of property.

f.	Directional Signs. Signs indicating the location and direction of
premises available for or in process of development, but not erected upon such premises, and having inscribed thereon the name of the owner, developer, builder, or agent, may be erected and maintained, provided:

1.	The size of any such sign is not in excess of six (6) square feet, and not in excess of four (4) feet in length; and

2.	Not more than one such sign is erected on each five hundred (500)	(
feet of street frontage.

g.	Artisans' Signs. Signs of mechanics, painters, and other artisans may be erected and maintained during the period such persons are performing work on the premises on which such signs are erected, provided:

1.	The size thereof is not in excess of twelve (12) square feet; and

2.	Such signs are removed promptly upon completion of the work.



h.	Private Driveways. Signs indicating the private nature of a driveway, or trespassing sign, provided that the size of any such sign shall not exceed two (2) square feet.

1.	Height and Projection of Signs. No sign in an R-District shall project into the public way or project higher than one story or twenty (20) feet, whichever is lower.

5.852		Signs in "C", "S" and "M" Districts.  Business signs shall be permitted as follows:





5-5'1'
 
a.	Size of Signs. (Detached). No detached sign shall have a gross surface of more than 100 sq. ft. in any "C" District or "M" District.

b.	Size of Signs. (Attached). No attached sign shall have a gross surface area in excess of 20 percent of the building side on which it is attached.

c.	Location of Signs. In any C-1, C-2, or C-2A District, all signs shall be securely attached to a building.  Inother "C", "S" and "M" Districts no free standing signs shall be nearer to any property line than the height of such sign, but in no case less than twenty (20) feet.

d.	Illumination of Signs. Flashing signs and revolving illuminated signs shall be considered as a Special Exception permitted in M-Districts provided that such signs shall not create any traffic hazard, or abut or face any residential property or any residential zone lot. Stationary illuminated signs are permitted in "C", "S" and "M" Districts only.

5.853		Outdoor Advertising. Outdoor advertisements (billboards) are permitted in all non-residential districts.


a.	No outdoor advertisement shall be permitted within two hundred (200) feet of any residence district, nor facing any public or parochial school, library, church, hospital or similar institutional use, if closer than two hundred (200) feet.

b.	No two outdoor advertisements shall be located closer to one another
than one-thousand (1000) feet. Double outdoor advertising signs shall be treated as a single sign regarding this restriction governing the minimum distance between signs.

c.	Outdoor advertisements shall conform with all yard spaces required for the district in which they are located.

d.	The total surface area of any outdoor advertisements, exclusive of structural supports, and trim, shall not exceed, in square feet, four times the frontage of the lot or tract on which it or they stand, nor shall any individual billboard exceed 672 sq. ft.

e.	No outdoor advertising sign shall be nearer to any property line than the height of such sign, but in no case less than 25 feet.

5.854		General Regulations. The following regulations shall apply to all permitted signs:

a.	Maintenance.  Signs shall be constructed of durable materials,






 
 




b.	maintained in good condition and not allowed to become dilapidated.

Wall Signs.  Display signs placed against the exterior walls of buildings	


(
	or structures shall not extend more than 15 inches out from the wall
surface. Wall signs exceeding forty (40) square feet in area shall be of non-combustible material.	

c.	
Projecting Signs.  Attached signs shall not project from any building	
	more than three (3) feet in the direction of a public street or public walk­	
	way area nor shall any such sign extend over a public street or walk-way	
	area.  A clear space of not less than ten (10) feet shall be provided below	
	all parts of projecting signs. Projecting signs exceeding forty (40) square	
	feet in area shall be made of non-combustible material.	

d.	
Height of Signs.  No sign except a free-standing sign shall be higher than	
	the building on which such sign is located nor shall any sign be located	
	upon the roof of any building except as otherwise provided in Section	
	5.532(h). No such free-standing sign shall extend more than thirty (30)
feet above the mean ground level where it is located.	

e.	
Permits (Building} for Signs. Building Permits shall be required for all	
	signs except signs provided for in Subsection 5.832 and other accessory	
	residential signs. For signs in the interest of the public information and	
	convenience, the Zoning Officer, upon approval by the Zoning Hearing	
	Board, may issue a temporary permit for a period to be designated by the	
	said Board. Such temporary signs shall be removed by the property	
	owner at the termination of any permit for the erection thereof.	

f.	
Fees.  No fee shall be charged for any permit connected with the erection	
	of a sign necessary to the public welfare.	

g.	
Portable Signs. Portable signs are prohibited from being placed in a public right-of-way and from being placed within a clear-sight triangle.	

 
5.860
 
Temporary Uses

5.861	Temporary Tract Office. Tract Sign. Model Home.  Such temporary use in any district shall be located on the property to which it is appurtenant and it shall be limited to a six (6) month period at the expiration of which time the applicant may request a further extension of time.  Otherwise such temporary use shall be removed at the expense of the owner.

5.862	Other Temporary Uses

a.	Twes of Other Temporary Uses. Temporary uses, other than "sidewalk sales" and those specified in Section 5.861 hereof, shall be permitted






5-1..,{
 
only as Special Exceptions and may include such uses as a circus, carnival, bazaar, concert, and other special exhibits, as well as the removal of culm banks and other waste deposits.

b.	Time Limitation on Permits.  Except for tract offices, tract signs, model homes, and the removal of culm banks and other waste deposits, no temporary permits shall be issued for a period of more than thirty (30) consecutive days.  For events of one (1) to two (2) day duration the permit shall be limited accordingly.   Such limitation shall not, however, preclude the applicant from securing additional temporary permit renewals not to exceed a period of thirty (30) days covered by any such temporary permit; provided, however, that no temporary uses shall be permitted for more than sixty (60) days during any calendar year. Application  shall be filed with the Borough Council not less than one (!) month prior to the regular meeting of the Borough Council at which approval shall be considered.

c.	Condition of Site of Temporary Event. Upon the termination of the temporary event, the applicant shall restore the site to its original condition with 24 hours of termination.

d.	Other Conditions


(1)	The applicant shall provide the Borough Council with evidence of adequate liability insurance in an amount to be determined by the Borough on a case-by-case basis, as well as evidence of adequate resources to assure the safety of the participants and the surrounding area.

(2)	Provide  bathroom  facilities

. (3)  Provide a site plan showing location ofstructure(s), parking layout, and ingress and egress.

(4)  Provide one (1) or more container(s) adequate for trash removal

e.	Any use which involves a structure such as a temporary tent shall conform with all other Borough codes and ordinances such as applicable BOCA codes.

f.	Temporary uses which involve a structure on a fixed site shall provide evidence of a Highway Occupancy Permit for any site located on a State Highway.

g.	Additional Requirements. The Borough Council may establish additional requirements related to the terms and conditions, and the






 
 
duration of each such temporary use on a case-by-case basis as needed to protect the public health, safety and welfare.

 
5.870











5.880
 
Heliports

Heliports may be permitted, including the construction of runways and landing pads, provided that plans for such construction shall be approved by the Federal Aviation Administration and that such construction will not interfere with the comprehensive plan for the area which may be affected by it, nor create any hazards or inconvenience in presently developed areas. Except in the event of an emergency, helicopter landings shall be permitted only at approved heliports.

Mobile Home Parks

Mobile homes shall be permitted  only in mobile home parks which meet the requirements of this section.

a.	No mobile home park shall have an area ofless than ten (10) acres.

b.	Each mobile home site or space within the park shall have a minimum area of 5,000 sq. ft. provided further that the minimum width of each site shall be not less than fifty (50) feet.

c.	No mobile home shall be located within ten (10) feet of its respective site lines,	(
provided further that there shall be no less than a twenty-five (25) foot clearance
between mobile homes and any non-accessory building within the park.
 

d.	No mobile home shall be located closer to any property line of the park or any abutting public street than thirty (30) feet or such greater distance as may be established by this Ordinance with respect to conventional buildings in the District where the mobile home park is located.

e.	Not less than ten (10%) percent of the gross area of the park shall be improved for the recreational use of the residents of the park.

f.	All service and accessory buildings shall meet the requirements of this Ordinance and all other applicable codes and ordinances.

g.	The park shall meet all applicable requirements of the Municipality's Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.

 
5.890
 
Flood Plain Conservation District 5.891	Declaration of Specific Intent
The Intent of this Section is to:
 





 
 
A.	promote the general health, welfare, and safety of the community;

B.	reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its governmental units and its individuals by preventing excessive development in areas subject to periodic flooding;


C.	minimize danger to public health by protecting water supply and natural drainage;

D.	and, promote responsible floodproofing measures within the Flood Plain Conservation District.

5.892	Special Definitions

A.	The "Flood Plain" is defined as:

1.	a relatively flat or low land area adjoining a river, stream or watercourse which is subject to partial or complete inundation;

2.	an area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.

B.	The "Floodway" is defined as the designated area of a flood plain required to carry and discharge flood waters of a given magnitude;

C.	The "Flood Waters of the one hundred year frequency" is defined as the waters of a flood that, on the average, is likely to occur once every 100 years (i.e. that has a one (1%) percent chance of occurring each year;

D.	Substantial Improvement - Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement.  This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed.  The term does not, however, include either:

(1)	Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of State or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or

(2)	Any alteration of an "historic structure," provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an "historic structure."





 
 
5.893	Establishment of the Flood Plain Conservation District


The Flood Plain Conservation District shall be deemed an overlay. This district shall include all areas subject to inundation by flood waters of the one hundred (100) year frequency. The source of this delineation shall be the 100 year flood plain map, prepared by the Federal Insurance Administration as administered by the Department of Housing and Urban Development.

5.894	Change in the Flood Plain Conservation District

The delineation of the Flood Plain Conservation District boundaries, may be revised and modified by the Planning Commission where they are changed through natural or other causes, or where changes can be validated by further detailed engineering studies employing on-site survey techniques as approved or recommended by the Federal Insurance Administration as administered by the Department of Housing and Urban Development.

5.895	Permitted Uses and Activities

A.	In the Flood Plain Conservation District, the development and/or use of any land shall be permitted provided that the development, substantial improvement and/or use adheres to all the requirements of the underlying zone. In addition, all development or substantial improvement in this district shall adhere to the flood-proofing provisions stipulated in the BOCA Basic Building Code of 1970, as amended, and the Municipality's Flood Protection Ordinance.

B.		In the floodway, no modification, alteration, repair, or new construction of buildings, structures, fill or any combination of these shall be permitted which would impair its ability to carry and discharge flood waters or increase the water surface elevation of the one hundred (100) year flood more than one (1) foot, except where the effect on flood heights is fully offset by stream improvements. The "Floodway" shall be that area delineated in the 100 year flood plain map prepared by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.

5.896	Uses by Special Exception

In addition, the following uses may be permitted in the Flood Plain Conservation District as a special exception when authority by the Zoning Hearing Board is given and after review by the Planning Commission.

A.	Dams, culverts and bridges approved by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Department of Environmental Protection.






 
 
B.	hnpoundment basins.

C.	Storm sewers. However, flap gates shall be provided on all storm water outfalls where an area or portion thereof is susceptible to backflooding.

D.	Other uses similar to the above, provided the effect is not to alter substantially the cross-sectional profile of the stream basin at the point of the proposed construction or use.

5.897	Special Regulations

A.	In case of any dispute concerning the boundaries of a Flood Plain Conservation District, an initial determination shall be made by the Zoning Officer.

B.	Any party aggrieved by a decision of the Zoning Officer as to the boundaries of the Flood Plain Conservation District, which may include the grounds that the said data referred to therein is or has become incorrect because of changes due to natural or other causes may appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board.  The burden of proof in such appeal shall be on the appellant.

C.	The Flood Plain Conservation District shall be deemed an overlay on any Zoning District now or hereafter applicable to any lot.  Should the Flood Plain Conservation District be declared inapplicable to any tract by
reason of action by (I) the Taylor Borough Council in amending this;
and/or (2) the Zoning Hearing Board, or any court of competent jurisdiction in interpreting the same; and/or (3) any court of competent jurisdiction in determining the legal effect of the same; the zoning applicable to such lot shall be deemed to be the District in which it is located without consideration of this Article.

5.898	Municipal Liability

The grant of a zoning permit or approval of a subdivision plan in the Flood Plain Conservation District shall not constitute a representation, guarantee, or warranty of any kind by the municipality or by any official or employee thereof of the practicability or safety of the proposed use, and shall create no liability upon the municipality, its officials or employees.



5.900	OTHER USES REQUIRING SPECIAL REGULATIONS

5.910	Settling Ponds and Reservoirs

Ifthe contents of settling ponds is poisonous, toxic or caustic, the settling pond must




5- lo
 
be fenced by a six (6) foot fence of cyclone fencing or tighter; ifthe contents emit noxious fumes, suitable ventilation controls must be exercised to prevent air pollution in accordance with Article 6 hereof. Such fences shall be maintained in good condition by the owner of the subject property.

 
5.920













5.930














5.940
 
Race Tracks


All tracks for motor driven vehicles including automobiles, go-carts, motorcycles, motor-scooters, dune buggies and the like shall be located a minimum of one-half mile from any Residential District.

The Zoning Hearing Board shall consider the noise factor and require noise deadening devices, or other means, to prevent the noise from becoming objectionable to surrounding areas.

Sanitary Landfills and Staging Areas


Sanitary landfills shall only be permitted as a conditional use in accordance with all applicable regulations contained in this ordinance governing conditional uses as well
as all regulations contained herein governing earth-moving activities and all applicable State and Federal regulations. Staging areas required in conjunction with sanitary landfills shall only be operated within the confines of a licensed sanitary landfill site, but in no event shall such staging area be distant less than 1000 feet from any Residential Zone. Staging areas shall be screened from public view in accordance with Section 4.720 hereof.

Drug Rehabilitation Facilities and Drug Treatment Centers

a.	Notwithstanding  any other provision oflaw to the contrary and except as provided in subsection 5.940b. hereof, a methadone treatment facility shall not be established or operated within 500 feet of an existing school, public playground, public park, residential housing area, child-care facility, church, meetinghouse or other actual place of regularly stated religious worship established prior to the proposed methadone treatment facility.
The provisions of this subsection shall apply whether or not an occupancy permit
has been issued to the owner or operator of a methadone treatment facility for a location that is within 500 feet of an existing school, public playground, public park, residential housing area, child-care facility, church, meetinghouse or other actual place of regularly stated religious worship established prior to the proposed methadone  treatment.

b.	Notwithstanding subsection 5.940a. hereof, a methadone treatment facility may be established and operated closer than 500 feet of an existing school, public playground, public park, residential housing area, child-care facility, church, meetinghouse or other actual place of regularly stated religious worship
established prior to the proposed methadone treatment  facility if, by majority vote,





5-t..1
 
the governing body votes in favor of the issuance of an occupancy permit prior to the governing body voting on whether to approve the issuance of an occupancy permit or certificate of use for a methadone treatment facility at a location that is closer than 500 feet of an existing school, place of regularly stated religious worship established prior to the proposed methadone treatment facility, one or more public hearings regarding the proposed methadone treatment facility
location shall be held within the municipality following public notice. All owners of real property located within 500 feet of the proposed location shall be provided written notice of said public hearings at least 30 days prior to said public hearings occurring.

c.	This section shall not apply to a methadone treatment facility that is licensed by the Pennsylvania Department of Health prior to May 15, 1999.

d.	Applicants for such facilities shall include, in lieu of the environmental assessment required under Section 5.240 hereof, the following:

I.	Description of nature and condition of persons to be treated.

2.	Description of operational procedures, relating to intake procedures, need for the overnight stay of persons to be treated, residential facilities to be used to house such persons if not on the premises, and other related pertinent information.

3.	Information on capacity of the facility in terms of the number of employees, by function, and the number of persons who may be treated on a daily basis.

4.	A traffic study indicating the number of vehicles to be generated, the adequacy of existing roadways to accommodate such traffic volumes, and methods to be used to expand such capacity where needed.

5.	Operational plan for security, including description of precautions to be taken to assure the safety and the security of residents of the Borough and its environs.

e.	As used in this section, the term "methadone treatment facility" shall mean a facility licensed by the Pennsylvania Department of Health to use the drug methadone in the treatment, maintenance or detoxification of persons.

 
5.950
 
Storage Areas

5.951	Storage of Hazardous Materials

Hazardous materials shall be those specified in Sections 5.840 and 5.952 and Article 11 hereof. In order to be authorized to store such materials, approval must be secured from D.E.P., and all containers must be labeled for spill,
 





 
 
hazard, trash permit, and danger-if-in-contact.

5.952	Self Storage Buildings	(


a.	Prohibited Materials.  Storage of the following hazardous materials is prohibited:

1)	Inflammable solids
2)	Oxidizing materials
3)	Highly toxic materials
4)	Radio-active materials
5)	Potentially explosive materials
6)	Pesticides or insecticides
7)	Corrosive liquid

b.	Records Requirements.  It shall be the responsibility of the owner to ascertain that the identified hazardous materials are not stored on the subject premises.  This shall be accomplished by the owner securing an affidavit from the tenant attesting to the fact that such materials are not being stored in the tenant's rented space. A copy of said affidavit shall be retained on the premises by the owner and a copy shall be submitted to the Borough's Zoning Officer and to the Fire Chief.

5.960   Bottle Clubs

Bottle Clubs are permitted as Special Exception Uses in C-3 Districts and shall not be permitted in any other District.

5.961  No Bottle Club shall be located within 500 feet of the following:

a.	Places of worship, primary or secondary schools
b.	Commercial enterprises catering primarily to persons under 18 years of age.
c.	A public library
d.	A child care facility or nursery school; and/or
e.	A public park.
5.962  No Bottle Club shall operate between the hours of2:00 A.M. to 8:00 A.M. 5.963  Limit of Use.  It shall be a violation of this ordinance for any person to cause or
permit the operation, establishment or maintenance of more than one (1) Bottle
Club in the same building, structure or portion thereof. 5.970  Dance Halls and Dance Clubs
Dance Halls and Dance Clubs are permitted as Special Exception Uses in C-3 Districts and shall not be permitted in any other District.

5.971  No Dance Hall or Dance Club shall be located within 500 feet of the following:





 
 
a.
b.
(	c.
d.
e.
 
Places of worship, primary or secondary schools
Commercial enterprises catering primarily to persons under 18 years of age. A public library
A child care facility or nursery school; and/or A public park.
 

5.972  No Dance Hall or Dance Club shall operate between the hours of2:00 A.M. to 8:00 A.M.

5.973 Limit of Use. It shall be a violation of this ordinance for any person to cause or permit the operation, establishment or maintenance of more than one (I) Dance Hall or Dance Club in the same building, structure or portion thereof.

	Wind Farms and Windmills

	Pumose

A.	The purpose of these regulations is to enable the Borough to regulate wind farms within the Borough, to encourage the siting of wind farms in nonresidential areas, to address the safety, visual and aesthetic aspects of such facilities, and to provide for public input in the process of siting wind farms.

B.	The Borough Council has determined that such regulation is needed to protect schools, parks, churches, playgrounds,  sites, and
structures; to preserve scenic areas; to minimize aesthetic impacts; to preserve the health and safety of residents; and to respect the need of wind farm developers to provide for suitable sites, while not unreasonably limiting competition among them.

C.	The Borough Council declares that the protection of residential dwellings is of paramount importance and that any local regulations of wind farms must furnish all possible protection for residential areas and further declares that these regulations are to be interpreted to favor protection of residential dwellings. The Borough shall, before issuing a permit for any wind farms affecting a dwelling, satisfy itself that all other alternatives have been exhausted.

	Location; Applicability, Exemption

A.	Wind farms shall be permitted only as Conditional Uses in the S-3 zone(s)

B.	In addition to the requirements of this Ordinance wind farms shall be subject to all other applicable local, state and federal requirements

C.	A windmill accessory to a principal structure which is sized and intended to be used to generate electricity primarily for the principal structure to which it is accessory shall be permitted in all zones as a Special Exception on a parcel of not less than one (1) acre.

D.	On-site transmission  and power lines between wind turbines shall, to the






 
 
maximum extent possible, be placed underground.



	Permit; Procedure; Fees; Temporary Permit

A.	Permits: - A zoning permit as well as a building permit shall be required for every wind farm and each individual windmill installed at any location in the Borough ..

B.	Procedure: Hearing- In accordance with the procedures for Conditional Uses, as provided herein, the Borough Council shall refer all such applications to the Borough Planning Commission for their review and comment, and shall conduct a hearing pursuant to public notice within forty-five (45) days after the submission of a formal, complete application,
including such technical information from the applicant as may be required by this Ordinance. Accessory windmills shall be reviewed and approved by the Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with the procedures for Special Exceptions

1.	The hearing notice shall indicate that the application may be examined and that further information is available at the Borough Secretary's office during regular business hours.

2.	The Borough Council shall approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove the application under the provisions of this ordinance within sixty (60) days after a hearing.

3.	The period in which the Borough Council shall take action may be extended with the written consent of the applicant.

C.	Planning Commission Review-. Planning Commission comments, if any, shall be provided to the Borough Council within thirty (30) days of the Commission's receipt of the application.

D.	Application Fees; Review Fees - The applicant shall pay the application fee for the wind farm and each windmill as established by resolution of the Borough Council. In addition, the applicant shall pay all professional costs incurred by the Borough for review of structural, radio frequency and other technical aspects of the proposal and shall deposit with the Borough an amount deemed adequate by the Borough Council to cover the anticipated costs. Ifthe review costs exceed the deposit, an additional assessment shall be made. Ifthe deposit exceeds the cost, the balance shall be returned to the applicant. No approval shall become effective until all costs have been paid by the applicant.

E.	Temporary Permit for Site Evaluation - The Borough may issue a temporary permit for the erection of a tower and necessary equipment on a site to determine if it has adequate wind for cost-effective wind farm development. The requirements of this Ordinance shall apply to such structures; however, the Borough Council may waive those requirements which are not
applicable to the temporary facility or which are not necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare.






S-71
 
	Site Plan; Information Requirements; Notice; Consent

A.	Land Development and Site Plan - A full site plan shall be required for all wind farm sites showing all information required to determine compliance with this Ordinance. New windmills and/or the construction of any equipment building or other roofed structure which have a combined gross floor area of greater than one hundred (100) square feet shall be considered a land development subject to the Borough's Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.

B.	Information Requirements - For all proposed wind farms, in addition to the information required by other Borough Ordinances, the following minimum information shall be provided. Items 10 through 14 shall be included in a report prepared by a registered professional engineer or other professional deemed qualified by the Borough. The Borough shall require any additional information deemed necessary to determine compliance with this
Ordinance.

 
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

8.

9.
10.



11.
12.


13.
14.
15.

16.
17.
18.
19.
 

Name and address of the IJroperty owner and the applicant. Address, lot and block andlor parcel number of the property. Name and address of person preparing the plan.
Size of the property and the location of all lot lines.
Approximate location of nearest residential structure. Approximate location of nearest occupied structure.
Loc'!tiov of all structures on the property which is the subject of the apphcat10n.
Location, size and height of all proposed and existing antennas and all appurtenant structures on the property.
Type, size and location of all proposed landscaping and fences.
A report by a Pennsylvania registered and licensed professional engineer, documentmg compliance with applicable structural standards
!llld des9ribing the general structural capacity of any proposed mstallation.
The number and type of windmills and other structures IJroposed. A description of the proposed windmills and all related fixtures,
structures, a11purtenances and apparatus, including height above grade, materials, color and lighting.
A description of the noise generated by the windmills.
The make, model and manufacturer of any proposed windmill.
A visual analysis of the wind farm as seen from public viewing points
in the Borough.
Wind speed maps
Maps of migratory bird routes
Information on the bat population in the area Generator capacity of the turbines
 

C.	Existing and Planned Facilities - The applicant shall provide details about the location, height and operational characteristics of all existing facilities of the applicant in and immediately adjacent to the Borough. The applicant
shall also provide a five-year plan for the provision of additional facilities in
and immediately adjacent to the Borough showing proposed general
locations or areas in which additional facilities are planned. Subsequent
applications shall confirm or modify the facility service plan, so that the
Borough will be kept up to date on future activities.







 
 

D.	Operational Compliance - Within ninety (90) days of operating any wind farm, the owner or operator shall submit to the Borough a written certification by a Pennsylvania registered and licensed professional that the wind farm complies with this ordinance and all other applicable government regulations.

E.	Change in Ownership/Operation - Ifthe name or address of the owner or operator of the wind farm is changed, the Borough shall be notified of the change within ninety (90) days.

F.	Associated Uses - All other uses ancillary to the wind farm (including a business office, maintenance depot, vehicle storage, etc.) are prohibited
from the wind farm site, unless otherwise permitted by Borough ordinances. This shall not prohibit the installation, as accessory structures, of equipment containers not intended for human occupancy to house only equipment necessary for the operation of the wind farm.

	Requirements Applicable to All Wind Farms and Windmills

The following requirements shall apply to all wind farms and windmills:

A.	Location Requirement and Number - The Applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Borough, using technological evidence, that the wind farm and windmills must go where proposed in order to function to industry standards. The generator capacity of the turbines

B.	Windmill Height Design

1.	Minimum Height - The applicant shall demonstrate that the windmills are constructed to a height no greater than the minimum required to function to industry standards. The wind farm shall comply with any applicable Airport Hazard Zoning Ordinance.

2.	Blade Height - The minimum height between any windmill blade and the ground shall not be less than thirty (30) feet.

3.	Visual Impact - The applicant shall provide to the Borough graphic information that accurately portrays the visual impact of the proposed wind farm and individual windmills from various vantage points selected by the Borough, such as, but not limited to key roads  and recreation areas. This graphic information may be provided in the
form of photographs or computer-generated images with the windmills superimposed, as may be required by the Borough. The Borough may require the applicant to conduct a balloon test to confirm the visual impact. The Borough may require specific colors, consistent with applicable federal regulations, to ensure that the wind farm is compatible with the surrounding landscape.

4.	Controls and Braking. All wind energy facilities shall be equipped with a redundant braking system. This includes both aerodynamic overspeed controls  (including variable pitch, tip, and similar systems) and mechanical brakes. Mechanical brakes shall be operated in a fail-





 
 

safe mode. Stall regulation shall not be considered a sufficient braking system for overspeed protection.

5.	Climb Protection/Locks.

a.	Wind turbines shall not be climbable up to fifteen (15) feet above ground surface.

b.	All access doors to wind turbines and electrical equipment shall be locked or fenced, as appropriate, to prevent entry by non-authorized persons.

6.	Noise and Shadow Flicker

a.	Audible sound from a wind energy facility shall not exceed 55 dBA, as measured at the exterior of any occupied building on a non-participating landowner's property. Minimum standards for measurement shall be in accordance with "Procedures for Measurement and Reporting of Acoustic Emissions from Turbine Generation Systems, Volume 1: First Tier."

b.	The facility owner and operator shall make reasonable efforts to minimize shadow flicker to any occupied building on a non­ participating landowner's property.

7.	Signal Interference The applicant shall make reasonable efforts to to avoid any disruption or loss of radio, telephone, television, or similar signals, and shall mitigate any harm caused by the wind energy facility.

C.	Setbacks - The following minimum setbacks shall apply.

1.	Separate Parcel- Ifthe parcel on which the wind farm is a separate and distinct parcel, the required minimum lot size shall apply; and, in all cases, the lot shall be of such size that all required setbacks are satisfied.

2.	Lease. License or Easement - Ifthe land on which the wind farm is leased, or is used by license or easement, the setback for any windmill, the support structure, equipment containers, other accessory
structures, and guy wire anchors shall be a minimum of thirty (30) feet from the line of lease, license or easement. In any case, no windmill,
including the blades, shall be located closer to any property line (not lease, license or easement line) than its height plus thirty (30) feet.

3.	Setbacks from Occupied Buildings

a.	Wind turbines shall be set back from the nearest occupied building a distance not less than the required setback for the zone district, or 1.1 times the  turbine height, whichever is greater. The setback distance shall be measured from the center
of the wind turbine base to the nearest point on the foundation of
the occupied building.





 
 
b.	Wind turbines shall be set back from the nearest occupied building located on a non- participating landowner's property a
distance of not less than five (5) times the Hub height, as	(
measured from the center of the wind turbine base to the nearest point on the foundation of the occupied building.

4.	RESERVED

5.	Setback From Property Lines. All wind turbines shall be set back from the nearest property line a distance of not less than the normal setback requirement of the zone where it is located  or 1.1 times the turbine height, whichever is greater, as measured to the center of the wind turbine base.

D.	Access: Travel Route: Road Bond

!.		Access to the wind farm shall be provided by means of a public street or easement to a public street. All access easements shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet in width and shall be improved to a width of at least ten (10) feet with a durable, dust-free, all weather surface. No access easement shall exceed a grade of fifteen (15) percent.


2.	The applicant shall provide a route of travel plan detailing which roads through the Borough will be used to access the wind farm during construction and for any maintenance activities requiring the use of heavy trucks.

3.	The Borough may require a bond, letter of credit or other financial	( guarantee to ensure that any damage to Borough roads caused by the construction or operation of the wind farm is repaired at the cost of the person causing such damage. The amount of the bond shall be based
on the extent of the operation, the Borough roads used by the operation and the recommendation of the Borough Engineer, and the
term and form of the bond shall be approved by the Borough Solicitor.

E	Parking: - Ifthe wind farm site is fully automated, adequate parking shall be required for maintenance workers. Ifthe site is not automated, the number
of required parking spaces shall be equal to the number of people on the largest shift.

F	Structure Safety - The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed windmills are safe and the surrounding areas will not be negatively affected by structure failure, falling ice or other debris, electromagnetic fields, or radio frequency interference. All windmills shall be fitted with anti­ climbing devices, as approved by manufacturers. The applicant shall submit certification from a Pennsylvania Registered Professional Engineer that all windmills will be designed and constructed in accord with accepted engineering practices and all requirements of any applicable construction code. Within forty-five (45) days of initial operation, the owner and/or operator of the wind farm shall provide a certification from a Pennsylvania Registered Professional Engineer that the wind farm and all structures comply with all applicable regulations.

G	Wind Farm as a Second Principal Use - A wind farm shall be permitted on a



5-7
 
property with an existing use subject to the following standards:

1.	The minimum lot area, minimum setbacks and maximum height required by this Ordinance for the wind farm and support structure shall apply; and, the land remaining for accommodation of the existing principal use(s) on the lot shall also continue to comply with the minimum lot area, density and other requirements.

2.	The vehicular access to the wind farm shall, whenever feasible, be provided along the circulation driveways of the existing use.

3.	The applicant shall present documentation that the owner of the property has granted an easement filed of record or other legal interest for the land for the proposed facility and that vehicular access is provided to the facility.

H	Licenses: Other Regulations - The applicant shall demonstrate that the required permits and licenses from the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission, and other agencies have been obtained. The applicant shall also document compliance with all applicable state and federal regulations by providing to the Borough with copies of all required documents, studies, and responses (e.g., National Environmental Policy Act, Pennsylvania Natural Diversity Index submission, Pennsylvania Historical and Museum Commission compliance.)

I	Insurance - The applicant shall submit a Certificate of Insurance evidencing general liability coverage in the minimum amount of $2,000,000 per occurrence and property damage coverage in the minimum amount of
$2,000,000 per occurrence covering the wind farm and all its facilities. The applicant shall provide the Borough with proof of annual renewal prior to expiration.

J	Discontinued Use -Ifthe use of any wind farm and/or windmill is discontinued, the owner or operator or then owner of the land on which the wind farm and/or windmill is located shall be required to remove the same within ninety (90) days from the abandonment of use. Failure to do so shall authorize the Borough to remove the facility, including foundations to a minimum of four (4) feet below grade, and assess the cost of removal to the foregoing parties. In addition, at the time of permit issuance for any wind farm the Borough shall require a financial guarantee, in a term, form and amount determined by the Borough Council with the advice of their Solicitor, to guarantee the removal of the wind farm and/or windmill. If such guarantee is inadequate, the Borough shall be authorized to use all means provided in law, including a municipal lien, to recover all costs of removal.

K.		Vibration - No vibration associated with the operation of the wind farm shall be permitted which is detectable without instruments at or beyond the property line; and no use shall generate any vibration which is capable of causing damage to buildings, structures, equipment aligmnent, or structural soundness ..

L.	Signs; Lighting; FAA and P A DOT Notice





 
 
I.	No signs or lights shall be mounted on any windmill except as may be required by this Ordinance, the Federal Aviation Administration, or other governmental agency which has jurisdiction.

2.	No windmill shall be artificially lighted, except as required by the Federal Aviation Administration or for security purposes approved as part of the zoning permit. No approved security light source shall be exposed to the eye except those covered by globes or diffusers so that the lights are fully shielded to project the light below the horizontal plane of the lowest point of the fixture. Other lighting shall be indirect or surrounded by a shade to hide visibility of the light source. No direct or sky-reflected glare, whether from overhead lighting or floodlights shall be permitted.

3.	The applicant shall provide a copy of the response to Notice of Proposed Construction or Alteration forms submitted to the FAA and PA DOT Bureau of Aviation; and, the wind farm and support structure shall comply with all FAA and P A DOT requirements.



M.	Landscaping

I.	Existing vegetation on and around the site shall be preserved to the greatest extent possible.

2.	Landscaping installation and maintenance may be required to screen as much of the windmills as possible, the fence surrounding the support structure, any other ground level features (such as a building), and, in general, buffer the windmills and other structures from neighboring properties and the sight lines from prominent viewing locations.

3.	The Borough Council may permit any combination of existing vegetation, topography, walls, decorative fences or other features instead oflandscaping, if they achieve the same degree of screening as the required landscaping.

N.	Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control; Stormwater Management - All earth disturbance shall comply with the soil erosion and sedimentation control requirements of the Lackawanna County Conservation District and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection; and, no approval shall be granted under this ordinance until the Applicant provides a copy of the approved soil erosion and sedimentation control plan and any required permits. A stormwater control plan and storm water management facilities shall be provided in accord with the Borough's stormwater management  requirements.

0.		Emergency  Services Plan - The applicant  shall provide an emergency services plan covering such services as fire, rescue, and medical emergencies, etc.  At   a minimum, the plan shall include details about any fire suppression system proposed  for any windmill  or structure. The plan shall be provided  to the applicable fire company for review and comment.

Q.	Maintenance: Identification: Notice of Problems - Wind farm maintenance



5-7'7
 
and continued compliance with this Ordinance shall be monitored by the Borough Zoning Officer. There shall be affixed to the windmill or security fence in an accessible, visible place the name and mailing address of the owner(s) and a 24-hour emergency telephone number. This information shall be kept current by the owner(s). The Zoning Officer shall inform the owner(s) of any safety problems, maintenance problems or any matter relative to the wind farm in accordance with the enforcement requirements of this Ordinance, sent to the posted address. Ifthe problem outlined in the letter from the Zoning Officer is not resolved within thirty (30) days of receipt of notice, or within such other period as allowed in writing by the Enforcement Officer, this shall constitute a violation of the Ordinance. An unresolved violation shall constitute grounds for revoking the windmill permit.

R.	Mitigation Plan. The Applicant shall provide, for approval of the Borough, a plan for how complaints about noise, communications interference and vibration will be addressed by the operator of the wind farm
















































 
 

ARTICLE6




PERFORMANCE   STANDARDS




6.100	GENERAL APPLICATION


All existing and proposed permitted uses, special exceptions, and conditional uses and uses accessory thereto, are subject to the following performance standards and procedures.



6.200	PERFORMANCE STANDARDS PROCEDURES

6.210	Prior to Construction and Operation

Any application for a Zoning Permit for a use, which shall be subject to performance standards, shall be accompanied by a sworn statement by the owner(s) of subject property that said use will be operated in accordance with the performance standards set forth herein.

Such application shall further be accompanied by a report prepared by a licensed professional engineer describing the methods or procedures to be undertaken to assure compliance with the Performance Standards specified herein; provided, however, that the Zoning Officer will consider requests for a waiver of this requirement and may waive this requirement for uses which are clearly not considered likely to violate any of the standards set forth herein and any applicable State or Federal standards.

6.220	Continued Compliance

Continued compliance with performance standards is required and enforcement of continued compliance with these performance standards shall be the responsibility of the Zoning Officer.

6.230	Determination of Violation

The Zoning Officer shall investigate any purported violation of performance standards and, if there is reasonable ground for the same, shall initiate the procedures set forth in Section 9.500 hereo£






-l
 
6.300	REGULATION OF NUISANCE ELEMENTS

 
6.310

















6.320
 
Definition of Elements


No land or building in any District shall be operated in such a manner so as to create any dangerous, injurious, noxious, or otherwise objectionable fire,  explosive or other hazard; noise or vibration, smoke, dust, dirt or other form of air pollution; electrical or other disturbance; glare; or other nuisance, condition or element in such amount as to adversely affect the surrounding area or premises (referred to herein as "Dangerous or objectionable elements"); provided that any use permitted by this Ordinance may be undertaken and maintained in any District ifit conforms to the regulations of this Subsection limiting dangerous and objectionable elements at the specified point or points of the determination of
their existence.


Locations Where Determinations Are to be Made for Enforcement of Performance Standards

The determination of the existence of any dangerous and objectionable elements shall be made at:

a.	The point or points where such elements shall be most apparent for fire and explosion hazards, for radioactivity and electrical disturbances, for smoke and other forms of air pollution.

b.	The property lines of the use creating such elements for noise, for vibration, for glare and for odors.
 


6.400	STANDARDS TO BE ENFORCED


6.410	Fire and Explosion Hazards

a.	1n all activities involving, and all storage of, inflammable and explosive materials, the owner or operator of such use shall provide adequate safety devices against the hazard of fire and explosion and adequate firefighting and fire suppression equipment and devices standard in this industry. Burning of waste materials in open fires is prohibited. The relevant provisions of Federal, State, and local laws and regulations shall also apply.

b.	No highly flammable or explosive liquids, solids or gases shall be stored in bulk above the ground except in structures according to Commonwealth and Federal Specifications.







 
 
c.	All outdoor storage facilities for fuel shall be enclosed in accordance with Federal or State Standards by a safety fence to prevent access thereto by unauthorized  individuals.

d.	All materials or wastes which might cause fumes, constitute a fire hazard, or attract rodents or insects may only be stored if enclosed in buildings or containers which are adequate to eliminate such hazards.

e.	No materials, fuels, wastes, or flammable substances may be deposited or stored on a lot in such a manner as to allow them to be transferred off the lot by natural causes or forces. No substances, including but not limited to gasoline, oil, waste oil, and chemicals which can contaminate ground water, a stream or water course or render such ground water, stream or water source unusable or undesirable as a source of water supply, or recreation or which will destroy or damage aquatic life shall be stored in such a location so that it could be introduced into the said ground water, stream or water course by natural causes or forces, or by rupture of storage containers or accidental discharge.

 
6.420







6.430
 
Radioactivity or Electrical Disturbance

No activities shall be permitted which emit dangerous radioactivity or electrical disturbance adversely affecting the operation of any equipment other than that of
the creator of such disturbance.	(
'



a.	At the points of measurement specified in Section 6.320, the maximum sound pressure level radiated in each standard octave band by any use or facility (other than transportation facilities or temporary construction work) shall not exceed the values for octave bands lying within the several frequency limits given in Table III after applying the corrections shown in Table IV. The sound pressure level shall be measured with a Sound Level Meter and associated Octave Band Analyzer conforming to standards prescribed by the American Standards Association.

(American Standard sound Level Meters for Measurement of Noise and Other sounds, 224.3-1944, American Standards Association, Inc., New York, N.Y., and American Standard Specification for an Octave-Band Filter Set for the analysis of Noise and Other Sounds Z24. l 0-1953, or latest approved revision thereof, American Standards Associated, Inc., New York, NY, shall be used.)

b.	Ifa District Magistrate determines that professional analysis is needed to enforce this Section regarding a particular situation, the Zoning Officer may require that the applicant reimburse the Borough for the costs of such analysis.




lo-3
 
c.	The maximum permissible sound level limits set forth in Table III, below shall not apply to any of the following noise sources:

1.	Sound needed to alert people about an emergency.

2.	Repair or installation of utilities or construction of structure, sidewalks or streets between the hours of7:00 A.M. and 9:00 P.M. except for emergency repairs which are not restricted by time.

3.	Household power tools and lawnmowers between the hours of7:00 A.M. and 9:00 P.M.

4.	Motor vehicles operating on a public street or highway.

5.	Public celebrations specifically authorized by Council, County, State or Federal Government Agency or Body.

6.	Routine ringing of bells and chimes by a place of worship or municipal clock.

TABLE III

Octave Band Frequency	Residential District*	Non-Residential
(Hz)	(Decibels)	(Decibels)

>
20	<
75	

69	

78
75	150	67	74
150	300	59	66
300	800	52	59
800	1200	46	53
1200	2400	40	47
2400	4800	34	41
4800		32	39

Ifthe noise is not smooth and continuous and is not radiated between the hours of 10 P.M. and 7 A.M., or if such noise is not radiated on week-ends or legal holidays, one or more corrections in Table N shall be applied to the octave band levels given in Table III.

* In all districts where residential development is allowed.









 
 
TABLEN


 
Type or Location of Operations
 	or Character of Noise 	
 
Correction in Decibels
 

1.	Daytime operation only	5
2.	Noise source operates less than*
a.	20% of any one-hour period	5
b.	5% of any one-hour period	10
3.	Noise of impulsive character, hammering, etc.	-5
4.	Noise of periodic character, hum, screech, etc.	-5
5.	Property is located in an "M" District and is not within 500 feet measured horizontally
or vertically of any R District	10
*Apply one of these corrections only.
 
6.440
 
Vibration
No activity or operation shall produce at any point along the property line continuous earthbome vibrations greater than the maximum displacement as permitted in the following table:
 

	TABLEV	
	
Residential District	
Non-Residential District
Frequency (Hz)	Displacement
(In Inches)	Displacement
(In Inches)

>
0	<
10	

.0004	

.0020
10	20	.0002	.0010
20	30	.0001	.0006
30	40	.0001	.0004
40	50	.0001	.0003
50		.0001	.0002

Discrete pulses that do not exceed I 00 impulses per minute may not produce more than twice the displacement specified in this table.






 
 
6.450
(




















6.460
 

 


a.	No direct or sky-reflected glare, whether from floodlights or from high­ temperature processes such as combustion or welding or otherwise, so as to be visible at the points of measurement  specified in Subsection 6.320.  This restriction shall not apply to signs otherwise permitted by the provisions of this Ordinance.  In no event shall a lighting intensity greater than fifty
hundredths (0.5) footcandle (2.7 lux), measured at grade, be permitted beyond
property lines.


b.	This section shall not apply to street lighting that is owned, and maintained by the Borough or the State.

c.	Flickering - Flashing, flickering or strobe lighting are prohibited, except for non-advertising seasonal lights between October 25 and January 20.

Smoke. Dust, Fumes. Vapor, and Gas Control

The emission of dust, dirt, flyash, fumes, vapors, or gases which cause any  damage to human health, to animals or to vegetation or other forms of property, or which can cause soiling or staining of persons or property at any point beyond the Jot line of the use creating such emission is hereby prohibited.

No activity in any industrial district shall be reactivated, established, modified, constructed, or operated without having obtained valid permits and/or certificates from the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection or its successor agency for airborne emissions. Such proof of compliance shall consist of duplicate copies of such permits and/or certificates for the current time period.  In addition to the requirements of the Department of Environmental Protection or its successor agency, the following requirements shall apply:

a.	Particulate Matter. No use shall exceed the national ambient air quality standards established in the federal Clean Air Act or the requirements of Titles 25 and 35 of the Pennsylvania Code as they are amended and adopted for particulate matter.

b.	Smoke or Steam. No use may emit from a vent, stack, chimney, or combustion process any smoke that exceeds a density or equivalent capacity ofRingelmann No. 1, except that an emission that does not exceed a density of equivalent capacity ofRingelmann No. 2 is permissible for a duration of not more than four minutes during any eight-hour period ifthe source of such emission is not located within 250 feet of a residential district. All measurements shall be taken at the point of emission of the smoke.  [For the purpose of determining the density of equivalent opacity of smoke, the Ringelmann Chart, as adopted and published by the United States Department
 





 
 























6.470







6.480
 
of Interior, Bureau ofMines Information Circular 8333, May 1967, shall be used. The Ringelmann number referred to in this section refers to the number of the area of the Ringelmann Chart that coincides most nearly with the visual density of equivalent opacity of the emission of smoke observed. For example, a reading ofRingelmann No. 1 indicates a 20 percent density of the smoke observed.


c.	Toxic Matter and Hazardous Material.   Emissions of chemicals, gases, components, or elements, listed as being toxic matter or hazardous material by the American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists, the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental  Protection or the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, or their successor agencies, shall not exceed any stated Threshold Limit Value in any industrial district.  No emission of toxic matter shall exceed fifty percent (50%) of the Threshold Limit Value in any adjacent residential or commercial district.

 


No emission shall be permitted of malodorous gases or other malodorous matter in such quantities as to be readily detectable without instruments at the property line of the zone lot from which they are emitted.

Liguid and Solid Wastes
(
No operation shall discharge wastes of any kind into a surface water or a
groundwater source. All methods of waste disposal shall be approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. Such evidence of approval shall be provided.  Such evidence of approval shall be provided to the Borough. The owner of any parcel governed by this ordinance may be required at
the discretion of the Borough to monitor the ground water and surface water in the vicinity of his premises. Water testing shall be conducted at an interval deemed appropriate by the governing body on any stream located on the premises or any stream within five hundred (500) feet of any area used for storage ofliquid or
solid wastes. In addition, the well located on the premises shall also be sampled at an interval to be deemed appropriate by the governing body. The sample shall be collected and analyzed by a certified water analysis laboratory for hydrocarbons or other parameters deemed appropriate by the governing body and
results shall be provided to the Borough.  Ifsamples exceed the limits established
by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, remedial action shall be taken in accordance with this Ordinance.







I
 

6.490	Heat

No activity or use shall produce heat perceptible beyond its property lines and no use shall be permitted that would cause the ambient water temperature, as defined by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, or its successor agency, to rise or fall more than five (5) degrees Fahrenheit (2.8 degrees Celsius) during the ten (10) year, seven (7) day low flow in any natural pond, stream, river, or other watercourse.























































 
 
ARTICLE  7






NONCONFORMING USES AND BUILDINGS





7.100	CONTINUATION OF USE

A use, building or structure lawfully in existence prior to the adoption of this Ordinance, which does not comply with the applicable use provisions of this Ordinance or any applicable amendment thereto may be continued except as otherwise provided in this Article.



7.200	REGULATION OF NONCONFORMING USES

No existing building or premises devoted to a nonconforming use shall be enlarged, extended, reconstructed, substituted, or structurally altered except when changed to a conforming use, or when required to do so by law or order and as follows:

7.210	Restoration	(

Any nonconforming building or structure damaged less than fifty percent (50%) may be restored, reconstructed, or used as before, provided that the volume of such use, building or structure shall not exceed the volume which existed prior to such damage, or as provided under Subsection 7.250 hereof, and that it is completed within one (1) year of such happening, and provided that such restoration shall be in conformity with the requirements of this Ordinance.

7.220	Displacement

A nonconforming use shall not be extended to displace a conforming use.

7.230	Change of Use

a.	A nonconforming use or structure shall not be changed into a use which is permitted in a less restrictive district than the district where the nonconforming use is first permitted.

b.	A nonconforming use may be changed into a conforming use.








 
 
c.	A nonconforming use which is µot permitted in any district or which is permitted only as a special exception may only be changed into a conforming use.


d.	When a nonconforming use shall be changed in accordance with the provisions hereof, the use of the building or other structure or tract of land shall not thereafter be changed again except in accordance with these regulations.

e.	Buildings or structures, regardless of conformity or ownership, shall not be combined for the purpose of extending an existing nonconforming use.

 
7.240






7.250

















7.260
 
Repairs

Normal maintenance, repairs, and incidental alteration of a building or other structure containing a non-conforming use is permitted.

Expansion

A nonconforming  use contained  within  a structure shall be expanded more than 25% of its floor area as it exists at the time of the adoption of the ordinance that created the nonconformance;  and, no nonconforming use that is not enclosed by a structure shall be expanded more than 25% of the land area that it occupies at the time of adoption of such ordinance.   Such use shall not be expanded, however, into a more restrictive district than where it is located; and, such use shall not be permitted  to expand except in accordance with all of the building regulations herein.   Such enlargement must conform to all other regulations of the District where it is situated.  This provision may be used only once for each zone lot.

Prior Approval

Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans, construction, or designated use of a building complying with existing laws, a permit for which had been duly granted and the construction of which shall have been started before the date of adoption of this Ordinance or any applicable amendment thereto, and the ground story framework of which, including the second tier of beams, shall have been completed within six (6) months of the date of the permit, and which entire building shall have been completed, according to such plans as have been filed, within one (I) year of the date of adoption of this Ordinance or any applicable amendment thereto.
 










 
 

7.300	TERMINATION OF NONCONFORMING USES

7.310	Termination

The discontinuance of a nonconforming use for a period of one (1) year and/or the change of use to a more restricted or conforming use for any period of time shall be considered termination and such nonconforming use shall not thereafter be revived.  Intent to resume active operations shall not affect the foregoing.

7.320	Partial Destruction

When fifty percent (50%) or more of the existing floor area or volume of a nonconforming building or structure, or use of land is destroyed by fire, or by other casualty, or Act of God, the use of such building, structure or land as a nonconforming use, building or structure shall thereafter be terminated.



7.400	REGISTRATION OF NONCONFORMING USES

The Zoning Officer may identify and register nonconforming uses and nonconforming structures as provided in Section 613 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247 as amended.



































1-'.::>
 
ARTICLE  8




ZONING HEARING BOARD




8.100	ORGANIZATION AND PROCEDURE

8.110	Establishment

Pursuant to the provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipality Planning Code, Article IX, a Zoning Hearing Board is hereby established.

8.120	Appointment

8.121	Members of the Board shall be residents of the municipality, appointed by resolution of the Governing Body. The Zoning Hearing Board shall consist of five (5) members, one of whom shall be designated to serve until the first day of January following the adoption of the Zoning Ordinance, one until the first day of the second January thereafter, and one until the first day of the third January thereafter, one until the first day of the fourth January thereafter, and one until the first day of the fifth January thereafter.  Their successors shall be appointed on the expiration of their respective terms to serve five (5) years. Members of the Board shall hold no other public office in the municipality.

8.122	Appointment to Fill Vacancies

The Board shall promptly notify the Governing Body of any vacancies which occur. Appointment to fill vacancies shall be for the unexpired term of the member or members whose term or terms bec.ome vacant and such appointments to fill vacancies shall be made in the same manner as the original appointment.

8.123	Removal

Any Board member may be removed for malfeasance, misfeasance or nonfeasance in office or for other just cause by a majority vote of the Governing Body who appointed the member, taken after the member has received fifteen (15) days advance notice of the intent to take such a vote. A hearing shall be held in connection with the vote if the member shall request it in writing.






i- \
 

8.124	Organization of Board


a.	The Board shall elect from its own membership its officers, who shall serve annual terms as such and may succeed themselves.  For the conduct of any hearing and the taking of any action, a quorum shall be not less than a majority of all the members of the Board but the Board may appoint a hearing officer from its own membership to conduct
. any hearing on its behalf and the parties may waive further action by
the Board as provided in Section 8.140. The Board may make, alter and rescind rules and forms for its procedure, consistent with ordinances of the Municipality and laws of the Commonwealth.  The Board shall keep full public records of its business which records shall be the property of the municipality and shall submit a report of its activities to the Governing Body as requested by the Governing Body.

b.	If, by reason of absence or disqualification of a member, a quorum is not reached, the chairman of the board shall designate as many alternate members of the board to sit on the board as may be needed to provide a quorum. Any alternate member of the board shall continue to serve on the board in all proceedings involving the matter or case for which the alternate was initially appointed until the board has
made a final determination of the matter or case. Designation of an alternate pursuant to this Section shall be made on a case-by-case basis in rotation according to declining seniority among all alternates.

8.125	Appointment of Alternate Members

The Governing Body may appoint up to three (3) alternate members of the Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with the provisions of
Section 903(b) of Act 247 as amended.  The term of office of an alternate member shall be three years. When seated pursuant to the provisions of Section 906 of Act 247 as amended, an alternate shall be entitled to participate in all proceedings and discussions of the Board to the same and full extent as provided by law for Board members, including specifically the right to cast a vote as a voting member during the proceedings, and shall have all the powers and duties set forth in this act and as otherwise provided by law. Alternates shall hold no other office in the Municipality, including membership on the Planning Commission and Zoning Officer. Any alternate may participate in any proceeding or discussion of the Board but shall not be entitled to vote as a member of the Board nor be compensated pursuant to Section 907 of Act 247 as amended unless designated as a voting alternate member pursuant to Section 906 of Act 247 as amended.





 
 
8.130	Expenditures for Services


Within the limits of funds appropriated by the Governing Body, the Board may employ or contract for secretaries, clerks, legal counsel, consultants and other technical and clerical services. Members of the Board may receive compensation for the performance of their duties, as may be fixed by the Governing Body. Alternate members of the board may receive compensation, as may be fixed by the Governing Body, for the performance of their duties when designated as alternate members pursuant to Section 8.125, but in no case shall it exceed the rate of compensation authorized to be paid to the members of the Governing Body.

8.140	Hearings


The Board shall conduct hearings and make decisions in accordance with the following requirements:

a.	Public notice shall be given and written notice shall be given to the applicant, the zoning officer, such other persons as the governing body shall designate by ordinance and to any person who has made timely request for the same. Written notices shall be given at such time and in such manner as shall be prescribed by ordinance or, in the absence of ordinance provision, by rules of the board.  In addition to the written notice provided herein, written notice of said hearing shall be conspicuously posted on the affected tract of land at least one week
prior to the hearing.


b.	The governing body may prescribe reasonable fees with respect to hearings before the zoning hearing board.  Fees for said hearings may include compensation for the secretary and members of the zoning hearing board, notice and advertising costs and necessary administrative overhead connected with the hearing. The costs, however, shall not include legal expenses of the zoning hearing board, expenses for engineering, architectural or other technical consultants or expert witness costs.

c.	The first hearing before the board or hearing officer shall be commenced within 60 days from the date ofreceipt of the applicant's  application, unless the applicant has agreed in writing to an extension of time. Each subsequent hearing before the board or hearing officer shall be held within 45 days of the prior hearing, unless otherwise agreed to by the applicant in writing or on the record. An applicant shall complete the presentation of his case-in-chief within I 00 days of the first hearing.  Upon the request of the applicant, the board or hearing officer shall assure that the applicant receives at least seven hours of hearings within the 100 days, including the first hearing. Persons opposed to the application shall complete the presentation of their opposition to the application within 100 days of the first hearing held after the completion of the applicant's case-in-chief. An applicant may, upon request, be granted





 
 
additional hearings to complete his case-in-chief provided the persons opposed to the application are granted an equal number of additional hearings. Persons opposed to the application may, upon the written consent or consent on the record by the applicant and municipality, be granted additional hearings to complete their opposition to the application provided the applicant is granted an equal number of additional hearings for rebuttal.

d.	The hearings shall be conducted by the board or the board may appoint any member or an independent attorney as a hearing officer. The decision, or, where no decision is called for, the findings shall be made by the board; however, the appellant or the applicant, as the case may be, in addition to the municipality, may, prior to the decision of the hearing, waive decision or findings by the board and accept the decision or findings of the hearing officer as final.

e.	The parties to the hearing shall be the municipality, any person affected by the application who has made timely appearance of record before the board, and any other person including civic or community organizations permitted to
appear by the board. The board shall have power to require that all persons who
wish to be considered parties enter appearances in writing on forms provided by the board for that purpose. The chairman or acting chairman of the board or the hearing officer presiding shall have power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant documents and papers, including witnesses and documents requested by the parties.

f.	The parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel and shall be afforded the opportunity to respond and present evidence and argument and cross-examine adverse witnesses on all relevant issues. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but irrelevant, immaterial, or unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded.

g.	The board or the hearing officer, as the case may be, shall keep a stenographic record of the proceedings.  The appearance fee for a stenographer shall be shared equally by the applicant and the board.  The cost of the original transcript shall be paid by the board if the transcript is ordered by the board or
hearing officer or shall be paid by the person appealing from the decision of the board if such appeal is made, and in either event the cost of additional copies shall be paid by the person requesting such copy or copies. In other cases the party requesting the original transcript shall bear the cost thereof.

h.	The board or the hearing officer shall not communicate, directly or indirectly, with any party or his representatives in connection with any issue involved except upon notice and opportunity for all parties to participate, shall not take notice of any communication, reports, staff memoranda, or other materials, except advice from their solicitor, unless the parties are afforded an opportunity




 
 
to contest the material so noticed and shall not inspect the site or its surroundings after the commencement of hearings with any party or his representative unless all parties are given an opportunity to be present.

1.	The board or the hearing officer, as the case may be, shall render a written decision or, when no decision is called for, make written findings on the application within 45 days after the last hearing before the board or hearing officer. Where the application is contested or denied, each decision shall be accompanied by findings of fact and conclusions based thereon together with  the reasons therefore.  Conclusions based on any provisions of this act or of any ordinance, rule or regulation shall contain a reference to the provision relied on and the reasons why the conclusion is deemed appropriate in the light of the facts found.  Ifthe hearing is conducted by a hearing officer and there has been no stipulation that his decision or findings are final, the board shall make his report and recommendations available to the parties within 45 days and the parties shall be entitled to make written representations thereon to the board prior to final decision or entry of findings, and the board's decision shall be entered no later than 30 days after the report of the hearing officer. Except for challenges filed under Section 916.1 of the PA Municipalities Planning Code,
as amended, where the board fails to render the decision within the period required by this subsection or fails to commence, conduct or complete the required hearing as provided in subsection (1), the decision shall be deemed to have been rendered in favor of the applicant unless the applicant has agreed in writing or on the record to an extension of time.  When a decision has been rendered in favor of the applicant because of the failure of the board to meet or render a decision as hereinabove provided, the board shall give public notice of said decision within ten days from the last day it could have met to render a decision in the same manner as provided in subsection (1) of this section.  Ifthe board shall fail to provide such notice, the applicant may do so. Nothing in this subsection shall prejudice the right of any party opposing the application to appeal the decision to a court of competent jurisdiction.

j.	A copy of the final decision or, where no decision is called for, of the findings shall be delivered to the applicant personally or mailed to him not later than the day following its date. To all other persons who have filed their name and address with the board not later than the last day of the hearing, the board shall provide by mail or otherwise, brief notice of the decision or findings and a statement of the place at which the full decision or findings may be examined.

k.	The Governing Body may prescribe reasonable fees with respect to hearings before the Zoning Hearing Board. Fees for said hearings may include compensation for the secretary and members of the Zoning Hearing Board, notice and advertising costs and necessary administrative overhead connected with the hearing.  The costs, however, shall not include legal expenses of the Zoning Hearing Board, expenses for engineering, architectural or other technical consultants or expert witness costs.




 
 

8.150	Jurisdiction


The zoning hearing board shall have exclusive jurisdiction to hear and render final adjudications in the following matters:
8.151	Substantive challenges to the validity of any land use ordinance,· except those brought before the governing body pursuant to Sections
609.l and 916.l(a)(2) of Act 247 as amended.

8.152	Challenges to the validity of a land use ordinance raising procedural questions or alleged defects in the process of enactment or adoption which challenges shall be raised by an appeal taken within 30 days after the effective date of said ordinance.

8.153	AppeaJs.from the determination of the zoning officer, including, but not limited to, the granting or denial of any permit, or failure to act on the application therefor, the issuance of any cease and desist order or the registration or refusal to register any nonconforming use, structure or lot.

8.154	Appeals from a determination by a municipal engineer or the zoning officer with reference to the administration of any flood plain or flood hazard ordinance or such provisions within a land use ordinance.

8.155	Applications for variances from the terms of the zoning ordinance and flood hazard ordinance or such provisions within a land use ordinance, pursuant to Section 8.200 hereof.

8.156	Applications for special exceptions under the zoning ordinance or flood plain or flood hazard ordinance or such provisions within a land use ordinance, pursuant to Section 912.1 of Act 247 as amended.

8.157	Appeals from the zoning officer's determination under Section 916.2 of Act 247 as amended.

8.158	Appeals from the determination of the zoning officer or municipal engineer in the administration of any land use ordinance or provision thereof with reference to sedimentation and erosion control and storm water management insofar as the same relate to development not involving applications under the municipality's Subdivision and Land Development  Ordinance.











 
 
8.200	ZONING HEARING BOARD FUNCTIONS

(	8.210	a.	Variances


The board shall hear requests for variances where it is alleged that the provisions of the zoning ordinance inflict unnecessary hardship upon the applicant. The board may by rule prescribe the form of application and may require preliminary application to the zoning officer. The board may grant a variance, provided that all of the following findings are made where relevant in a given case:
1.	That there are unique physical  circumstances or conditions, including irregularity, narrowness, or shallowness oflot size or shape, or exceptional topographical  or other physical  conditions peculiar to the particular property and that the unnecessary hardship is due to such conditions and not the circumstances or conditions generally created by the provisions of the  zoning ordinance in the neighborhood or district in which the property is located.

2.	That because of such physical circumstances or conditions, there is no possibility that the property can be developed in strict conformity with the provisions of the zoning ordinance and that the authorization of a variance is therefore necessary to enable the reasonable use of this property.

3.	That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the appellant.

4.	That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential character of the neighborhood or district in which the property is located, nor substantially or permanently impair the appropriate use or development of adjacent property, nor be detrimental to the public welfare.

5.	That the variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum variance that will afford relief and will represent the least modification possible of the regulation in issue.

b.	In granting any variance, the board may attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards as it may deem necessary to implement the purposes of this zoning ordinance and Act 247 as amended.

8.220	Special Exceptions

The board shall hear and decide requests for special exceptions in accordance with the standards and criteria set forth in Section 5.810 hereof.  In granting a special exception, the board may attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards, in addition to those expressed in this ordinance, as it may deem necessary to implement the purposes of this zoning ordinance and Act 247 as amended.






 
 
8.300	PARTIES APPELLANT BEFORE THE BOARD


Parties appellant before the Board shall be as set forth in Section 913.3 of Act 247 as amended.



8.400	TIME LIMITATIONS

8.410	Filing Proceedings with the Board

No person shall be allowed to file any proceeding with the board later than 30 days after an application for development, preliminary or final, has been approved by an appropriate municipal officer, agency or body if such proceeding is designed to secure reversal or to limit the approval in any manner unless such person alleges and proves that he had no notice, knowledge, or reason to believe that such approval had been given.  Ifsuch person has succeeded to his interest after such approval, he shall
be bound by the knowledge of his predecessor in interest.  The failure of anyone other
than the landowner to appeal from an adverse decision on a tentative plan pursuant to Section 709 of Act 247 as amended or from an adverse decision by a zoning officer on a challenge to the validity of this ordinance pursuant to Section 916.2 of Act 247 as amended shall preclude an appeal from a final approval except in the case where the final submission substantially deviates from the approved tentative approval.

8.420	Appeals From Adverse Determinations

All appeals from determinations adverse to the landowner shall be filed by the landowner within 30 days after notice of the determination is issued.

8.430	Expiration of Approvals

The approval of a variance, special exception, or conditional use will automatically expire after a period of two (2) years, from date of approval, if construction has not reached completion. Ifsaid construction has not reached completion in two (2) years time from date of approval, the applicant may apply for not more than one (1) ninety
(90) day extension. All such applications shall be accompanied by an additional fee of$100.00 payable to the Borough of Taylor.



8.500	ZONING CHALLENGES

8.510	Procedure for Landowner Curative Amendments

The procedure to be followed for landowner curative amendments shall be as set forth in Section 609.l of Act 247 as amended.







 
 
8.520	Procedure for Curative Amendment by the Municipality

Ifthe municipality determi.nes that this ordinance or portions thereof are substantially invalid, it shall take action in accordance with the procedures set forth in Section
609.2 of Act 247 as amended.
 
ARTICLE9






ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT





9.100	ZONING OFFICER

9.110   Creation of Office

The Office of Zoning Officer is hereby established.

9.120  Appointment

The Zoning Officer shall be appointed by and compensated by the Governing Body.

9.130  Holding Other Public Office

The Zoning Officer shall not hold any elective office in the Municipality.

9.140  Powers and Duties

The Zoning Officer shall administer the Zoning Ordinance in accordance with its literal terms, and shall not have the power to permit any construction or any use or change of use which does not conform to this Ordinance. He shall examine all applications for permits, issue permits for the construction, alteration, enlargement and occupancy of all uses which are in accordance with the requirements of this Ordinance and all nonconforming uses, record and file all applications for permits with accompanying plans and documents, and make such reports to the Planning Commission and the Zoning Hearing Board as may be required.

Zoning permits for a variance from the requirements of this Ordinance and for such special exceptions as may be enumerated in Article 3, hereof shall be issued only upon written order of the Zoning Hearing Board.

9.150  Appeals

All appeals from decisions of the Zoning Officer shall be taken in the manner set forth in this Ordinance and as otherwise prescribed by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.






9-\
 
9.160  Qualifications of the Zoning Officer


The zoning officer shall be able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the local governing body a working knowledge of municipal zoning.

9.170  Registration of Nonconforming Uses and Structures


The zoning officer may identify and register nonconforming uses and structures and shall identify the reasons for their identification as nonconformities.

9.180	Issuance of Preliminary Opinion


In order not to unreasonably delay the time when a landowner may secure assurance that the ordinance or map under which he proposes to build is free from challenge, and recognizing that the procedure for preliminary  approval of his development may be too cumbersome or may be unavailable,  the landowner may advance the date from which time for any challenge to the ordinance or map will run under Section 914.1 of Act 247 as amended by the following procedure:

9.181	The landowner may submit plans and other materials describing his proposed use or development to the zoning officer for a preliminary opinion as to their compliance with the applicable ordinances and maps. Such plans and other materials shall not be required to meet the standards prescribed for preliminary, tentative or final approval or for the issuance of a Zoning Permit so long as they provide reasonable notice of the proposed use or development and a sufficient basis for a preliminary opinion as to its compliance.

9.182	Ifthe zoning officer's preliminary  opinion is that the use or development complies with the ordinance or map, notice thereof shall be published  once each week for two successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality.   Such notice shall include a general description of the proposed use or development and its location, by some readily identifiable directive, and the place and times where the plans and other materials may be examined by the public.   The favorable preliminary approval under Section
914.1 of Act 247 as amended and the time therein specified for commencing a proceeding with the board shall run from the time when the second notice thereof has been published.



9.200	ZONING PERMITS

9.210  Puroose

To determine compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance. No person shall erect, alter or convert any structure or building, or part thereof, nor alter the use of any land,




C\·d--
 
subsequent to the adoption of this Ordinance, until a Zoning Permit has been issued by the Zoning Officer.
In addition, a zoning permit shall be required for:

a.	The deposit or excavation of more than 50 cubic yards of soil, stone, rock, clean fill or similar material on a site in any calendar year,

b.	Grading activities involving more than Y2  acre ofland, and/or,

c.	Any grading, dumping or fill activities within the 100 Year Floodplain.  All such activities shall be subject to review by the Planning Commission Engineer.

9.211   Exemptions


A separate zoning permit is not required for fill or grading specifically approved under another zoning permit, under a subdivision or land development approval or as part of a Borough approved flood control project.

9.220  Application for Permits

All such applications shall be accompanied by plans, in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing the actual shape and dimensions of the Jot or Jots to be built upon, its assessment map and parcel number as recorded, the date of official record of any Jot or lots on which construction is proposed, the exact size and location of any building, sign, parking or loading area or other physical feature existing or proposed on the Jot, the existing and intended use of each building or part of a building, the number of families, dwelling units, employees, offices or other appropriate units of occupancy which the building is designed to accommodate, and such other information as may be necessary to determine compliance with this Ordinance.  One copy of such plans shall be returned to the owner when such plans shall be approved; one copy each of all applications with accompanying plans and documents shall become a public record after a permit is issued or denied.

9.230   Issuance of Permits

It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer to issue a Zoning Permit, provided he is satisfied that the structure, building, sign, parking area of premises, and the proposed use thereof, conform with all requirements of this Ordinance and that all other reviews and actions, if any, called for in this Ordinance have been complied with and all necessary approvals secured thereof.

All Zoning Permits shall be issued in duplicate and one copy shall be kept conspicuously on the premises effected, and protected from the weather, whenever construction work is being performed thereon. No owner, contractor, workman or other person shall perform any building operations regulated by this ordinance of any





 
 
kind unless a Zoning Permit covering such operation has been displayed as required by
(	this Ordinance, nor shall they perform such building operations after notification of the revocation of said Zoning Permit.

9.231	Indemnification of Taylor Borough

The issuance of this permit is not intended to create liability on the part of the Borough, its commissions, officers, and agents.  Parties are advised to independently investigate development rights, improvements, structures, or components thereof.  Additional zoning and/or building permits may be necessary.  The owner and his successors and assigns shall indemnify and hold harmless the Borough, its employees, agents, and commissions from all claims related to development lands and calculation, including but not limited to stormwater detention and discharge.  Additionally, consult disclaimer of municipal liability under Section 205 of the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance and Section 5.898 hereof.

9.240  Denial of Permits

When the Zoning Officer is not satisfied that the applicant's proposed development will meet the requirements of this Ordinance, he shall refuse to issue a Zoning Permit and the applicant may appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board for a reversal of the Zoning Officer's decision.

9.250  Revocation of Permits

Ifit shall appear at any time, to the Zoning Officer that the application or accompanying plans are in any material respect false or misleading or that work is being done upon the premises differing materially from that called for in the applications filed with him under existing laws or ordinances, he may forthwith revoke the Zoning Permit, whereupon it shall be the duty of the person holding the same to surrender it and all copies thereof to the said Zoning Officer.  After the Zoning Permit has been revoked, the Zoning Officer may, in his discretion, before issuing a new Zoning Permit, require the applicant to file an indemnity bond in favor of the
Municipality with sufficient surety conditioned for compliance with this Ordinance and
all building laws and ordinances then in force and in a sum sufficient to cover the cost of removing the building if it does not so comply. A permit shall also be revoked in accordance with Section 8.430, hereof.



9.300	OCCUPANCYPERMITS

9.310  ForNewUses

After completion of the whole building or structure, and upon the sworn application by





 
 
the owner or his duly authorized agent, setting forth such facts as the Zoning Officer may require, and after actual inspection of the premises by the Zoning Officer or his duly authorized assistant, he shall upon finding the facts to be as represented, issue in duplicate an Occupancy Permit, certifying that the premises comply with the provisions of the Ordinance and may be used for the purposes set forth in the permit, which purposes shall conform with the requirements of this Ordinance. No change of use shall be made in any building, structure, or premises, or premises now or hereafter erected or altered that is not consistent with the requirements of this Ordinance. Any person desiring to change the use of his premises shall apply to the Zoning Officer for an Occupancy Permit, setting forth nuder oath such facts as may be required.




A copy of the Occupancy Permit shall be kept at all times upon the premises effected, and shall be displayed upon request made by an authorized official.  A record shall be kept of all Occupancy Permits issued and the original applications therefore shall be kept on file in the same manner as applications for Zoning Permits.  No owner, tenant, or other person shall use or occupy any building or structure thereafter erected or altered, the use of which shall be changed after the passage of this Ordinance without first procuring an Occupancy Permit; provided that an Occupancy Permit once granted shall continue in effect so long as there is no change of use, regardless of change in the personnel of tenants or occupants.

9.320   For Existing Uses

Upon written request from the owner, tenant or occupant, the Zoning Officer, after inspection, shall issue an Occupancy Permit for an existing use legally existing at the time this Ordinance is made effective, certifying the extent and kind of use and whether any such existing use conforms with the provisions of this Ordinance.

No change or extensions of use, and no alterations shall be made in a nonconforming use or premises without an occupancy permit having first been issued by the Zoning Officer stating that such change, extension or alteration is in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance.



9.400	PLANNING COMMISSION

9.410  Review Application and Appeals

The Zoning Hearing Board may refer to the Planning Commission all applications for Special Exceptions, and any other applications or appeals which in their opinion require review by the Planning Commission.

9.420   Criteria for Review





 
 

The Planning Commission shall review such applications in accordance with applicable criteria set forth in Section 5.810 and any special requirements for the intended use.

9.430   Report to the Zoning Hearing Board

The Planning Commission may recommend approval, disapproval, or approval subject to conditions or modifications, and shall report its findings to the Zoning Hearing
Board within thirty (30) days of receipt thereof; such report shall state all recommended conditions and modifications and the reasons for such approval or disapproval.




9.449   Report to Governing Body

Following the enactment of this Ordinance the Planning Commission shall, from time to time prepare and file with the Governing Body, but in no case at less than two (2) year intervals a report on the operation of this Ordinance including recommendations on the enactment of amendments, supplements or changes thereto.  The Planning Commission shall also review and report on all proposed conditional uses referred to it by the Governing Body.



9.500	VIOLATIONS

9.510    Complaints ofViolations

Whenever a violation of this Ordinance occurs, any person may file a complaint in regard thereto.  All such complaints must be in writing and shall be filed with the Zoning Officer, who shall properly record such complaint and immediately investigate and report thereon.

9.520   Enforcement Procedures

9.521	Enforcement Notice

a.	If it appears to the municipality that a violation of the zoning ordinance has occurred, the municipality shall initiate enforcement proceedings by sending an enforcement notice as provided in this section.

b.	The enforcement notice shall be sent to the owner of record of the parcel on which the violation has occurred, to any person who has filed a written request to receive enforcement notices regarding that parcel, and to any other person requested in writing by the owner of record.






 
 
c.	An enforcement notice shall be mailed to the alleged violator by certified mail and shall state at least the following:

(1)	The name of the owner of record and any other person against whom the municipality iutends to take action.


(2)	The location of the property in violation.


(3)	The specific violation with a description of the requirements which have not been met, citing in each instance the applicable provisions of the ordinance.

(4)	The date before which the steps for compliance must be commenced and the date before which the steps must be completed.

(5)	The recipient of the notice has the right to appeal to the zoning hearing board within the prescribed period of time and in accordance with procedures set forth in Section 9.523 hereo£

(6)	The failure to comply with the notice within thirty (30) days of the date of said notice, unless extended by appeal to the zoning hearing board, constitutes a violation, with possible sanctions clearly described.

9.522		Causes of Action.   In case any building, structure, landscaping, or land is or is proposed to be, erected, constructed reconstructed,  altered, converted, maintained or used in violation of this ordinance, the Zoning Officer of the municipality, or any aggrieved owner or tenant of real property who shows that his property or person will be substantially affected by the alleged violation, in addition to other remedies,  may institute any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, restrain, correct or abate such building, structure, landscaping or land, or to prevent, in or about such premises, any act, conduct, business or use constituting a violation.  When any such action is instituted by a landowner or tenant, notice of that action shall be served upon the municipality at least 30 days prior to the time the action is begun by serving a copy of the complaint to the governing body of the municipality.  No such action may be maintained until such notice has been given.

9.523		Appeals. Any recipient of a notice of enforcement shall have the right to appeal to the zoning hearing board to remove such notice.  Such appeals, however, must be filed with the zoning hearing board not more than five (5) days following the receipt of such an enforcement notice.

9.530  Enforcement Remedies






 
 
a.	Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated or permitted the violation of the provisions of this zoning ordinance shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the municipality, pay a judgment of not more than $500.00 plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees incurred by the municipality as a result thereof. No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or be payable until the date of the determination of a violation by the district justice.  Ifthe defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the municipality may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation, unless the district justice determining that there has been a violation further determines that there was a good faith basis for th!J person, partnership or corporation violating the ordinance to have believed that there was no such violation in which event there shall be deemed to have been only one such violation until the fifth day following the date of the determination of a violation by the district justice and thereafter each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation. All judgments, costs and reasonable attorney fees collected for the violation of this ordinance shall be paid over to the Municipality.

b.	The court of common pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of stay, upon cause shown, tolling the per diem fine pending a final adjudication of the violation and judgment.

c.	Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted to grant to any person or entity other than the municipality the right to commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this section.

9.600	FEES

The following fees shall be paid to the Zoning Officer upon the filing of an application: 9.610  Fees for Zoning Permits not requiring Board Action	$  40.00
9.620   Zoning Permits for business and
outdoor advertising signs	$  50.00

9.630   Occupancy Permits	$  25.00

9.640   Applications requiring Board action, including appeals for variances, requests for amendments, applications for special uses, applications for
rehearings on appeals and applications	$400.00

9.650   Applications for Conditional Uses
requiring action by the Borough Council	$300.00
 

9.660  Fees are intended to cover the costs of advertising and other costs of administering applications requiring Board and Council action, including a portion of the court stenographer's fee, as allowed by law. In the event that actual costs are less than the fee paid with the application, the Borough shall refund surplus payments in excess of
$25.00.






















(





























{




 
 
ARTICLE 10
(


AMENDMENTS




10.100	PROCEDURE

10.110	Enactment


Before voting on the enactment of an amendment, the governing body shall hold a public hearing thereon, pursuant to public notice.  Inaddition, if the proposed amendment involves a zoning map change, notice of said public hearing shall be conspicuously posted by the municipality at points deemed sufficient by the municipality along the perimeter of the tract to notify potentially interested citizens. The affected tract or area shall be posted at least one week prior to the date of the hearing.

10.120	Enactment of Map Amendment


In addition to the notice requirements specified in Section 10.500, where the proposed amendment involves a zoning map change, notice of public hearing shall be mailed by the municipality at least thirty days prior to the date of the hearing by first class mail to the addresses to which real estate tax bills are sent for all real property located within the area being rezoned, as evidenced by tax records within the possession of the municipality.  The notice shall include the location, date, and time of the public hearing.

10.130	Referral to Borough Planning Commission and County Planning Commission

In the case of an amendment other than that prepared by the planning agency, the governing body shall submit each amendment to the Borough Planning  Commission and the County Planning Commission at least thirty (30) days prior to the hearing on such proposed amendment to provide the planning agencies an opportunity to submit recommendations; provided, however, that submission to the Borough Planning Commission is not required for amendments prepared by the Borough Planning Commission.  Before voting upon enactment, the governing body shall at least ten days prior to enactment readvertise, in one newspaper of general circulation in the municipality, a brief sununary setting forth all the provisions in reasonable detail together with a summary of the amendments.









l () -l
 


10.140	Rehearings

In the event substantial amendments are made in the proposed ordinance or amendment, before voting upon enactment, the governing body shall at least ten
(10) days prior to enactment readvertise, in one newspaper of general circulation in
the municipality, a brief summary setting forth all the provisions in reasonable detail.

10.150	Submission to County Planning Commission


Within 30 days after enactment, a copy of the amendment to the zoning ordinance shall be forwarded to the LCRPC.



10.200	PROCEDURE FOR CURATIVE AMENDMENTS

The procedure for landowner curative amendments shall be as set forth in Section 609.1 of Act 247 as amended.


10.300	PROCEDURE FOR MUNICIPAL CURATNE AMENDMENTS
(
The procedure for municipal curative amendments shall be as set forth in Section 609.2 of Act 247 as amended.



10.400	PUBLICATION, ADVERTISEMENT AND AVAILABILITY OF ORDINANCES

10.410		Publication.  Publication shall include the time and place of the meeting at which passage will be considered, a reference to a place within the municipality where copies of the proposed ordinance or amendments may be examined without charge or obtained for a charge not greater than the cost thereof.  The governing body shall publish the proposed ordinance or amendment once in one newspaper of general circulation in the municipality not more than 60 days nor less than 7 days prior to passage. Publication of the proposed ordinance or amendment shall include either the full text thereof or the title and a brief summary, prepared by the municipal solicitor and setting forth all the provisions in reasonable detail.  Ifthe full text is not included:

(1)	A copy thereof shall be supplied to a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality at the time the public notice is published.


(




l0 -d.
 






(2)	An attested copy of the proposed ordinance shall be filed in the county law library or other county office designated by the county commissionets, who may impose a fee no greater than that necessary to cover the actual costs of storing said ordinances.

10.411	Recording

Zoning ordinances and amendments may be incoJporated into official ordinance
books by reference with the same force and effect as if duly recorded theteil].


l 0.500	APPLICABILITY OF ORDINANCE AMENDMENTS

When an application for either special exception or a conditional use bas been filed with either the Zoning Hearing Board or the Governing Body, as relevant, and the subject matter of such application would ultimately constitute either a fond development OJ' a subdivision,  no change or amendment of the zoning, subdivision or other governing ordinance or plans shall affect the decision on such applJcation adversely to the applicant and the applicant shall be entitled to a decision inaccordance with the provisions of the governing ordinances or plans as they stood at the time the application was duly filed.  Provided, further, should such an application be approved by either the Zoning Hearing Board or Governing Body, as relevant, the applicant shall be entitled to proceed with the submission of either land development OJ' subdivision plans within. a period of six months or longer Ol' as may be
approved by either the Zoning Hearing Board or the Governing Body following the date of
such approval in accordance with the provisions of the governing ordinances or plans as they stood at the time the application was duly filed before either the Zoning Hearing Board or Governing body, as relevant.  If either a land development or subdivision plan is so filed within said period, such plan shall be subject to the provisions of Seotion 508 (1) through (4) of the PA Municipalities Planning Coc:le, Aot 247, as amended, and specifically to the time limitations of Section 508 (4) which shall commence as of the date of filing such land development  01· subdivision plan.



















\0-3
 
ARTICLE 11 DEFINITIONS
11.100	Unless the context otherwise requires, the following definitions shall be used in the
.i	nterpretation and construction of this Ordinance. Words used in the present tense include the future; the singular number shall Include the plural, and the plural the singular; the word 'building' shall include the word 'structure'; the word 'used' shall include arranged, designed, constructed, altered, converted, rented, leased, or intended to be used; the word 'shall' is mandatory and not optional; the word 'abut' shall include the words 'directly across from'.


Accessory Use of Structure

A use or structure subordinate to the principal use of a building on the same lot and serving a purpose customarily incidental to the use of the principal building.


Agent of Owner

Any person who can show notarized written proof that he has authority to act fOr the property owner.





·	A public thoroughfare which affords only 'a secondary means of access to abutting property.


Alteration {Of Building or Structure}

Any change in the structural members of a building, such as walls, columns, beams or girders.



Assisted living Facility

A bulldlng, establishment, complex or district part thereof which: a) accepts primarily aged persons (62 years of age or older) for domiciliary care; and b) provides on site to Its residents, room, board, non" medical living assistance services appropriate to the residents' respective needs and contract medical services as prescribed by each resident's treating physician.


Auto Auction

The wholesale auction of cars, automobile auc!ions, and other businesses of like kind and nature. Including but not limited to; a principal use where automobiles are stored, readied and displayed for wholesale safes on a recurring scheduled basis. Related support for the auction including title services, arbitration services, the storage, washing and transportation of vehicles; and heavy equipment repair, for sale or use of principal.





11-1
 
Automobile or Trailer Sales Area

An open area, other than a street, used for the display, sale or rental of new or used motor vehicles or trailers in operable condition and where no repair work is done.

Automobile Service Station or Filling Station

A building or place of business where gasoline, oil and greases, batteries, tires and automobile accessories are supplied and dispensed directly to the motor vehicles trade at retail, and where the following services may be rendered.

a.	Minor Repair

I.	Sale and servicing of spark plugs and batteries.

2.	Tire repair and servicing, no recapping.

3.	Replacement of mufflers and tailpipes, water hose, fan belts, brake and transmission fluids, light bulbs, floor mats, seat covers (where this shall not be the principal use), windshield wipers, grease retainers and wheel bearings.

4.	Radiator cleaning and flushing.

5.	Washing and polishing, not including mechanical and/or automatic car wash establishments.

6.	Installation of fuel pumps and fuel lines.

7.	Minor servicing and replacement of carburetors.

8.	Adjustment and installation of brakes.

9.	Tuning engines, except for grinding valves, cleaning carbon or removing the head of engines and/or crankcases.

I0.	Greasing and Lubrication.

11.	Emergency Wiring Repairs.

12.	Any similar minor service or repair not listed below under "major repair".


b.	Major Repair

In addition to those repairs and services listed above as "minor repair", any general repair, rebuilding or reconditioning not listed above; collision service including body, frame or fender straightening or repair; painting or paint shops; mechanical car wash



I.	\ -'J,.
 
establishments; but not including any operations which require the heating or burning of rubber.

Automobile Wrecking


The dismantling or disassembling of used motor vehicles or trailers; or the storage, sale or dumping of dismantled, partially dismantled, obsolete or wrecked vehicles or their  parts.

Bakery


Bakeries which are first permitted in the M-1 District only, include such baking establishments which manufacture quantities of goods for retail elsewhere than on the premises.

Basement

A floor level partly or completely below grade.  It shall be considered a story if more than 33 1/3 percent of the perimeter walls of a basement are 5 feet or more above grade.

 


The Zoning Hearing Board of the Borough of Taylor.

Boarding House

a.	A residential use in which any or all of the following applies:

(1)	individual room(s) that do not meet the definition of a dwelling unit are rented for habitation by a total of 2 or more persons who are not "related" to the owner of record of the property, or
(2)	a dwelling unit that includes a greater number of occupants than the permitted maximum number of unrelated persons (see the definition of "family''), or
(3)	if individual units of living space not meeting the definition of a dwelling unit are separately rented to person(s) who are not "related" to the owner of record of the property.

b.	A boarding house shall not include the following uses:  treatment center, abused person shelter, hotel, dormitory, motel, assisted living center, bed and breakfast use, group home or nursing home.  A boarding house may include providing meals to residents.

c.	This use shall only involve renting living accommodations for minimum periods of 5 consecutive days.



 
 
Borough Council


Borough Council of the Borough of Taylor. Bottle Club
An establishment operated for profit or pecuniary gain, which has a capacity for the assemblage of twenty (20) or more persons and in which alcoholic liquors, alcohol or malt or brewed beverages are not legally sold but where alcoholic liquors, alcohol or malt or brewed beverages are either provided by the operator or agents or employees of the operator for consumption on the premises or are brought into or kept at the establishment by the patrons or persons assembling there for use and consumption.
The term shall not include a license under the Act of April 12, 1951 (P.L. 90, No. 21) known as the Liquor Code or any organization as set forth in Section 6 of the Act of December 19, 1990 (P.L. 1200, No. 202) known as the Solicitation of Funds for Charitable Purposes Act.

Building

Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls, used or intended to be used for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, or property. When such a structure is divided into separate parts by one or more unpierced walls extending from the ground up, each part is deemed a separate building, except as regards minimum side yard requirements.

Building Group

Any building, such as a store group, which is divided into separate parts by one or more unpierced walls extending from the ground up.

Building Height

The vertical distance measured from the mean level of the ground surrounding the building to a point midway between the highest and lowest point of the roof, but not including chimneys, spires, towers, elevator penthouses, tanks, and similar projections.

Building. Principal

A building in which is conducted the principal use of the building site on which it is situated.  In any residential district any dwelling shall be deemed to be a principal building on the zone lot on which the same is located.

Bulk Fuel Storage

The storage of fuel beyond what is reasonably needed for customary on-site use. This



\ \-4
 
includes the storage of fuel to be sold for off-site use.




A motor vehicle. thirty (30) feet or more in length, other than a taxi cab, limousine, motor home, or recreational vehicle (RV) designed to transport passengers.

Caliper


The diameter of the main trunk of a tree. Caliper measurement shall be taken at a point on the trunk six (6) inches above natural ground line for trees up to four (4) inches in caliper and at a point twelve (12) inches above the natural ground line for trees over four (4) inches in caliper.

Commercial Vehicle


A commercial vehicle shall be any vehicle other than a private passenger vehicle, including trucks, trailers, and construction equipment.

Commission

The Borough Planning Commission of the Borough of Taylor. Comprehensive Plan
The most recently adopted Master Plan or Comprehensive Plan of Taylor Borough Conditional Use
An enumerated use which will only be allowed upon order of the Borough Council in
accordance with the procedure set forth in Section 5.200 hereof. Controlled Substance
A mind control substance which has been classified as an illegal substance, including, but not limited to marijuana, cocaine, heroin and crack.

Courtyard

A courtyard is any open, unoccupied area which is bounded by three or more attached building walls.

Dance Club

An establishment for patronage by under-age (less than 21 years of age) persons, including  establishments operated for profit or pecuniary gain which has the capacity



\ \-5'
 
for the assemblage of twenty (20) or more persons for dancing, regardless of whether dancing is the primary or intended purpose of the building, establishment or place of assembly.

Dance Hall


An establishment operated for profit or pecuniary gain which has the capacity for the assemblage of twenty (20) or more persons for dancing, regardless of whether dancing is the primary or intended purpose of the building, establishment or place of assembly, and where alcoholic liquors, alcohol or malt or brewed beverages are either provided by the operator or agents or employees of the operator for consumption on the premises or are brought into or kept at the establishment by the patrons or persons assembling there for use and consumption. The term shall not include an
establishment that has a valid license for the sale of alcohol pursuant to the Liquor
Code, 47, P.S. 1-101 et. seq.

Day Care

a.	Child Day Care Center. A Day Care Center is a State licensed facility in which care is provided for 7 or more children, at any one time, where the child care areas are not being used as a family residence.

b.	Family Day Care Home. Any premises other than the child's own home, operated for profit or not for profit, in which child day care is provided at any one time to four, five, or six children, who are not relatives of the caregiver; provided that such facility is registered by the Pennsylvania Department of PublicWelfare.

c.	Group Day Care Home. A State licensed facility in which care is provided for more than 6 but less than 12 children, at any one time, if care is provided in a facility where the child care areas are being used as a family residence.

Development Section

Within any large-scale development, the developer may select a portion of the entire approved large-scale development area to be developed in stages or phases; any such area shall be considered as a "development section".

District

A district or a zone shall be any portion of the territory of the Municipality within which certain uniform regulations and requirements or various combinations thereof apply under the provisions of this Ordinance.

Drive-in and Drive-through Eating and Drinking Places






l 1-L.
 
Business establishments such as banks and fast-food establishments, where customers may be served without leaving their cars; indoor and outdoor service may also be available in addition to the drive-in/drive-through  facilities.

Drug Rehabilitation Facilities

Facilities for the rehabilitation of persons addicted to controlled substances, including the overnight stay of patients for periods of two (2) or more days.

Drug Treatment Centers

Facilities for the treatment of persons who are addicted to the use of controlled substances, such as a methadone clinic, where such treatment is designed to cure persons of such addictions.

Dwelling

Any building or portion thereof designed or used exclusively as the residence of one or more persons, except boarding houses, hotels, motels, hospitals, nursing homes, and other congregate living facilities.

a.	Dwelling, Single-Family

A detached building, designated for or occupied exclusively by one family and	


(
	containing not more than one dwelling unit.	

b.	
Dwelling, Two-Family	
	
A detached or semi-detached building where not more than two individual	
	family or dwelling units are entirely separated by vertical walls or horizontal
floors, unpierced  except for access to the outside or to a common cellar.	

c.	
Dwelling, Town House	
	
A town house shall include a group of not more than eight (8) single-family attached dwellings separated from each other by common walls, where each unit contains a separate and private entrance to the outside.	

d.	
Dwelling, Garden Apartments	
	
A group of rental units, generally under single ownership (but a condominium is not precluded) where there shall not be more than eight (8) dwelling units	
	contained within each structure; such structures containing garden apartment	
	units are generally less than four (4) stories in height although in the
Municipality they shall not exceed a height of 2.5 stories or thirty-five feet.	





lt-1
 
e.	Dwelling,  Multi-Family


A structure containing three (3) or more dwelling units including but not limited to garden apartment, condominium and town houses.

Dwelling Structure


Any structure which shall contain one (1) or more dwelling units, not including a hotel, hospital, nursing home, dormitory, fraternity or sorority house, rooming house or boarding house.

Dwelling Unit


One (1) or more rooms, including a kitchen or kitchenette, and sanitary facilities in a dwelling structure, designed as a unit for occupancy by not more than one (1) family for living and sleeping purposes.

Earth-Extraction Industry

An earth-extraction industry is a business activity which includes the excavation and removal of natural resources from the earth. Earth-extraction industries include, but are not limited to mining and quarrying.

Earth-Moving  Industry


An earth-moving industry is a business activity which results in temporarily or permanently changing the contour of the earth. Earth-moving industries include, but are not limited to earth extraction industries and sanitary landfills.

Essential Services

a.	Essential  Services, Enclosed or Permanent Structures

Such uses are intended to include facilities for sewage treatment, electric substations, transformers, switches, and auxiliary apparatus, as well as local governmental services such as police stations, fire houses and similar uses. Where such uses are proposed to be located in a Residential District, they shall be subject to the following regulations:

1.	Such facility shall not be located on a residential street (unless no other site is available), and shall be so located as to draw a minimum of vehicular traffic to and through such streets.

2.	The location, design and operation of such facility shall not adversely affect the character of the surrounding residential area.





l1-i
 
3.	Adequate fences, barriers and other safety devices shall be provided, and shall be landscaped in accordance with the provisions  of Section 4.730 hereo£


4.	Noise emitted from electric substations shall not be greater than permitted in accordance with the performance standards set forth herein.

b.	Essential Services, Open


Such uses shall be limited to the erection, construction, alteration, or maintenance, by public utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies, of underground or overhead gas, electrical, steam or water transmission or distribution systems, collection, communication, supply or disposal systems, including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants, and other similar equipment and accessories in connection therewith reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by such public utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies or for the public health or safety or general welfare.  Such uses shall not include sanitary landfills and related uses such as staging areas or other means of solid waste disposal. Where applicable, the landscaping regulations of Section 4.730 hereof shall apply.

Family
(
Any number of individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit and doing
their cooking on the premises, as distinguished from a group occupying a boarding or rooming house or hotel.

Notwithstanding the definition in the preceding paragraph,  a family shall also be deemed to include unrelated persons occupying a dwelling unit and living as a single, nonprofit housekeeping unit, if said occupants are handicapped persons as defined herein.  Such unrelated individuals shall have the right to occupy a dwelling unit in the same manner and to the same extent as any family unit as defined in the first paragraph of this definition.

A family does not include a group living in a boarding house or hotel, or fraternities, sororities, and clubs, or other forms of congregate living arrangements, such as nursing homes and personal care homes, except as otherwise provided herein.

Floor Area

For the purposes of applying the requirements for off-street parking and loading, "floor area", in the case of offices, merchandising, or service type of uses, shall mean the gross floor area used or intended to be used by tenants, or for service to the public as customers, patrons, clients, or patients, including areas occupied by fixtures and equipment used for display or sales or merchandise. It shall not include areas used
 
principally for non-public purposes such as storage, incidental repair, processing or packaging of merchandise, for shop windows, for offices incident to the management
(	or maintenance of stores or buildings, for toilet or rest rooms, for utilities or for
dressing rooms, fitting or alteration rooms. Forestry
The management of forests and timberlands when practiced in accordance with accepted silvicultural principles, through developing, cultivating, harvesting, transporting and selling trees for commercial purposes which does not involve any land development.

Garage, Private Parking


A detached accessory building or a portion of a principal building used only for the storage of automobiles by the families resident upon the premises.

Garage, Public Parking


A structure or portion thereof, other than a private garage, used for the storage, sale, hire, care, repair or refinishing of automobiles not including a structure or part thereof used only for storage or display of automobiles for other than transients.

Governing Body


The Borough Council of the Borough of Taylor. Group Home for the Handicapped
A dwelling unit shared by handicapped persons, including resident staff, who live together as a single housekeeping unit and in long-term, family-like environment in which staff persons residing on the premises provide care, education, and participation in community activities for the residents with the primary goal of enabling the residents to live as independently as possible in order to reach their maximum
potential.  The term "group home for the handicapped" shall not include alcoholism or drug treatment center, work release facilities for convicts or ex-convicts, or other housing facilities serving as an alternative to incarceration ..

Hazardous Materials

Corrosive Liquid shall be and include acids, alkalines, caustic liquids and powders or flakes.  Other corrosives, that when in contact with living tissue, cause severe damage to living tissue with contact.  Leakage - chemical action liable to cause fire when in contact with organic matter.

Flammable Solid which is liable to cause fire through friction, absorption of moisture




 
 
or spontaneous chemical change.


Oxidizing Material shall mean chlorates, permanent peroxides or nitrates that yield oxygen to stimulate combustion.


High Toxic Materials - a material so toxic to man to afford unusual hazard to life and health.

Health Care Facilities


Health Care Facilities consist of several different types of facilities such as hospitals, medical centers, nursing homes, hospice institutions, and other similar uses where people can receive medical treatment and related support services due to their inability to meet their own physical care needs.  Rooming and boarding houses, and drug rehabilitation facilities and drug treatment centers other than for the medical treatment of persons requiring medical treatment for traumatic conditions resulting from overdosing on controlled substances are not considered to be health care facilities




A building designed for occupancy as the temporary residence of individuals who are lodged with or without meals and in which no provision is made for cooking in individual rooms or suites.

Hub Height

The distance measured from the surface of the tower foundation to the height of the wind turbine hub to which the blade is attached.

Improvement

Any man-made, immovable item that becomes part of, is placed upon, or is affixed to real estate.

Junk Yard

An area ofland, with or without buildings, used for the storage, outside a completely enclosed building, of used and discarded materials, including, but not limited to, waste paper, rags, metal, building materials, house furnishing, machinery, vehicles, or parts thereof, with or without the dismantling, processing, salvage, sale or other use or disposition of the same. The deposit or storage on a lot of two or more unlicensed and wrecked or disabled vehicles, or the major part thereof, without current inspection stickers shall be deemed to be a "junk yard".

Laboratories, Testing, Medical





[   /-11
 
A medical facility for testing the medical condition of human beings, including but not limited to such tests as blood tests, urine tests, x-rays, cat scans, and MRI tests.  Testing the medical condition of animals is not included.

Land Clearance


Land clearance subject to the provisions of this ordinance shall include the clearance of more than one (1) acre of trees and/or any other vegetation.

Large-Scale Development

a.	Residential.  A large scale residential development shall be planned for a site of not less than ten (10) acres.

b.	Commercial.   A large scale commercial development  shall be planned for a site of not less than three (3) acres.

c.	Manufacturing.  A large scale manufacturing development shall be planned for a site of not less than ten (10) acres.



Limited Access Highway

A highway designed in such a manner so as to provide no direct access to properties abutting its right-of-way and including all highways designated as limited access highways as adopted by the Planning Commission.

Lot or Zone Lot

A piece or parcel ofland occupied or intended to be occupied by a principal building
or a group of such buildings and accessory buildings, or utilized for a principal use and uses accessory or incidental to the operation thereof, together with such open spaces as required by this Ordinance, and having frontage on a public street.

a.	Lot. Comer

A lot abutting upon two (2) or more streets at their intersection or upon two parts of the same street, such streets or parts of the same street forming an interior angle ofless than 135 degrees.  The point of intersection of the street lot lines is the "comer".

b.	Lot, Depth

The mean horizontal distance between the front and the rear lot lines.


c.	Lot Lines



11 -I()..
 
The property lines. bounding the lot.


1.	Lot Line, Front. The ultimate right-of-way line of the street or road.



2.	Lot Line, Rear.  The lot line opposite and most distant from the front lot line.

3.	Lot Line, Side. Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from a street is called a side street lot line.

4.	Lot Line, Street or Alley. A lot line separating the lot from a street or alley.

d.	LotWidth


The mean width of the lot measured at right angles to its depth.  Such a line	
	along which this minimum lot frontage shall be measured at a point which shall
coincide with the building set back or front yard line.	

e.	
Lot Area	
	
The computed area contained within the lot lines and the ultimate right-of-way line.  The area within the right-of-way shall not be computed as part of the lot area.	
,(

Medical Centers


Medical Centers, including Mini Medical Centers are establishments, other than hospitals, which provide medical evaluation and treatment services to individuals; such treatment may include day-surgery, out-patient surgery, magnetic resonance imaging centers and similar uses, but, they may not include drug rehabilitation facilities or drug treatment centers other than for the medical treatment of persons requiring medical treatment for traumatic conditions resulting from overdosing on
illegal controlled substances. Satellite hospital facilities which do not include facilities
for the overnight stay of patients are also included in this use category.

Mobile (Manufactured) Home

A transportable, single family dwelling intended for permanent occupancy, contained in one unit, or in two or more units, designed to be joined  into one integral unit capable of again being separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site complete and ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations, and constructed so that it may be used without a permanent foundation.




I1-1
 
Mobile (Manufactured) Home Park


A parcel or contiguous parcels of land which have been so designated and improved that it contains two or more mobile home lots for the placement thereon of mobile homes. Provisions regulating mobile home parks are set forth in Section 5.880 hereof.

Motels, Motor Courts and Motor Hotels


A series of attached or semi-attached dwelling structures, where each unit has convenient access to parking space for the use of the units' occupants. The units, with the exception of the manager's office or caretaker's unit, are designed to provide sleeping accommodations for automobile transients or overnight guests.

Municipality

The Borough of Taylor. Net Developed Area
Total acreage excluding any area within a public right-of-way. Net Land Area
The net land area of any development parcel shall include only the area contained within the property line and the ultimate right-of-way line.  The area within the right­ of-way (public right-of-way or other thoroughfare) shall not be computed as part of the "net Land area".

No-Impact Home Business

"No-impact home-based business," a business or commercial activity administered or conducted as an accessory use which is clearly secondary to the use as a residential dwelling and which involves no customer, client or patient traffic, whether vehicular or pedestrian, pickup, delivery or removal functions to or from the premises, in excess
of those normally associated with residential use. The business or commercial activity
must satisfy the following requirements:

1.	The business activity shall be compatible with the residential use of the property and surrounding residential uses.
2.	The business shall employ no employees other than family members residing in
the dwelling.
3.	There shall be no display or sale of retail goods and no stockpiling or inventory of a substantial nature.
4.	There shall be no outside appearance of a business use, including, but not
limited to, parking, signs or lights.
5.	The business activity may not use any equipment or process which creates noise,



ll-IY
 
vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical or electronic interference, including interference with radio or television reception, which is detectable in the neighborhood.
6.	The business activity may not generate any solid waste or sewage.
7.	The business activity shall be conducted only within the dwelling and may not occupy more than 25% of the habitable floor area.
8.	The business may not involve any illegal activity. Nonconforming Lot
A lot the area or dimension of which was lawful prior to the adoption or amendment of
this zoning ordinance, but which fails to conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located by reasons of such adoption or amendment.

Nonconforming Structure

A structure or part of a structure manifestly not designed to comply with the applicable use or extent of use provisions set forth herein or any amendment heretofore or hereafter enacted, where such structure lawfully existed prior to the enactment of such ordinance or amendment or prior to the application of such ordinance or amendment to its location by reasons of annexation. Such nonconforming structures include, but are not limited to, nonconforming signs.

Nonconforming Use	(

A use, whether of land or of structure, which does not comply with the applicable use provisions set forth herein or any amendment heretofore or hereafter enacted, where such use was lawfully in existence prior to the enactment of such ordinance or amendment, or prior to the application of such ordinance or amendment to its location by reason of annexation.

Nursing Home

Any premises with less than forty (40) sleeping rooms where persons are lodged and furnished with meals and nursing care.

Parking Area, Private

An open area for the same uses as a private garage, and regulated as a private garage. Parking Area, Public
An open area, other than a street or other public way, used for the parking of
automobiles and available to the public whether for a fee, free or as an accommodation for clients or customers.





t  1-15'
 
Planning Commission


The Planning Commission of the Borough of Taylor. Professional Office
The office of a member of a recognized profession.  When conducted in a residential district, a professional office shall be incidental to the residential occupancy, shall be conducted by a member of the residential family entirely within a residential building, and shall include only the offices of doctors, or physicians, dentists, optometrists, ministers, architects, landscape architects, professional engineers, lawyers, artists, authors and such other similar professional occupations which may be so designated by the Zoning Hearing Board upon finding by the Board that such occupation is truly professional in character by virtue of the need for similar training and experience as a condition for the practice thereof and that the practice of such occupation shall in no
way adversely affect the safe and comfortable enjoyment of property rights in any zone to a greater extent than for the professional activities listed herein. The issuance of a State or Local license for regulation of any gainful occupation need not be deemed indicative of professional standing.

Recreation

a.	Recreation Commercial

Recreation facilities operated as a business and open to the general public for a fee.

b.	Recreation, Private, Non-Commercial


Clubs or recreation facilities, operated by a non-profit organization and open only to bonafide members of such organization.

c.	Recreation, Public

Recreation facilities operated as a non-profit enterprise by the Municipality, and other governmental entity or any non-profit organization and open to the general public.

Recreation Vehicle

Vehicles such as a travel trailer, camping trailer, truck camper, water craft, all terrain vehicles, snowmobile and motor home.

Residential Street

A street, between two intersecting streets, upon which an R-District abuts, or where




ll-llt>
 
fifty percent (50%) or more of the abutting street frontage is in predominantly residential use.

Rooming House


A building containing a single dwelling unit and rooms for the rooming and/or boarding of between three (3) and twenty-five (25) persons, by pre-arrangement  for a definite period of not less than one (1) week.

Sanitary Landfill


A sanitary landfill is considered to be any facility devoted to the storage and/or disposal of solid wastes pursuant to the regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental  Protection governing sanitary landfills.   Sanitary landfills may include staging areas as defined in Article 11.  Sanitary landfills shall be subject to all regulations contained herein governing earth-moving activities.

Setback Line

A line established by the subdivision regulations and/or zoning ordinance generally parallel with and measured from the lot line, defining the limits of a yard in which no building or structure may be located above ground, except as may be provided in said codes.




A "sign" is a name, identification, description, display, or illustration which is affixed to, or painted, or represented directly or indirectly upon a building, structure, a piece of land, or on any other object such as a stationary vehicle (automobile, truck, trailer, tractor trailer, bus, etc.) upon which there is any information presented for public view, where such information directs attention to an object, product, place, activity, person, institution, organization or business; provided, however, that information in the form oflettering and/or illustrations on vehicles accessory (sending or receiving) to the business or the parcel where they are located shall not be considered to be a sign.

Sign, Business


A "business sign" is a sign which directs attention to a business or profession conducted or to a commodity, service, or entertainment sold or offered upon the premises where such sign is located, or to which it is affixed.

Sign, Flashing

A "flashing sign" is any illuminated sign on which the artificial light is not maintained stationary or constant in intensity and color at all times when such sign is in use. For the purpose of this Ordinance any revolving, illuminated sign shall be considered a




I/-L1
 
"flashing sign".

Sign, Gross Surface Area


The "gross surface area" of a sign shall be the entire area within a single continuous perimeter enclosing the extreme limits ofsuch and in no case passing through or between any adjacent elements of same. However, such perimeter shall not include any structural or framing elements, lying outside the limits of such sign and not forming an integral part of the display. The gross surface area of free standing signs shall include the area of one (1) side of such sign even if display information is included on both sides of the sign.

Sign. Outdoor Advertising


An outdoor sign or billboard which directs attention to a business, profession, commodity or entertainment conducted, sold, or offered elsewhere than upon the same lot. Under the provisions of this ordinance, outdoor advertising can be erected on the premises in any of the nonresidential districts.

. Sign. Outdoor Advertising - Double Sign

A double outdoor advertising sign shall be a sign constructed with separate framing elements which are structurally connected at their sides. No half of such a double sign shall, however, exceed two-thirds of the maximum permitted gross surface area of an individual sign; and the combined gross surface area shall not exceed the maximum permitted for a single sign.

Special Exceptions

A "special exception" is a use which because of its unique characteristics requires individual consideration in each case by the Zoning Hearing Board as specified in Articles 8 and 9, before it may be permitted in the district enumerated in Article 3. In accordance with the provisions of this ordinance, the Zoning Hearing Board may require certain conditions and safeguards before such a use is permitted.

Specimen Tree

Any existing tree with a caliper that is 75 percent or more of the record tree of the same species in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.

Staging Area

A staging area is an area designated for motor vehicles or other means of transportation or any other types of refuse container containing solid waste materials which are to be deposited at a sanitary landfill site. Loaded vehicles awaiting their opportunity to deposit such wastes shall wait for their tum in a designated staging area




l1-1
 
on the sanitary landfill site. All staging areas shall be subject to all regulations contained herein governing sanitary landfills.

Stationarv Vehicle


Any vehicle that is parked on a single parcel of land for a period of more than 24 hours within 200 feet of any street right-of-way lines, if it is visible within said 200 foot distance; e.g. ifit is within 200 feet of the right-of-way and it is not visible from the right-of-way or from any adjacent residential property, it shall not be considered to be
a stationary vehicle.




That portion of a building, included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or, ifthere is no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling above it.

a.	Story, Half

A partial story under gable, hip or gambrel roof, the wall plates of which on at least two opposite exterior walls are not more than four (4) feet above the floor of such story; provided, however, that any partial story shall not be used for residential purposes, other than for a janitor or caretaker or his family.

b.	Story, First

The lowest story or the ground story of any building the floor of which is not more than twelve (12) inches below the average contact ground level at the exterior walls of the building.




A public or private thoroughfare not less than thirty (30) feet in width if in existence prior to the passage of this ordinance nor less than fifty (50) feet in width if established subsequent to the passage of this ordinance which affords the principal means of
access to abutting property, including avenue, place, way, drive, land boulevard, highway, road and any other thoroughfares except an alley.


a.	Side Street

Any street, the length of which shall be not more than 50 percent of the length of the largest street line of the Municipality's blocks of which it is part.

b.	Residential Street

A street between two intersecting streets upon which an R-District abuts, or




 
 
where 50 percent or more of the abutting street frontage is in predominantly residential use.


The following defines the types of streets described in Section 5.523.

a.	Primary Streets traverses through the municipality and are used primarily for through or heavy traffic.


b.	Secondary and Collector Streets carry traffic from minor streets to the major system of primary streets, including principal entrance streets of a residential development and streets for major circulation within such developments.

c.	Minor Streets are used primarily for access to the abutting properties. Strip Mining
Any mining operation by which the earth and rocks overlying a coal vein are removed by mechanical means or by hand for the purpose of recovering, mining, or removing coal thereunder. Strip mining shall be considered both an earth-extraction and an earth-moving industry.

Structure


Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location on the ground or attachment to something having a fixed location on the ground. Among other things, structures include buildings, mobile homes, carports, walls, fences and billboards.

Structural Change

Any change in the structural. members of a building, such as walls, beams columns or girders.

Telecommunications Facilities, Commercial


Facilities used for transmitting or retransmitting electronic signals, including, but not limited to, the transmission of commercial radio or television signals or cellular telephone communications. TV satellite disc antenna are not included under this category of use.

Telecommunications Tower, Commercial

A free standing structure, including any guy wires, principally intended to support facilities for receipt or transmission  of signals for uses such as commercial or public VHF or UHF television, FM radio, two-way radio, commercial carriers, cellular telephone, fixed point microwave, low power television, or AM radio, including accessory equipment related to telecommunications.   Not included are towers and





l \-d-..O
 
supportive structures for private, non-commercial  and amateur purposes including but not limited to ham radios and citizens band radios.

Telecommunications Antenna. Commercial


A device attached to a building, structure, or Telecommunications Tower principally intended for receipt or transmission of signals for such uses as commercial or public VHF or UHF television, FM radio, two-way radio, commercial carriers, cellular telephone, fixed point microwave, lower power television or AM radio, including accessory equipment related to telecommunications. Not included are antennas for private, non-commercial and amateur purposes, including but not limited to ham radios and citizens band radios.

Telecommunications Facilitv Building. Commercial

The building in which electromagnetic receiving and relay equipment for a Telecommunications tower is housed.

Telecommunications Facilities. Residential


Antennas for private, noncommercial and amateur purposes, including T.V. satellite dish antennae as regulated in Section 5.824.

Temporarv Uses

a.	General. Temporary uses shall include those activities which will be undertaken for a period of time specified in the application for a permit for such a use.  Said period of time shall be one (1) year or less. Ifadditional time is required a new application shall be submitted. No application for temporary uses shall be for a period of more than one (1) year.

b.	Business.  Uses such as a circus, carnival, flea market, etc. with or without a structure such as a tent.




Land held in single ownership which consists oflands to be subdivided or suitable for a land development. The tract shall consist of not less than the minimum area required for subdivision or development as set forth herein.

Tractor-Trailer

A non-passenger vehicle which is designed to be drawn/towed and primarily used to carry property, also including any portion of said Tractor-Trailer assembled or disassembled thereof, or similar structure, with or without wheels.





l(-Cf,\
 
Travel Trailer


A vehicle, less than 30 feet in length and used for temporary living or sleeping purposes, and standing on wheels.

Truck-Tractor


The non-load carrying component of a truck, commonly referred to as the cab, used to draw other vehicles or loads.

Turbine Height


The distance measured from the surface of the tower foundation to the highest point of the turbine rotor plane

Ultimate Right-of-way


The full width of the road designated by the Governing Body to be the minimum required width of any public right-of-way.

Variance

The Zoning Hearing Board may authorize departure to a minor degree from the terms
{	of this Ordinance in direct regard to hardship peculiar to an individual lot in
\	accordance with the procedures set forth in the Ordinance.


Wind Farm

A facility where one (1) or more windmills are located and are used for the generation of electricity which is used on-site for commercial purposes or which is sold on the open market. A windmill accessory to a principal structure which is sized and  intended to be used to generate electricity primarily for the principal structure to  which it is accessory shall not be considered a wind farm.

Windmill

A machine that operates on the energy generated by a series of blades or slats rotated by the wind.

Windmill, Accessory

A windmill that serves as an accessory source of energy to a principal use.  Not more than one (1) windmill shall be permitted as an accessory windmill on any property.

Windmill Height

The vertical distance measured from the base of the support structure at grade to the highest point of the structure, including blades. Ifthe support structure is on a sloped grade, then the average between the highest and lowest grades shall be used in calculating the height.




 
 



An open space, as may be required by this Ordinance, of uniform width or depth on
the same lot with a building or a group of buildings, which open space lies between the principal building or group of buildings and the nearest Jot line and is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as h.erein permitted.

a.	Yard, Front


An open space extending the full width of the lot between the front of the building and the ultimate right-of-way line unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as specified elsewhere in this Ordinance.

b.	Yard, Rear

An open space extending the full width of the lot, between a building and the rear lot line, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as specified elsewhere in this Ordinance.

c.	Yard, Side

An open space extending from the front yard to the rear yard between a building and the nearest side lot line, unoccupied and unobstructed  from the ground upward except as specified elsewhere in this Ordinance.

Zoning Hearing Board

The Zoning Hearing Board of the Borough of Taylor. Zoning Officer
The administrative officer, appointed by the Governing Body who shall administer and
enforce the provisions of this Ordinance. Zoning Map
The Zoning Map or Maps of the Borough of Taylor, Pennsylvania dated May, 1990,
together with all amendments subsequently adopted.













 
 
ARTICLE  12






 







12.100	INTERPRETATION

In the interpretation and the application of the provisions of this Ordinance, they shall be held to the minimum requirements for the promotion of the health, safety morals, and general welfare.  It is not intended to interfere with or abrogate or annul other rules, regulations or ordinances, provided that where this Ordinance imposes greater restrictions upon the use of buildings or premises, or upon the height or bulk of a building, or requires larger open spaces, the provisions of this Ordinance shall control.



12.200	EXEMPTIONS

This Ordinance shall not apply to any existing or proposed building, or extension thereof, used or to be used by a public utility corporation, if, upon petition of the corporation, the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission shall, after a public hearing, decide that the present or proposed situation of the building in question is reasonably necessary for the convenience or welfare of the public.



12.300	VALIDITY

Ifany section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this Ordinance or the location of any district boundary shown on the Zoning Map that forms a part hereof is for any reason held by a Court of competent jurisdiction  to be invalid, such a decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Ordinance or Zoning Map.  The Governing Body of the Borough of Taylor hereby declares that it would have passed this Ordinance and each section or part thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections or parts thereof be declared invalid.











l	-I
 

12.400	EFFECTIVE DATE


This Ordinance shall take effect at the earliest period allowed by law.

Duly presented and adopted at a regular meeting of the Borough Council of the Borough of Taylor,Pennsylvaniaheldonthis 1 "f	dayof PP<:EmBeR	. -UOi·








 













































 
 


(















SUBDIVISION AND
LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE


FOR1HE	·.


BOROUGH OF TAYLOR LACKAWANNA COUNTY, PA







Ordinance No. 6· of 2003









JuLY 2003


. AS AMENDED OCTOBER  12, 2005
 
 
 


(

BOROUGH OF TAYLOR
ORmNANCENO. OF2005

AN AMENDMENT OF THE BOROUGH OF TAYLOR SUBDIVISION AND.LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE, INCLUDING, INTER ALIA,: ARTICLE 1 DEFINITIONS ARTICLE 2, SECTION 203, FEES AND SECTION 2o5, INDEMNIFICATION.

WHEREAS, the B0rough of Ta)'lor is a duly ordained political subdivision (the
.   "Borough"); and  ·

WHEREAS, the Borough has duly enacted on July 9, 2005, a Subdivision and
land Development Ordinance, No. 1of 2005 (the "SALDO Ordinance"); and ·

WHEREAS, for the public good and welfare. it is in the best interest of the
Borough to Amend the aforesaid SALDO Ordinance; and	·

NOW,  THEREFORE,  BE rr ORDAINED AND  ENACTED by the. Borough
Council of the Borough of Taylor; and it is hereby enacted and ordained by the authority
.   granted to Boroughs under the laws of the Commonwealth of Pemsylvania.  as follows:

SECTION.I: .PURPOSE & LOCATION

To adopt a SALDO ordinance amendment to the.current Taylor Borough SAlDO
Ordinance of July, 2005 in accordance with the which is Incorporated herein by reference as if specificalJy set fOrth herein. A copy of the full text of the Ordinance and this Amendment  are both on file lnthe Borough Bui\ding w the Borough Secretary, 122 Union Street, Taylor, PA.  The Ordinance and this Amendment  are incorporated by
reference Into the official ordinance book of the Borough with the same force and effect
as if duly recorded therein. The Ordinance with this Amendment may be inspected and
copy secured during regular Borough hours at the above address.

SECTION II: AMENDMENTS

1he SALDO Ordinance of the Borough of Taylor is hereby amended as follows:

Artlcl• 1

Add definition Professional Consultants. Parsons who provide expert or professional advice including but not limited to architects, attorneys, certified public accountants (CPA).' engln . geologists, land surveyors, landscape architects or planners.

Add definition Improvement  Any man-made, immovable item that becomes part of, is
placed upon, or is affixed to real estate.	·



 
 







Sec. 203, ·Fees

Sec. 203 A.1. (a) Replace 11•••the Municipal Engineer and the Borough Solicitor"' with
"the Municipality's  professional    consultants,"	·
Add: Such fees shall also cover the cost of the Inspection of improvements; provided, however, that the applicant shall not be required to reimburse the municipality for any
Inspection which is.duplicative of Inspections covered by other governmental agencies or public utilities; the burden of proving that any inspection is duplicative shall be on the applicant.	·

Add to sec203 A.4 a:
provided, however, that fees charged to the municipality relating to any appeal of a
decision on an application shall not be considered review fees and shall not be charged
to an applicant. The Borough Council or its designee shall submit to the applicant an itemized bill showing work performed; identifying the person performing the services
and the time and date spentfor each task. Itemized bills may be submitted on an interim
basis or upon the conclusion of services provided. Subsequent to the final release of
financial security for completion of improvements for a subdivision or a land development, or any phase thereof, the professional oonauttant shall submit to the governing body a billforthe inspection services, specifically designated as a final bill. · The final bill shall include Inspection fees incurred through the release of financial security.

Revise Sec 203 A4. b. as follows: In the event the applicant disputes the amount of any such review fees, the applicant shall. no later than forty-five (45) days after the date of transmittal of the bill to the applicant, notify the Borough and the applicable Borough profes&ional consultant that such fees are disputed and shall explain the basis of their objections to the fees charged, in which case the Borough shall not delay or disapprove a subdivision or land development application due to the applicanfs dispute over fees. Failure Of the applicant to dispute a bill within thirty (30) days shall be a waiver of the
applicanf s right to arbitration of that bill under Section 51o (G) of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code,  as amended.	·	·

Revise Section 203 A4.c. Replace •Borough Of Taylor" with •t11e Borough's Professional
Consuttanr and replace •herein" with "Section 510 (G) of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.•	·

Replace Section 203 A4.d...with: If the professional consultant and the applicant cannot agree on the amount of expenses which are reasonable and necessary, then the applicant shall have the right, within forty five (45) days of the transmittal of the final bill or supplement to the final bill to the applicant, to request the appointment of another professional consultant to serve as an arbitrator. The applicant and the professional consultant whose fees are being challenged shall. by mutual agreement, appoint
another professional qonsultant to review any bills the applicant has disputed and which
remain unresolved and make a detennination as to the amount thereof which is
 






reasonable  a necessary. The arbitrator  shall be Of the same profession or discipline
as the pmfessronal consultant whose fees me being disputed.	·

R lace Sec 203 A4.e. with: The Arbitrator so appointed shall hear such evidence and review such documentation as the arbitrator • in his or her sole opinion  deems necessary and shall render a decision no later than fifty (50) days afte the date of appointment. Based on the decision of the atpitmtor file applicant or the professional   . consultant whose fees were ch8Henged shall be required to pay any amounts necessary to implement the decision within sixty (60) days. Inthe event the municipality has paid
the professional  consultant an amount in excess of the amount determined to be reasonable and necessary, the professional consultant shall, Within sixty (60) days reimburse the excess payment	.	·

Replace Sec 203 A4.f. with: Inthe event that the Municipality's Professional Consultant and applicant cannot agree upon the arbitrator to be appointed within 20 days of the request for appointment of an arbitrator, then upon application of either party, the President Judge of the Court of Common Pleas of Lackawanna County shall appoint such arbitrator, who, in that case, shall be neither the Municipalify's Professional Consultant. nor any professional consultant who has been retained by, or performed services for, the Municipality or the applicant within lhe preceding five years.

Replace sec 203 A4.g. with: The fee of the arbilrator shall be paid by the applicant if
the review fee charged Is sustained by the arbitrator; otherwise it shall be divided
equally between the parties. If the disputed fees are found to be excessive by more than
$5,000.00 the arbitrator shall have the disaetion to assess the arbitration fee inwhole
or in part against either the applicant or the professional consultant The governing
body and the consultant whose fees are the subject of the dispute shall be parties to the
proceeding.

Add Sec 203 A.4.h. as follows: Subsequent to a decision on an application, the Borough Council shall submit to the applicant an itemized bill for review fees, specifically designated as a final bill. The final bill shall include all review fees incurred at least through the date of the decision	the application.  If for any reason additional r view is required subsequent to the decision, including Inspections and other work to sati fy the conditions of the approval, the additional review fees shall be charged to the applicant
as a supplement to the final bill.

Add Section 203 A.6. Fee Schedule, as follows:
Fees charged to applicants shall be based upon a schedule that the Borough shall
establish by ordinance; provided, however, that:

1.	Said fee schedule may be amended ftom time to time by resolutio when Professional Consultants revise their fee charges to the municipality
 
.2.
 
Said fees shall be reasonable and in accordance with the ordinary and customary fees
charged by the M.unicipaliif s Professional Consultants for work performed for similar
services inthe municipality, but in no event slWI such fees exceed the rate or cost
 


, .


charged by the professional coosultant to the municipality for comparable services when
fees are not reimbursed or otherwise impose <>n appliCan.ts.

Add Sec 205. Indemnification of Taylor Borough.

The Issuance of any permit or approval of any plan Is not fntended to creatf;11 liability on the part of the Borough, Its commissions. officers, and agents•.Parties are advised to independently Investigate development rights, lmproVements. structures. or components thereof.  Additional zoning and/or bulfdlng permits may be necessary.  The owner and  its successors and assigns shall Indemnify and hold harmless the Borough,.Its employees, agents, and commissions from all claims related to development plans and· calculation, Including but not limited to stormwater detention and discharge.
Additionally, consult dlsclalmer of munlclpal liability under Section 5.898 and 9.231 of the Taylor Borough Zoning Ordinance. This language shall appear on each plan submitted  for review and/or approval.

Add Sec. 402.B.{11)  Required Note on Indemnification of Taylor Borough. Placement of the note required under §205 hereof.

Add Sec. 403.B.(12)  Required Note on Indemnification of Taylor Borough. Placement
of the note required under §205 hereof.

SECTION HQ: FULL FORCE AND EFFECT

In all other respects. the SALDO Ordinance of the Borough of Taylor, as amended, shall
remain In full force and effect.

SECTION IV: SEVERABILITY .AND REPEALER

a.	Should any section, clause, or provision of this Ordinance be declared by the courts to be invalid, the same shall not affect ·the valldlty of the Ordinance as a whole or the parts thereof. othedhan the part so declared to be Invalid.

b.	All ordinances .or parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith am hereby repealed.

SECTION V:  EFFECTIVE DATE

This Ordinance shaU take effect October 18, 2005 or as soon as permitted by law thereafter.

ENACTED AND  ORDAINED this 12111 day of October,
 








.·

APPROVED this IJtJaday of October, 2005
 
 
 
 





BOROUGH  OFT.AYLOR ORDINANCE# _:i_:_. 200S .


AN  ORPINANCB  FOR THEtCOLLBCTION   OF PROFltSSiONAL   CONSULTANT   REVIEW FBBS ASSOCIATED WITH THB SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT	. ORDll'fANCB  OF TIIB BOROUGH   OF TAYWR


BB IT ORDAINED AND ENACfBD by tho B rough Council of the Borough of Taylor, Lackawanna County. Pennsylvania by authority of and pursuant to the provisions of Act of 1968,
P.L 805, No• .247·ofthe Oeneml Assembly of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, approved	·. July 31, 1968, as reenacted and amended, known and cited as the "Pennsylvania Municipalities Imming Code," as follows:	·

.1.		PwpoBe.  This ordinllllee is to establish tho maximum fees that.may be charged by professional consultants emplo}'W by the Borough of Taylor t() assist with plan reviews and project inspections necessitated by subdivision and/or land deve10pment ai>plication.s submitted to- the Borough of Taylor. Such professional consultants shall include, but shall not be limited to arcl:rltects, attomeya, certliied publia aaoountants, engineers, geologists, land surveyors, landscape ardlltects. and phmne.rs ·
.	.
2.	Em,. The following hourly rates shall be the basis fur fees charged by such Professional
Consultants; and,.such rates may hemdter be amended by resolution of tho Borough
Council of tho Borough of Taylor Inorder to reflect revised rates that may subsequently
be established by the Dorough"s Professional Comulmnts.

 
a.	,Borough Engineer
b.	Borough  Solicitor
c.	Borough Planner
d.	Others      ·
 
$SS.OO per hour
$60.00 per hour
$1S.OO per bo\Jr
Cw.tent approved mt.e plus ex.penses
 

3.		SUgplemental Fpes !Uld Adiustment  - Iftho rcv;ew fees collected at the time of application arc not Bufficient to cover the cost of engineering services and other related professional consulting services incurred by the Box:ougb, an additional fee shall e collected from the Applicant prior to any action on the plan.  Ifafter BoIO?gh action on
the plant any review fees remain, there shall be a rC?fund made to the Appbcant of the
balance within thirty (30) days of action on the plan.	·

4.	Full Foree and Effect. Inall other respects, the SALDO Ordinance of the Borough of Taylor, as amended, shall remain in:full force and offect. ·	.	·
.	.'
5.	SEVEBABILI!Y RBPBALBR
 





a.	Should any s ction, clause, or provision of this Ordimmce be declared bythe courts to be invalid. the same shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as.a whole o the·parts thereof, other than the part so declared  to be invalid.

b.	All ordinances or parts of ordinances inoonsi t herewith are hereby repealed.

6.	EFFECTIVE DAm

This Ordinance shall take effect October 18,2005 or as soon as permitted by law thereafter. ENACTED AND ORDAINED this 1291 day of October, 2005


 

 

APPROVED thish;i!bday of October, 2005



-	·




















.•'
 

 


Lackawanna County
Commissioners
Michael J. Washo, Chairman Corey D. O'Brien
A.	J. Munchak

Planning Commission Patrick Dempsey, Chairman John Pocius
David PetroskY Bonnie Rosiak John Segilia Joseph Lorince
Kathleen Graff Paul Weridolowski Rosemary Broderick

Department of Planning and Economic Development
Harry D. Lindsay
Executive Director
 

LACKAWANNA	COUNTY
PLANNING	COMMISSION














TO:   Lackawanna County Municipalities
& Subdivision/Land  Development Preparers FROM: Mary Liz Donato, Regional Planning Manager RE: REVISED FEE SCHEDULE
DATE: April 17, 2008


Effective June 1, 2008, the Lackawanna County Regional Planning Commission FEE SCHEDULE for Subdivision and Land Development Plans will change. The LCRPC Board of Directors approved the revisions at its April 10th monthly meeting.

Please forward or copy and distribute the enclosed schedule (changes in red) to all individuals within your municipality or organization who are responsible for the submission of subdivision and land development plans to this office.

After June 1, plans submitted to this office with a deficient review fee will either be returned as incomplete or delayed for review until the appropriate fee is paid.

Thank you for your attention this matter. Please feel free to call me with any questions.
 



















Scranton Electric Building• 507 Linden Street• Suite 501 • Scranton, PA 18503	Phone: (570) 963-6400	Fax: (570) 963-6364
 
LACKAWANNA COUNTY REGIONAL PLANNING COMMISSION FEE SCHEDULE
EFFECTIVE June 1, 2008



SUBDIVISION REVIEWS

Minor Subdivision (Less than five lots, including lot line revisions and lot consolidations) Flat Fee: $75.00

Major Subdivision (Five or more lots or any plan requiring road construction)
$75.00 plus $15.00 per lot. Minimum fee: $105.00



LAND DEVELOPMENT REVIEWS

Two Single-Family Residential Dwellings on an Existing Lot Flat fee: $75.00

Multi-family Residential (Three or more residential units, such as apartments, townhomes, condominiums, dormitories, nursing homes, assisted-living facilities, etc.)
$75.00 plus $15.00 per unit. Minimum fee: $105.00

Non-Residential Structures (Commercial, Office,  Professional, Manufacturing, Warehousing/Distribution and similar facilities)
$75.00 plus $7.50 per 1,000 square feet of floor area

Government/Community Facilities/Schools/Non-profit Organizations
No Fee



OTHER FEES (No charge for Lacka Co munis/govt/nonprofits)

County Lines	$25.00 (maximum 2 free copies for munis/govt/nonprofits)
 
Annual Report
Stormwater Management Plan Open Space Plan CD
Open Space GIS Files CD

Aerial Photos - DVDs 10,000'xlO,OOO' tile Entire County
 
$5.00
$25.00 (3 documents & maps)
$20.00
$150.00



$15.00 per tile
$1,500
 

Other GIS Data Layers - DVDs
1municipality	$150 per layer	$500 all layers
2-5 contiguous municipalities	$250 per layer	$1,000 all layers
Entire county	$500 per layer	$1,500 all layers All county GIS layers, including the digital aerial photography	$3,000

Copies	$0.50 per copy (after 4th sheet)
 



OPTIONAL  FORM 99 (7-80)

FAX  TRANSMITTAL
to	•	rJ	.'Z..	From
 

P.01
 

Depl./Agency
Environm	"•M q	Fax ,	e to meet
these requ	sum.es any
"b'	NSN    7540-01-317-7369	5099-101	GENERAL SEFIVICH ADMINISTRATION
respons1  1    _	•	..	.	,r
construction and operation of the facilities contained inthe plan.
G. Upon written request by the applicant and approval by the District Manager, a
portion of the review fee may be refunded if the applicant withdraws the plan prior to review. No fees are refundable after the district review is underway.

108 - Fee Sghedule:

Lackawanna County Recommended Fee Schedule

Residential Developments	(For Townhouses consider ••pAD" (Multi-unit
Building) 11.11 lot)







 

71 &Above
 
1,000.00 + $30.00 for each additional lot
 

lndu.11triaJ/Commercial/Otber
LeH then .33 sere1	$ 75.00
.34 -0.99 aen	S 250.00
1-4.99 acre	450.00
5..14.99 acres	900.00
1S-30 acres	l•.S00.00
Over 30 acres	1,500 + $30.00 for each additional acre
(Round disturbance to nearest whole number)

Timber Harvest	
Less then 25 acres	$ 50.00
25-50 acres	150.00
50-250 acres	300.00
over 250 acres	450.00

E&S Plan aHoclated with Chapter. 105 General Perm.its, which an not part of
larger Projecbl - $15.00.

109 ApproYA.l:
Be it resolved this 24th day of February inthe year 2004 that the Lackawanna County
Conservation District does hereby adopt a fee schedule mid policy for the review and
approval of all Erosion and Sediment Control Plans as authorized by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Act Number 217of1945, Conservation District Law as amended, in accordance with the attached schedule of fees and policy.


3	Lackawanna County Conservation
District - Fee's 2008
 
 
 
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT·
,.
I
Ordinance No. 6 of 2003

TABLE OF CONTENTS


 
ARTICLE 1

Section 100.
Section 101.
Section 102
Section 103.
Section 104.
Section 105.
 

General Provisions

Short Title • .• • • • .. . • • .• .• • • • • • • • • • • .. .• • . .• . I - I Authority •••••.••••.••••• • • • • • • • • • • • ... ..• I - l Purpose • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • .• • • • • . • • • • • • ... • • . I - 2 Scope .• .• • • .• • • • .• • • • .• • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • . . . 1-2 Interpretation •......•..... • ...... ........ ... I- 2 Definitions and word usage  • • • • • • • • • • • • • .• • .• • .   I - 3
 

ARTICLE JI    Administration
 


Section 200.
Section 201.
Section 202.
Section 203.
Section 204. ARTICLE ill
Section 300.
Section 301.
Section 302.

Section 303.

Section 304.
Section 305.
-'	ARTICLE IV

Section 400.
Section 401. Section 402•. Section 403.
 


Applicability .• • • • • ... . .• .... • • • .. • . ... . .• ... Approval Authority .••..••...•.••.•••.•..••.. EnfoI"Cement • • • • • • • • • • • • .• • • • • • • • • • • .• • ... • .• Fees        .......................................  .
Effect of Filing • • • • • • • • .• • • .• .• • • .• ... .. • . . . Procedures
General outline of procedures •••.•••••••.......
·Sketch plan •••.•••••• :••••.•••.•••••••..•...
Preliminary application for major subdivision
or land development ••••••.••••..•••.....
Final application for major subdivision
orl;md development  .•••...•••.•.••...... Fmal application for minor subdivision •••••..••..
Recording of final plan for minor and major
subdivision and for land developments

Application  and Plan Requirements

Application  requirements  • • • • • . • •..•••..•... ···
Sketch plan application .......•...•.•.......• ·
Preliininaryapplication ...•...•...............
Final plan for major subdivision
or land development .•••.....••••• • ·• ····•
 


Il- l II- l Il-1 Il-2 II-5



m- i
m- 2
m- 4

m- s
ID-12

m-16




IV- l
IV- l
IV- 3

IV-13
 
-	Section f(-04.
 

Final
 

plan for minor subdivision •.•••••..•...• ·•
 

IV-19
 
Section 405.
Section 406.
Section 407.

-
 
.Lot line change ·• • • • .• • • • • • • .• .. . .. . .. ·······
Resubdivision    ••••....•.•........•..••...••..
Record plan   .·.••.•••••.•.....•..•••........•
 
IV-20
IV-20
IV-21
 

SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOP NT



 
ARTICLEV
 
Design Standards
 

 
Section 500.

Section 501.
Section 502.
Section 503.
Section 504.
 
Scope; minimum standards
adjustment ofstandards •••......••........ General standards .. c • ., • • • .. • • • • • • • • • • • • ., • • • • • 6 Community facilities • • . • • • • ..• .• • .• .....• . ..• Streets generally ..••.•....•..•.•..•.•........ Classification ofstreets .••...•• •••.... • .. ...
 

V-  l
V-  1
V-  2
V-  2
V- ·4
 

.....
-
 





:...·
 
Section 505.
Section 506.
Section 507.
Section 508.
Section 509.
Section 510.





























ARTICLE VI

Section 600.
Section 601.
Section 602.
Section 603.
Section 604.
 
Street standards    ••••.•.• · ••..••••••......•.•.
Culs-de-sac ........ . ......... .. ......... . .... .
Building I..ots • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • Street  alignment  •  ; ••.....•..•.•.•....•.•...... Street grades • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • Street    intersections          •••.•••·••••••.••.•••.•.••.•.





























Improvements

Purpose; conformance req d .. .., ...........
Minimum requirements .....•••..•..•..•....•.
Revision of plans .••••.....•.•..•••...••..••. Maintenance • • • • • • • . • • . ..• • .• • • • • . .. • .• • • • . Streets and ddve ays ..•.....••......•....•...
 
V-  5
V- 1
V.-  8
V-  8
V-  9
V-  9































VI-  1
VI- l
VI'-  1
VI- 1
VI-	1
 







...,











-


-
...,

-
-
...,

--
 
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT


 
-
......
















.......
'
I
- -


-
-
-



....
 


Section 605.

Section 606.
Section 600.
Section  608.   .
Section 609.
Section 610.
·	Section 611.
Section 612.
Section 613.
Section 614.
Section 615.

Section 616.
Section 617.
Section 618.
Section 619.

Section 620.
Section 621. Section 622•. Section 623.
Section 624.
Section 625.

ARTICLBVIl

Section 700. Section 70l. ·
ARTICLEVIlI

Section 800.
Section 801.
Section 802.
Section 803.
Section 804.
Section 805.
 


Street signs, regulatory signs and traffic
signalization	•••....•.........•........
Street lights •.•.••...•..••....•.....••...... Monuments and markers •..•••...•......•..•.. Sidewalks  .......................... , ..........
Curbs  .................................... .
Storm sewerage system ••..•.••.•....•••...... Central water supply and fire hydrants ....•...... Reserved .• • ..• . .• ... .•. ....• .• ...• .• ..• ...:.. Public sanitary sewersystems •.••.....•.••..... Private sewer systems •.•••••.•..•• •.........
Gas, electric, telephone and communication facilities and manholes	•    . :••••..•••••.•••.•.••.•. Grading      ................................... .
Plan.tings ...........·. ...... .. ...............
Community facilities ...• ..• . ..•.....•.•......
Preliminary inspection of streets and
improvements  ••..•..•••....••...........
Final inspection of streets and improvements .•..••
Acceptance of streets and improvements ••...•....
. Ownership and maintenance of retention basins .... Water Storage Areas  .•..........•..; ..•..·....
Fire Hydrants • .. .• .• .. ... .• .• ....• ....... . ..
Changes   " .... ........ .................... ..

Contracts and Guaranties

Installation of improvements or suitable
guaranty required  • • • • .• • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • .• .
Contracts  • .• • ..• .. • • .... • • ... ......• ..... .
Amendments; Penalties; Severability; Repealer Amendments   ............................. ···
Violations and penalties .•..•..••. • ....•• ······ Severability • • • ...• . ..• . .. . ... • .• .• ·.• ·• ···• Repealer ...... . .... ..... . ... ....... ....... .·
Effective date . ...• .... .. .. .. .. . • ..• • • .• • • ...
Enactm.ent . . . .....·. ...... ..... ... . ....... . . ..
 



VI- 3
VI- 3
VI- 3
VI.: 4
·VI- 4
VI- 4 VI-12 VI-12 VI-12 VI-13

VI-14 VI-14 VI-14 VI-15

VI-15 VI-15 VI-16 VI-16 VI-18 VI-18 VI-18





VJI- 1
Vll-1




VIlI-l
vm-1
.  vm-2
vm-3
Vill-3
VDI-3
 

 
TABLES

Table 1: Table2:
 



Basic Street Dimensional Standards ........•••..... Street and Roadway Design Standards ....•.•.•.....
 


V- 5
V-6
 
 
 
g $] 9' nmh"iaa
122 UNION STREET TAYLOR, PENNSYLVANIA 18517	·	.
Phone: (570) 562-1400	Fax: (570) 562-1415


 
STEPHEN ROMANKO, CHAIRMAN RICHARD NEZLO, SECRETARY STEPHEN RINDICH
FRAN DeANGELO
 

ATTORNEY WILLIAM T. JONES, Solicitor GEORGE P. AULISO
BRIAN FALLON
STEVE ARMILLA Y
 



Re: Planning Project Contact Information



Please provide all requested information pertaining to the current project you have submitted to the Taylor Planning Commission, so we can contact the appropriate party in regards to updates, Review fee schedules in a timely fashion.


PROJECT NAME:	 	



PROJECT OWNER:

ADDRESS:	  	  PHONE                                                                                                                NUMBER:	  	 E-MAIL ADDRESS:	 	


ENGINEER (NAME):-------------------- ADDRESS:	 	  PHONE NUMBERS:   	
E-M	AIL ADDRESS:	 	




BILLING (NAME):	  	 ADDRESS:	  		  PHONE NUMBER:	 		 E-MAIL ADDRESS:	 		

If you should have any questions, please don't hesitate to contact the Chairman of the Taylor Planning Commission.
 
 
 

BOROUGH OF TAYLOR ·

·LACKAWA A COUNTY PA


TRACKING SYSTEM
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT·APELICATIONS



TYPE OF· APPLICATION:   SUBD.IVISION  (. -) .  OR LAND DEVELOPMENT· . (.

NAME                             OF                             APPLICANT  	  NAME                        OF                        DEVELOPMENT  	 DESCRIPTION OF DEVELOPMENT:·
1.	Area (acres)  	

2.	Use, units, etc.  	




A.	Pre-Application Review Date ·--- P;re-Application Respox:ise Date	_

B.	Preliminary Application·
 

l.	.Date filed with fees  	
 

Fee amount
 

$	_
 
2.	Action deadline fa)  	
 
3.	Date. of application and· fee
4.	Response of County Planning
 
to County Plan_ning Commission	_ Commi·ssion:	Deadline (30 days)  		
Receipt	_
 
s.·	Date of Planning Commission action
6.	Date of action communicated to applicant (a)(b)  	

C.	Final· Applicati.on

1.	Date filed ·
2.	Action dead. l....,i_n_e- ( a-) --	---
3.	Date bf Planning Commission action ...----:----::--
4 •	Date· of  action  communicated ··to applicant  .(a){b  	
·s.	Date of recording of approved plat
(max...90 days after approval)

D.	Billing of Review Fees
 

1..
2.

3.

4.
 

Date of billing - ----	Amount billed $	_
Date·objection filed---..,----, -
. (max. 10 working days from billing date)
Deadline to resolve d!spute or appoint .engineer
·	(max. 20  wor)c:ing days from billing date)
Deadline for final resolution
(max. 50 working days from billing date)
 


NOTES:	(a)	Not more than 90 days from 1st subsequent Planning Conunission meeting; ··if   no meeting within 30 days of filing, then 90 days from 30th day after filing.
 
(b)
 
Not more than ...15 days  after. action _is   taken;
 
·...



E.	Improvements

1; .	'Performance bond. amount ·. $  --------,-
 
2.	·aR.e.leas.e
 
of Progress. Payments
$
 
Request U <  Date	. . .	. Amount
:b. Municipal Engineer. certif.ication of·-. _c_..o_m_p-=l-e_t_i o-n-
(.not mc;ire· than 45. days· fromE=-. 2,....-a-._,"), 
.c. Amount r leased $	'-"------

3.	Release of Progress· Payments
a.	Request i2	Date	Amount $_--	,-,---
b. Municipal Engineer certification of completion.=---;;---,-
(not more.than 45  days from E.3.a.)
c. Amount released $	_

4.	Release of Progress Payments
a.	Request t3 . Date	Amount $.---.---::-;.---
b. Munici al Engineer certification of completion  	
(not mo e than 45   days from E.:4.a ..)
.c. Amount. released.$---.,.------'--
5.	Compli::tion·of Improvements
a.	Date developer notifies Governing Body   	
b.	Date Governing Body notifies Engineer   	
(not more.· than 10 days fr.om S·.a.)
c.	Date. of Engineer.' s report:	 	
(not more than 30 days from 5 .b.)
d. ·oate Governing Body notifies developer  	
(not more thari 15.days from 5.c.)

F.	Final. Sununar of Review Fees
 

1..	Fees· Billed	$ 	

2.	·Fees Received	$   	
3·_	·Actual Cost	$

·4.	Difference	$   	

5.	Adjusted Billing	$ 	
 

D te  	  [)ate  	
Date ------

Date --------
Date  	
 
Check One:	Refund ·(	)
 
or Developer Payment
 

6.	Adj s ment Payment:	Date  	

G.	Recreation  Impact .
 

.A	mount $-------
 

1.	Land,. fee, improvement  (describe).----------------



2.	Date of developer's compliance/offer ------

3.	·Amount of. develoP,er's compliance  	

4.	·	Date of municipal acceptapce of compl ance/offer  	
 
·.··.
 

•.'
 



.BO:flOUGH  .OE'   'l'AYLO,R   ·  :
 

SUBDIVISION   AND   LAND   DEVELOPMENT    ORDINANCE   .

.     CHECK-LIST


PRE-APPLICATION

I.	GENERAL  INFORMATION	·-·

 
A   	
B    	
c
D----
 
Describe existing covenants. Describe land characteristics.·
Describe available community fac.ilities and utilities .. Describe the proposed· development. .	·
Proposed µse:	_
Number  of lots, buildings,  establishments Typical .lot sizes and dimensions· ·
 	Proposed prices	·
··· ·	·proposed co  enants
-- Proposed streets and utility improvements
Sketch plan showing pro osed de elopment layout
 

II.	LOCATION MAP·
 
A	_ B   		
c·
D. ----
E   	
 

Name of development
Zoning of the site and adjacent lands
North arrow	scale and date	·
Hazardous features Relationship to, existing:·
·Public faciliti s	.
-- Shopping facilities ·
Traffic arteries
Prin_cipal. plapes of employment
 
III.	TOPOGRAPHIC MAP (At a scale of not less than· 100 feet =  1 i ch), showing:.

A.	---'--· . The proposed· name of the Subdivision/Development B	Name of:"the Subdivider/Developer·
C	Name of the.registered owner
D	North point, scale and date
E	Name of engine.er	surveyor1      o:i:: .other qualified person
. responsible  for the. map .	.·..	. ..
 
F   		  G	 	



H   	




I·----
 
Tract boundaries with bearings and distances	. Topography, with elevations based on data approved by the Conunission; and showing contours at vertical intervals of five (5) feet, or as required by the
Munici.pal. Engineer·	.
Approximate location	water courses, tree masses,· .
rock out-crops, existing buildi?gs, and actual location
of.sewers, inlets, water mains, easements, fire hydrants, railroads,. ·existing or confirmed· streets and
their  'established  grades	· Adjacent  streets	·
 



·. BOROUGH OF TAYLOR

SUBDIVISION_ ANµ· LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE



CHECK-LIST·



MINOR SUBDIVISIONS




SUBMIT FOUR (4} COPIES OF·THE FOLLOWING

 
A  ---





B   	








c   	
 
PROPOSED SUBDIVISION.LAYOUT
Property Dimensions·
Distances between property lines and existing buildings
on the site and adjacent to the site


EXISTING CONDITIONS

.	Adjacent  street widths	.
-- Location and characteristics of' existing utilities Water courses·
Other drainage .facilities Special features/hazards


CERTIFICATIONS  ·

Evidence of adequacy of ori- ite sewage disposal, if applicable
Evidence ·of adequate ·water·supply
 
'··



 
'   .	.	.   ·.··	·.'
·.S.UBDIVI ION	D LAND .DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE .

..   Ci-IECK  LIST
..:.
··MAJOR SUBDIVlSI.O.NS OR LAND DEVELOPMENTS

.   PRELIMINARY APPLICATION


SUBMIT EIGHT (8) COPIES OF THE FOLLOWING, MARKED "PRELIMINARY APPLICATION":


 
A ---









B    	
 
ENGINEERING DATA.._ Section 205a.3)
1	 		Results of review.for compliance with the Sewage·
Facil;i..ti	c.t	(D E.R. Qr   S,E.O.)	......._	.
2	 		Evidence .of. notification of ail a·ffected ·utiliti:es
regarding adequacy of proposed.easements-
·	3		Soil· erosion  and sedimentation control plan, by stages··	·	..	·
Review by Municipal Engineer
Review by  Count;.y Soils.Conservation Office

GENERAL INFORMATION - Section 205b.1)
 

·. 1   	

2    	
3   	
 

Plan specifications:	.
.	1 inch= 50 ft , 6r	. i·inch = 100 ft.
Proposed name·	subdivision
Names and addresses of applicant(s), and their
professionals,  including  seals ·
 
 			Proposed   street  ·layout, show  ng street  names,  proposed  widths  ·of.rights-of-way; and pavement·. widths	·	·	·	·
 
5   	

6  ---
7    	
8
9 --'---
10  	




11   	

12  	


13	_
 
Layout  of  lots, ·showing dimensions·and  numbers.' and existing zoning designation -  .  :
Parcels of l nd proposed to be dedicated to the
Borough	· ·	·
Legend and.notes
Building setback.or front yard lines·
Graphic scale,. nortb. polnt .and date .·
A location map showing subdivision name and
.l	ocation; tax map number; major existing · thoroughfares related to the subdivision,	. including the distance therefrom; title, graphic. scale, north.point·and date
Tract.bot:!ndary lines, showing dimensions,
bearings,  and  corners	:.	.	. Existing  streets ·and rights-of-way,  on or.
adjoining the site, including dedicated widths .and
roadway widths . ··	.
E sements: -   :Locations, W.idt]1.s, .and purposes
 



 
.14 -. ---



15  	
16	 	
17	 	

iB  	


19 ---



20    	



21  	
 

Existin · and pi'oposed utilities including sanitary and storm sewers,and other drainag facilities Size or·capacity of each should be shown and the
·	location of, or distance to, each existing utility
indicated	..
Existing,plattin of adjacetit land·.
Areas subject to periodic flooding
Other features or conditionswhich.would·affect
the subdivision·	·
A descripti9n.of the.protective covenants o:i;
private  restrictions to be  incorporated in the deeds	·	·
. Site data incl'uding the number of res'idential · lots; _typical lot sizi, the acreage of the subdivision/development  and the acreage in proposed recreation, and· other public, semi-public and community areas
Physical features.such as railroads	existing
permanent buildings, ·water courses,; and other xistinq features pertinent to proper subdivision
shall be shown	· ·
Contours at vertical intervals of two (2) feet if
t4e general slope of the site is less than ten
(10%) percent and at vertical intervals of five
(5) feet if the general slope is greater than ten
(10%) percent
 

c		ENGINEER'S REPORT

The followin·g shall be  shown on the Preliminary Plat or the Engineer's  Report:  ·

 		Profile of each street showing existing ground lines and proposed  grades	.	_
2	 		A typical cross section of.each 'l;:ype of:roadway to
be built, including all applicable cross-section
·data for the enti:i:;-e width of .rights of-way
3	 		The proposed type of surfacing for streets
4		Information regarding existing drainage systems in
the subdivision/development, both surface and
underground, including the location, size, type
and grade of drainage structures, storm sewers,
dr.ain tile and drainage. ditches.	The engi.neer' s opinion shall be expressed regarding the adequacy of such drainage facilities, and the basis given for such conclusions.	·
5		Information regarding proposed drainage systems in
t11e  subdivision,.both surface and underground,
including the size, location, type and grade of·
drainage structures, storm sewers, drain tile arid
drainage ditches proposed to be constructed, 'and
the drainage are.as they· are designed for.
 



 
.6  	



7	 	
8	 	



9  ----





10	 	




11	 	



12	 	



1-3    	
 

: The  location  of ··a11·water  courses.  .bodies'  of  water . or  str7ams. w.ith  their  low  and·high  water
elevations. ·..  All   the   elevations ·shall  be   united States Geologica1.·survey  Datum ..··	· ··	·.
Sanitary ·sewers,.· either in .place ·or. pr.oposed Results·pf   soil  seepage  'tests· hich  have  been conducted" throughout. the· area  to determine  the ability of  ;the. soil to dispose "of  sewage	astes  by seepage ·	.	.	.
.· A description of the water ·supply and sewage
disposal.facilities which  will operate	.
successfully   in.the.subdivision/development	In the event· individual'. septic tanks are to be installed,  the ·minimum  area  required per  family for a· seepage bed based on the. soil seepage tests shall. be given .. ·	·	.·	.	·
Water Supply.	A copy  of  a Certificate of  Public Convenience from t e pennsylvania Public Utility Commission  or. {in  application  for. such cert.ificate, a· cooperat'ive. agreement "or· ·a commitment or	.	. agreement  to  serve the  area  in  question.
Planning  Modules.	When  planning  modules  are required  by  the  Pennsylvania  Department   of Environmental  Resources· (DER).	·Evidence· of DER
approval of planning· modules,  if  applicable.. · Where the owner of the site unde·r consideration OWn    COI}tigUOUS    land .·suitable  for  development,   the above d scribed   engineering  data   sh ll  cover  all such  contiguous -lands.		·	·	· Highway.occupancy· perm,it,	if applicable.
 


BOROUGH OF TAYLOR

SUBDIVISION AND LANDDEvELOPMENT ORDINANCE·

CHECK..:.LIST.  · .

MAJOR SUBDIVISIONS OR LAND DEVELOPMENTS FINAL APPLICATION
SUBMIT EIGHT (8) COPIES OF THE FOLLOWING MARKED "FINAL APPLICATION":


A		IMPROVEMENTS.
 

1  	

.or	2    	 3·----
 

Municipal Engineer's approval of completion of required improvements	.	. Financial security ..in an amount sufficient to. cover the cost of such improvements
Financial security.to secure structural integrity
of such improvements
 

B		SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS -. Sect.ion 207r.
 

1  	






2    	
3	 	



4	 	


5
6  ----

7    	




8    	
 

Evidence showing that all general taxes on· the subdivision. ave been paid in full to date,. and that all special taxes or assessmentSj have been
.Paid or.. discharged in. full or that the·court under which side assessments were made has entered an order redistributing the assessments against the land platted.	·	·
A copy·of the Sales contract
A statement signed by the subdivider/developer,
setting forth the public improvements he proposes
to make, together with plans, specifications, and estimates of cost therefor.
An   affidavit that the applicant is the.owner.or
equitable owner of.the land proposed to be
·subdivided..	·
Location and method.of street lighting facilities.
Deed of dedication o streets and other public property.	. ·
Front yard setback lines, the minimum as fixed by the Borough's Zoning Ordinance, and any other·
etback or street lines established by this. Ordinance and those specified in. the ·deed restrictions.	·
A. check payable to the· municip.ality in an amount determined by  the Municipal Engineer sufficient to cover the cost of:
a)	Reviewing  the Application's  Engineering details; _  ·	.	·	. ·.
b)·	Inspecting the site for conformance to
survey;·
 



c),	. repariJ:lg the; cost, e"sti ates of· req ired imp,:-ovements;	·	·
 
. d)

e)

f)
 
nspection of requir d improvements du ing installation;. and	·	·	"
1;inal ."ins ection on completi"o of· installation of_required  improvements; and Fees charged by the County Planning	· Commission and·· fees fo:i; other related
consu.  l..t-in·:·g services	·	·	·
 

c		OTHER' INFORMATION

 
1  	

2	 	





3	 	



·4   	


5   	

.;	.6   	

7    	


8   	
9    	


10	 	




11	 	

12	 	


13	 	


14  	

15  	
 

Primary control points, approved by the engineer,· or description and "ties"-to such control points. Tract· boundary lines, ·right_;of-way lines of streets, easements,· and other rights-of-way,- and property lines of residential lots and other sites with .accurate dimensions, bearings, or deflection angl s, and. radii, arcs, and central angles of all
cu·rves·: ·· c. ·.'.: ·•..;.   :· :·· · : · ·: --. ·. ·.	· _.   ·     ·  · ·  ·.·  ·' ·  · ·  ·      .-_-. ·'·	···.    :·.. · '·.
Accurate distances and directions to the nearest establ"ished street corners or official monuments. Refer.ence corners shall be accurately described on the plan.	·	. ·
Accurate locations of ali existing and recorded
·	streets. intersecting the boundaries of the tra.ct and the names of such streets..
Location,·  dimensions, . and. purpose  of .easements,
includirig ·ahy limitations on such easements.	·
Nu_mber to identify each lot and/or site, and street numbers of lots	·	·
Accurate dimensions and.· purposes for a_ny· property·
to be dedicated or reserved for public, semi- ·
public  or. .community  use .. ·     .   ·	·	·	. ·	.   . .	·
Building· lines on all lots and other sites Profiles. of. streets and· alleys sh.owing .grades at minimum scale of fifty (50)  ·feet·horizontal and
··.ten (10) . feet vertical. .	· .	·
Cross sections for the entire width of each right­
of-way of·the streets and alleys showing the width
of the right-of-way, width of cartway, ·1ocation and :width of sidewalks, and location. and. size of
utilit,y  mains.	·	..	·	..	.
Names of record owners of adjoining unplatted
land.	. .	· .
Reference to recorded subdivision applications of
adjoining platted land by record nam , date_ arid
number, ,   ·  . ·    :    ·   · .    d Certification.by· licensed Surveyor or license. Engineer  certifying  to  accuracy  of  survey  and
application. · · ·   .
Proposed Protective .Co enants running with the
land, if any.	.	.
Proposed contours at vertical intervals as set
forth in	ecti6n 205 b.l)a)20}.
 

 

16	 	







17	 	
 
:V:

The Application shall have lettered.upon it a. statement.delineating the areas proposed to.be dedicated for such public uses'as .. streets, alleys,
:public schools, parks or. iflnY other public use,  and
.  there shall be attached·	the  application.a
certificate· of title c·ertifying the ownership of
all such: lands .·to be so dedicated by said
application.. .	..·  .	.
Plans and profiles.of proposed sanitary and/or
storm water sewers, with grades and pipe sizes
indicated, and a plan- of _any proposed water
distribution system showing pipe sizes and location of  valves and fire hydrants.	·
 


D		POST APPROVAL REQUIREMENT

 		Recorder of Deeds Certificate with two (2) copies pf the appli·cation as recorded.








































. 1i
 
·.·.:.;·,··:	...	.
 


•'  '.
 

. TAYLOI . p	ING.;coMMrss.ION.
··APPLicATION FOR.·PREL M· -N -· pl.Afi: APPROVAL·
..     .	.

L	Name of.Subdi i ion

 
2.	Naine of owner(s) of property.
•.
··Address
 

---.,.	----.,. -'-	-
 

3 ·	Name of developer (s)  if differ nt.fr	owner (s)

Address	 

4. .	Name of individual responsible f9r preparation of ."plan------


 


5.	Total Acreage	_

No. of Lots  	
 
.·  '!e1.   No....,,.;_'---"""'--'-'----'-==-'-'-"-
Acreage to be.developed -----
Money Order, Cashier's.Check,
 

Certified Check in the amount o $--------,-----------
6.	Type.of development planned:	Resiqential  	
 

Commercial ·----------
 

Industrial  	
 
7.	Linear feet of streets·-------------------------
B.	Ac.reage. propose!d  in public or quasi-publ c use (parks,

playgrounds, etc.)  	

9.	·.  Attachments  a;nct Enclosures: ·

(a)	Preliminary ·Plan.showing proposed subdivision. Jb) Copies of proposed deed restrictions.
 




10.
 
(c). Report on subsurface· conditions."
(d) Fee in the form.of a  check or money order. Certifications:	The undersigned.hereby represents that, to the
best of  his knowledge and· belief,· al .information li. ted above ·
and attached. h reto is true·,· corre.ct and c_omplete

Date		Signature(s) ot·owner(s) or Developer(s)
 



TO BE FILLED IN BY PLANNING COMMISSION ONLt:



1.	Date application receiv d  	

2.	Date reviewed by Commission  	
3.	Dates of Commission action:.	··Approved

-,-	-Disapproved

4.	Reasons and conditions for approval:  	









·5.	Reasons for disapproval:	--'









6.	Modificat ons requiied or other conditioni of ap r6val:









7.	Signed b¥:



 

ttest:_



Secretary
 
Chairman.
 
·...
TAYLOR.PLANNINGCOMMIS-\>ION APPLICATION FOR FINAL PLAN APPROVAL·

1.

2.

Tel·. No.    	

3.	Name of de.veloper(s) if different from owner(s)

Address		Tel. No.    	

4.	Acreage. being dedicated or rese·rved for open space  	

 
:..··...  :;·;;'  ....   ···-··	..- ;.   -· --..•·;.... ·:-.·-.-.·. - ...........·.··.··-··:·..·
s.  · Attachments and Encl6sures:
 	(a) Final Plan and necess.ary prints.
 	(b) Final Engineering plans..	·
 	{c) Final copy.of protective covenants.
 	(d) Other supporting.data required when
·Plan approval may.have 'been granted
conditions being satisfied.	·
 

'".  : .:




Preliminary subject to
 

6.	Certification ..

The undersigned represents that' q.11 of the above sta:tements and
.a..tt<,'lchrne.nts are·. true, corI. ;"ect and comp. lete.

Tl"ie undersigned repres nts.th t all·right..:..of..:..way,	easements, and other. properties for public use, as shown on the Final Plat are to be dedicated,· .unless otherwise specifically· noted ..
.	.
.The undersigned further represents, except as.othe wise. specifically· noted, that all .proposed public improvements and facilities.as shown on the Final Plan have been improved and constructed or a  bond is: herewith.posted with·Borough Council in favor of Taylor Borough ·and in sufficient amount to cover the full esti ated cost of construction thereoft prior to sale o agreement of sale of any subdivided· lot as shown on  the Fin.al
Plan.	·	·

The undersigned further agrees that.within ninety (90) days from the date of .approval of this.subdivision that the Final Plat and Restrictive covenants will be recorded. with the Lackawanna County
·Recorder.of Deeds or that said commission· approval shall become-··· ··' ·-
null and void.

Date:  	



Signature of ·Owner(s)
 



TO BE FILLED'.IN BY.PLANNING COMMISSION ONLY:


1.	Date application received and amount of fee:

Date  		 

2.	Date reviewed by .Commission	_;	--'---

3.	.Referrals and dates:

(a)	Commis.sion Engineer  	

(b)	Department of Eqvironmental.Resources ------	-----­

(c)	PA Department of Transportation  	

4.	Reports received:

(a)	Commission Engineer  	

(b)	Department of Environmental Resources  	

(c)	PA Department of Transportation  	

5.	Planning Commission Action:

              (a) Approved  	

{b)	Approved  subject to following · modificat.ions:  	





              (c)	Disapproved for following reasons:





6.	Signed by:



 

·Attest·:



Secretary
 
Chairman
 



Date Occupancy Permit rssued -------------	-------
 



WesJones .-Borough FilY! Chief.


 


Zoning & Fire Reauirements

1) landscaping as outlined in 4.722 Page 4-6 - REQUIRED

2} Site lighting as outlined in 4.723 Page 4-7 -NOTE ON PLANS ·NONE PROPOSED" IF NOT UTILIZED FOR YOUR PROJECT

3) Signage (If there are any signs to be placed for this project, they should be drawn, showing the size, .width, illumination, sample messages, etc. as outlined· in 5.532 to 5.850 - NOTE ON PLANS •NONE PR POSED" IF NOT UTILIZED FOR YOUR PROJECT

4) Parking requirements with number of employee's as outlined In Table I, page 5-26, Table IV
Page 5-30 and Sections 5.600 to 5.003 - REQUIRED                                                      .            ·

5)	Parking area surfacing as outlined In 5.643 Page 5-31 - REQUIRED

6)	Fire Hydrants should be located no more than 500 running feet to the furthest point - REQUIRED	.

7)	Will there be wall mount hydrants located the building? If so oouplings should be 4 inch Storz
coupler. - NOTE ON PLANS •NONE PROPOSED" IF NOT UTILIZED FOR YOUR PROJECT

8)	List all hazardous chemicals on site and provide MSDS sheets - REQUIRED

9)	List emergency contacts,· names, phone numbers & time of day responsible - REQUIRED 1O) State if the building will be equipped with automatic fire suppression systems - REQUIRED
11)	State if a KNOX BOX system will be Installed - REQUIRED

12)	State if the building will be equipped with a fire alarm system - REQU_IRED

13)	State if there is access to drive around the entire building for fire apparatus· REQUIRED


Provide all information for required details on plans. Please don't hesitate to contact us if you should have any comments or question of this correspondence.


Respectfully,



Clark Robbins		· Zoning Officer	·
 
...





 
FIRE  tlYDIWfl" _........ 	
l<S   SPECIFIED






....
S  CU.  FT.  CW.VE!....-:..-..--
lmAIH-KEEP Cl.EAR :: •
OF  C0Nt::RETE	· -:-.:


8 Mli. POL,y..	.•	'
EJ1m.EN£· UHING	·::
EIEIWEEN    CONC.
·	&:  DUCTILE  IRON
 

NOTE;
i.	AU.  HYDRANTS  TO  BE SF:!'  PUJMB  W/  NOZZLE  OONG
m UIUSS O'IHERWISE SPtCIF'IED BY FtRE DEPARNEMT
2. AU. CONc:Rm:. TO  BE 2500  PSI P.C. COHCRtTt	•.
3. FIRE HYDRANT ASSEMBLY' INct.UDES CATE VM..W. AND APPURl'ENANCES

F1NIS1i  GRADE



u-$" M.J. W.lE VAL.W
W/RETAINING  Cl.ANDS

.·
 
(TrPiCAI.)	·.

 
•	'RE'FER TO THRUST	· DETAIL FOR. MWST Bt.OCKINti
REQUIREMEN'IS
 

REFER TO lHRUST Bl.OCKINC t)ttHL  FOR  'IHRIJST  Ell..OCIQNG REQUIREMEMTS
 



·.
.,	lYPICAL	FIRE	HYDRANT .ASSEMBLY







..
 
fl	9JOJUJUf!li !JfannimJ &unmi6"itm
122 UNION STREET TAYLOR, PENNSYLVANIA 18517
Phone: (570) 562-1400 Fax: (570) 562-1415


SUBDIVISION I LAND DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL EXTENSION

Taylor Planning Commission 122 Union Street
Taylor, PA. 18517
Re: Subdivision I Land Development Plan of	_ I/We submitted for official filing the referenced preliminary plan of subdivision, the
submittal acceptance date is-----------
Please be advised that the undersigned, being duly authorized by the
owner/developer/applicant,  not withstanding any contrary provision of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code or the Taylor Borough Ordinances, this letter will serve as notice to the Taylor Borough Planning Commission, as well as, Taylor Borough Council its employees, officers and agents, including but not limited to the Zoning Officer, Engineer, Inspectors, and Code Officers that the requirement that action be taken on this subdivision I land development proposal within ninety
(90) days ( or such other applicable time period)of the acceptance date noted herein or otherwise provided, is hereby waived, without limitation as to time. This waiver is granted to permit us to make such adjustments or revisions to the plans as may be required during the plan review process.

Further, you are hereby assured that I/We will give Taylor Borough Planning
. Commission and the Council thirty (30) days prior written notice if I/We should determine that limiting the time of the review process becomes necessary. Such revocation notice shall be addressed separately to the Chairman of the Planning Commission with copies to the Borough Manager and President of Council at the above address. After the elapse of the 30-day revocation notice period, the Borough shall have an additional 45 days to issue any approvals, rejections, conditions or otherwise respond to our submission without prejudice or having been determined to be delinquent or a deemed approval arising.  I/We further agree that Taylor Borough Planning Commission or other reviewing body having jurisdiction  may impose a specific time limitation on the subject time extension, provided the Taylor Borough Planning Commission or other reviewing body notifies (the applicant) thirty (30) days prior to the date of the specific limit date. Such notification shall be made in writing.

Respectively


Signature:-------------  Date:-------- Accepted by Planning Commission
----------------- Date: --------
 
 
 
-
/·-..
-
·-
 






SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT



ARTICLE1
General Provisions
 
§ 100. Short title..

I		This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as "The Subdivision and Land D_evelopment Ordinance of the Borough of Taylor


§ 101. Authority.

a.	The Borough of Taylor, Lackawanna County, Pennsylvania under authority granted by Act 247 of 1968 and subsequent amendments thereto, hereby adopts
the
following regulations governing the subdivision and development of land within
·the Borough.

b.	The Borough Council of the Borough of Taylor, hereby, througll the adoption of this Ordinance, delegates the Authority granted it under Section 501 of the Pennsylvani Municipalities Planning Code to the Planning Commission of the Borough of Taylor; provided, however, that all powers relating to the provision of public improvements, including improvement bonds or other guarantees, and the acceptance of public improvements such as streets, utilities, recreational facilities, etc . are specifically reserved by the Borough Council.

 




.....
-

-
......
 
c.		No subdivision or land development of any lot, tract or parcel of land shall be made, and no street, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, water main or other improvements in connection therewith shall be laid out, constructed, opened or dedicated for pu_blic use or travel, or for the common use of occupants of buildings abutting· thereon, except in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance.

d.		No lot in a subdivision may be sold, no pennit to erect or alter any building upon land in a subdivision or a land development may be issued, and no building may be erected in a subdivision or a land development. unless and until a plan of such subdivision or land development shall have been approved and properly recorded, and until the improvements required herein in connection therewith have been constructed or guaranteed as hereinafter provided.

e.	No person, firm or corporation proposing to make. or have made, a subdivision or land development within the Borough shall proceed with any grading before obtaining from the Planning Commission the approval of the preliminary plan of the proposed development, and no deeds shall be recorded for Jots in any development, before obtaining from the Planning Commission the approval of the final plan of the proposed subdivision or land development, except as otherwise provided herein.

I-l
 


SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT




f.	The proposed subdivision or land development plat shall be in general accordance with the Comprehensive Plan. of the Borough of Taylor.

 

g.	No land in the Borough shall be subdivided or other\\vise developed if such land is considered by the Planning Commission to be unsuitable for developI?ent by reason
of flooding or improper drainage, objectionable earth and rock formation.	· topography, o any other feature harinful to the health and safety of resi e ts and the community as a whole; and, provided further that no land shall be subd1v1ded or otherwise developed by the subdivider or the developer unless adequate access to the land over adequate streets or thoroughfares exists or will be provided by the subdivider or the developer.  or otherwise  developed.

h.	The proposed subdivision or Ian development shall confonn with the :design standards set forth in this Ordinance.
 





....





.....
 


§ 102.. Purpose.

This ordinance is established to regulate and control the subdivision and development of land within fue Borough of Taylor so as to insure the harmonious development of the community; and to provide sites suitable for human habitation, commercial and industrial operations, and other uses for which land may be developed, thereby creating conditions favorable to the health, safety, morals.and welfare of the community and generally consistent with the goals of the Taylor  Borough Comprehensive Plan of 1990.
§ 103. Scope.	-

From and after the effective date of this Ordinance, any subdivision or land development	.;..;.·
shall be in conformity with this Ordinance and all standards and specifications adopted as a part of
such Ordinance.	-
§ 104. Interpretation.


Ininterpreting and applying the provisions of this Ordinance, they shall be held to be minimum requirements for the promotion of the pulilic health, safety, comfort, convenience and gener8:1 elf are. When prov_isi_?DS of this Ordinance and au standards and specifications adopted
unde !timpose.greare_r restrictlo s than those of any statute, other Ordinance or regulations, the
prov!smns of this Ordmance and its standards and specifications shall be controlling unless
spe ified to the c?ntrmy. The mustrations in this Ordinance are not a part of the Ordinance, but are mcluded herem for purposes of explanation and clarification only.


-
 
-
( -






-
-



....
-


-
".""'
-


-
....
-
 






SUBDmSION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT




§ 105. Definitions and word usage.


A.	For the purpose of this Ordinance, the words and terms used herein shall be interpreted as follows:

(1)	Words used in the present tense include the future.

(2)	The singular includes the plural.

(3)	The word "person" includes a corporation, partnership, association, or other legal entity, as well as an individual.

(4)	The word "lot" includes the word ''plot" or "parcel".

(5)	The term "shall" is mandatory.

(6)	The word "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or biµ}ding shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged. or designed to be occupied".

(7)	The word "Commission" and the words "Plrumi.Qg Commission" shall mean the Taylor Borough Planning Commission.

B.	Any word or term not defined herem shall be used with a meaning of standard usage.

C.	Unless a contrary intention clearly appears, the following words and phrases shall have, for the purpose of this Ordinance, the meafilngs given in the following clauses:

ALLEY OR COURT - A minor right-of-way providing secondary vehicular access to the side or rear of two or more properties.	·

APPLICANT • The l d owner or .the authorized agent of the land owner requesting the approval of a proposed subdivision or land development under this Ordinance. When the applicant is the authorized agent of the land owner, the agent will be an acceptable applicant only if there is a no authorization to that effect.

APPLICATION, PRELIMINARY - All plans and other documents required to be submitted for the review of a proposed subdivision or a land development. Approval of the Preliminary Application authorizes the applicant to proceed with the Final Application process. including the submission of required. guarantees for the construction of required improvements in accordance with Article 1hereof.





I-3
 
-
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
.

 
APPLICATION, FINAL -All documentation and legally binding commitments which the applicant must submit for approval based on the plans approved under the Preliminary Application Process. Approval of the Final Application authorizes the applicant to proceed with the sale of lots and or the sale of improved parcels; such authorization, however, may be subject to additional
requirements of this ordinance as weU as other Municipal ordinances.
 

.....
 

 
AVERAGE DAILY TRAFFIC (ADT) ·The actual or calculated total vehicular trips that occur.
or are expected to occur, on a specific street within a typical weekday.

···i   BERM ·Alinear earth mound with a maximum slope of three to one (3:1)with a grass cover or a maximum slope of two to one (2:1) when shrubbery or ground cover is used.
 




......
 

BLOCK:- .An area bounded by streets. railroads. public facilities, or other rights-of-way or
easements, or other definite barriers.

BUILDING SETBACK LINE ·The line parallel to the proposed right-of-way line at a distance therefrom equal to the depth of the front yard required for the zoning district .inwhich the lot is ocated; provided that, inthe case of a lot where the side lines are not parallel, the building setback line shall be where lot width fJ.rst coincides with the required minimum lot width but in no case closer to the street line than the required front yard.


-

-
-
-
-





I-4	-
 
-
(-.


-







......



-
 






SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT-



CALIPER •The diameter of the main trunk of a tree.  Caliper measurement shall be taken at a point on the trunk six (6) inches above natural ground line for trees up to four (4) inches in caliper and at a point twelve (12) inches above the natural ground line for trees over fom (4) inches in caliper.

CARTWAY - The paved portion of a_street right-of-way.

CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE • An area of unobstructed vision at street intersections defined by
lliies of sight between points at a given distance from the intersection of the streets, as regulated in
;§512hereof.

CLUSTER DEVEWPMENT-  A residential cluster shall include an area to be developed as a single entity according to a plan containing residential housing units in which the individual lots
·	have a common or public open space as an appurtenance. Such common or public open space
shall be a8sured of continued o ration and maintenance either through the dedication of such area to the Municipality and the Municipality's acceptance thereof, or through the creation of a
homeowners association, or the developer's acceptance of such responsibility including such
achieve such assurances.
 


-
-



......
-
-
-
 
l gally binding agreements as may be required to

COMMISSION -The Taylor Borough Planning Commission.

COMPREHENSIVE PLAN - A plan prepared for the Borough of Taylor intended to provide a Jong range plan for the development of the municipal.i,ty. The Comprehensive Plan may or may not have been formally adopted by the municipality.

CONDOMINIUM - AB de.fined within the Uniform Condominium Act #82 of 1980, as amended:
:  Real estate, portions of which are designed for separate ownership and the remainder of which is designated for common ownership solely by the owners of those portions.  Real estate is not a condominium unless the included interests in the common elements are vested in.the unit owners•

COURT - Refer to "Alley." .

CROSSWALK - A publicly or privately owned right-of-way for pedestrian use that crosses !l cartway or cuts across a block so as to furnish access for pedestrians to adjacent streets or properties.

CUL-DE-SAC - A street intersecting another street at one (1) end and temlinating in a vehicular turnaround at the other end.
An excavation.  The difference between a point on the original ground and a designated
 

CUT -
point of lower elevation on the final grade. Also, the material removed in excavation.


-	I-5
 


SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT

 

DENSITY •A measure of the number of dwelling units per unit of area. It shall b expn:ssed in dwelling units per acre. The measure is arrived at by dividing the number of dwelling uruts by the
net area of the site.	·


 



DESIGN STANDARDS ·Regulations, as stated in Article V. imposing standards in the layout by
which a subdivision or land development is governed.

DESIGNATED GROWTH AREA - A region within a county or counties descn'bed in a municipal or multlmunicipal plan that preferably includes and surrounds a city, borough or village,
and within which residential and mixed USO development is permitted or planned for at densities Of
one unit to the acre or more, commercial, industrial and institutional uses are permitted or planned
for and public infrastructure services are provided or planned.
 
....

-










-
 

DETENTION BASIN - A reservoir which temporarily contains stonn water runoff and releases it gradually into a watercourse or storm water facility.	·

DEVELOPER - See definition of "subdivider".

DEVELOPMENT OF REGIONAL SIGNIFICANCE AND IMPACT-Any land development
of its character, magnitude, _or location will have substantial effect upon the health,
safety, or welfare of citizens in more than one municipality.

DRIVEWAY ·Aprivate vehicular service road providing access to a single lot, building, dwelling
or garage.

-
 
-
....









·r
-
-
-
 






SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT



Dw.m:LLING - A building designed and occupied for residential purposes, excluding hotels, roommg houses, towist homes, institutional homes, residential clubs, mobile home parks and the
like.	•
(1) SINGLB-FAMJLY DETACHED DWELLING - A building used by one (1) family, having only one (1) dwelling unit, and having two (2) side yards.

(2)	SINOLE-FAMILY ATIACHED DWEUJNG (Row) -A building used by one (1)
family, and having two (2) party walls in common with other buildings. .	·.

(3)	SINOLE-FAMILY SEMI-DETACHED - A building used by one (1) family, having one (1) side yard, and one (1) party wall in common with another building.

(4)	DWEUJNG, TWO-FAMILY, DETACHED - A building used by two (2) families,
with one dwelling unit arranged over the other, and having two (2) side yards.
 
-	(5)    DWELLING. TWO-FAMILY. SEMI-DETACHED-A  building used by
 
two (2)
 
families, with one dwelling unit arranged over the other, having one side yard, and one
party wall in common with another building.

(6)	DWEU...ING. TOWN HOUSE- A town house shall include a group of not more than eight (8) single-family attached dwellings separated from each other by common walls, where each unit contains a separate and private entrance to the outside.

(7)	DWELLING, GARDEN APARTMENTS - A group of rental units, generally under single ownership, but a condominium is not precluded, where there shall not be more than eight (8) dwelling units contained within each structure; such structures containing garden apartment units are generally less than four (4) stories in height although in the Borough of Taylor they shall not exceed a height of 2.5 stories or tlllrty-five feet, unless otherwise indicated in the Taylor Borough Zoning Ordinance.

DWEUJNG GROUP- A group of two (2) or more single-family, two-family, or multi-family  dwellings occupying a lot in one ownership.

MULTI-FAMILY  DWEUJNO - A building designed for, occupied or used for dwelling purposes by three (3) or more families living independently of one another, and doing their own cooking, including, but not limited to garden apartments and town houses.

DWELLING UNIT - A single habitable living Wlit occupied by one or more persons living	· together and maintaining a common household.  Each dwelling unit shall have:  a) its own toilet. bath or shower, sink. sleeping and cooking facilities and b) separate access to the outside or lo a common hallway or balcony that connects to outside access at ground level.  No dwelling unit shall include a separate living area that is completely separated by interior walls so as to prevent   · interior access from the remainder of the living area.  No dwelling unit may include more than  1 kitchen, except:

I-7
 
-
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT


(1)  Cooking facilities may be located in two abutting rooms that open into each other, (2). Ha kitchen was installed prior to the adoption of this Ordinance under a valid
Borough pennit, or

(3)  For Care of Relative.

EASEMENT-A right-of-way granted, but not dedicated, for limited use of private land for a
.:j private, public or quasi-public purpose. No structure shall be erected upon an easement.

ENGINEER - A registered Engineer. authorized to practice engineering as defined by the Registration Act of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.

ENGINEER, MUNlcIPAL - A registered professional engineer designated by the governing body to perform the duties of engineer as herein specified; provided, however, that the municipal engineer shall not represent any AppJicant or be employed by a firm representing an Applicant before any official body of the municipality.

EROSION - The removal of surface materials by the action of namral elements.

EXCESSIVE SLOPE -·.Areas with a slope of 20% or more which are deemed by the Planning Commission as unsuitable for development, and thereby deducted from the gross site area for purposes of calculating residential densities.	·

FIRE CHIEF - The Fire Chief of the Borough of Taylor.

FLOODPLAIN - A relatively flat or low land area adjoining a river, stream, or watercourse that is subject to partial or complete inundation; and/or an area subject to the unusual and rapid
accumulation or run-off of surface waters from any source; the boundaries of which are delineated 	4
and more fuUy descn"bed in the Taylor Borough Zoning Ordinance.	·

FLOODPLAIN SOILS - Soils in areas subject to periodic flooding and listed in the Soil Survey	"""'
of LacJcawanna and Wyoming Counties. Peum;yJyania. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Soil
C nse ation Service,  arch 1982, as being on the floodplain or subject to flooding.  "Floodplain
sods" mclude, but are not limited to:	...,

(l)	Fluvents and FJuvaquents
(2)	Holly
(3)	Philo
(4)	Pope
(5)	Urban land, occasionally flooded





I-8
 
- .
.-	SUBDIVISION   AND  LAND  DEVELOPMENT

FUTURE GROWTH AREA - An area of a municipal or multimunicipal plan outside of and adjacent to a designated growth area where residential, commercial, industrial and institutional uses and development are permitted or planned at varying densities and public infrastructure services may or may not be provided, but future development at great.er densities is planned, to
 
accompany
 
the
 
orderly
 
extension and provision
 
of public infrastructure services.
 

 



....


.....




-







.....
·-



-
.....

.....
 
GOVERNING BODY - The Borough Council of the Borough of Taylor.

..   IMPERVIOUS SURFACES -Those surfaces that do not absorb rain. All buildings, parking areas, driveways, roads, sidewalk.s, and any areas in concrete, asphalt, and packed stone shall be
.considered impervious swfaces within this definition. In addition, other areas determined by the
Engineer to be impervious within the meaning of this definition will also be classed as impervious
surfaces:

IMPERVIOUS SURFACE RATIO· A measure of the intensity of use of a piece of land.  It is measured by dividing the total area of all impervious surfaces within the site by the net site area.




 





IMPERVIOUS SURFACE RATIO (example)
 
Total area of impervious surfaces =
.	Net Site Area


-
 
.80 acres
9.17	acres




I-9
 
= .087
 
-.

SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT


IMPROVEMENTS SPECIFICATIONS - Regulations. as stated in Article VI, imposing
minimum standards for the construction of required improvements, including, but not limited to,
streets. curbs, sidewalks and sewers.

INTERIOR WALK - A right-of-way for pedestrian use extending from a street into a block or across a block to another street

LAKES and PONDS • Natural or artificial bodies of water that retain water year-round.
.. .Artificial ponds may be created by dams or result from excavation. The shoreline of such water
··. bodies shall be measured from the permanent pool elevation. Lakes are bodies of water two (2) or
more acres in extent. Ponds are any water body less than two (2) acres m extent.

LAND DEVELOPMENT· Any of the followlng activities:

(1)	The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots. tracts or parcels ofland
for any pwpose involving:

(i)	a group of two or more residential or non-residential buildings, whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single non-residential building on a lot
or Jots regardless of the number of occupants or tenure; or

{ii)	the divisfon or allocation of land or space, whether initially or cumulatively. between or among two or more existing or prospective occupants by means of. or for the purpose of streets, common areas, leaseholds. condominiums, building groups or other features.

(2)	A subdivision of land.

{3)  The following are excluded from classification as a land development and are not
required to be reviewed by the Planning Commission:

(i)	The conversion of an existing single-family detached dwelling or single-family semi-detached dwelling into not more than three residential units, unless such units  are intended  to be  a condominium;  and

(ii)	The addition of an accessory buHding, including farm buildings on a lot or lots
subordinate to an existing principal building.	.

LANDSCAPE ARCWTECT - A professional landscape architect registered by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.

LEVE_L OF SER ICE - As de cribed in the Highway Capacity Manual. Special R ort 209
{Washington, D:C.. Tr sportatmn Research Board. National Research Council, 1985, as may be
ame ded  rom tim to time), the quality of traffic movement on	particular street or through a particular mtersectmn.
I-10	-
 
-

SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT




LOT OR ZONE LOT - A piece or parcel of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a principal building or a group of such buildings and accessory buildings. or utilized for a principal use and uses accessory or incidental to the operation thereof, together with such open spaces as required by this O dinance, and having frontage on a public street.

(1)	wr, CORNER - A lot abutting upon two (2) o.r more streets at their intersection or upon two parts of the same street, such streets or pans of the same street forming an interior angle of less than 135degrees.  The point of intersection of the street lot lines is the "comer".

(2)	LOT; DEPTH - The mean horizontal distance between the front d the rear lot lines.

wr. INTERIOR - any lot that is not a comer lot. ·
 
-
-


-
.....









.....
'

.....

.....
 
(3)

(4)   LOT, REV.BR.SE FRONTAGE- A lot between an artciial street and a minor street
with vehicular access only from the minor street.

·(5)  LOT, Tim.OUGH - An interior lot having frontage on two (2) parallel or approximately parallel streets.



 





(6)	LOT LINES - The property lines bounding the lot.



I-11
 
.....


SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT

a.	wt Line. Front.  The ultimate right-of-way line of the street or road.

b.	Lot Line. Rear. The Jot line opposite and most distant from the front.lot iine.
 

c.	Lot Line. Side. Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from a street is called a side street lot line.
 

""'I

-
 
d.	Lot Line. Street or AJley. A lot line separating the lot from a street or alley.

(7)   LOT WIDTII - The mean width of the lot measured at right angles to its depth.  Such	...., a line along which the minimum lot frontage shall be measured at a point which shall
 
coincide with the building set back or front yard line.

LOT AREA - The computed area contained within the lot lines and the ul ate right-of-way line.
 
-..
 

(1)	GROSS LOT AREA - The area contained within the property lines of a lot without regard for portions of the lot that may be restricted or preempted as easements for roadways or utility rights-of-way or similar requirements.

(2)	NET LOT AREA - The area contained within the property lines of a Jot (as shown on the development plan). excluding space within an existing or ultimate street right-of­ way and within all permanent drainage easements. but including the areas of all other easements, such as pipelines and overhead transmission lines assigned an individual owner or to a given collective use by means of a subdivision of land.  Open space required under this Ordinance shall not be counted as a portion of the lot.area for the
pwposes of measuring lot area per dwelling unit	-
.....



- ulUmate nght-ofaway	-

 


NET LOT AREA = Total lot area not including the ultimate rlght of way.
I-12	-
 
-
(--
-
-
-
-
 






SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT



WT AREA PER DWELLING UNIT, AVERAGE (Minimum)-The minimum lot area that is
expressed as an average of all lots for a single type of dwelling unit	·









.·
 
-

-




.....




-


-
-





-
 
..





















AVERAGE LOT AREA PER DWELLING UNIT (example)

area lot l ± area Jot 2 ± ...area lot 8  = average lot area/dwelling unit
dwelling units


LOT LINE ADJUSTMENT,.. Refer to Subdivision, Minor.

MAJOR INTERSECTION • Any intersection of one (1) or more collector or arterial streets.
MARKER .. A metal pipe or pin of at least one-half inch (0.5) diameter and at least twenty-four
inches (24") inlength.·                         ·

MONUMENT- A stone or concrete monument with a flat top of at least four inches (4") square; scored with an "X" or a drill hole to marlc: the reference point; at least thirty inches (30") in length; the bottom sides of whi h are at least two inches (2") greater thBn the top to minimize movements
caused by frost.





I-13
 
......


SUBDIVISION AND LAND DE LOPMENT


 
OPEN SPACE-

) OPEN SPACE. COMMON - A parcel or parcels of land or an ar a of wate:, or a
(l	combination of land and water within a development site and designed d mt nded for the use or enjoyment of.residents of the residential deve!opm t: not mcluding
streets, off-street parking areas. and areas set aside for pubbc ac1hties. Comm.on open
space includes both developed (active) and undeveloped (passive) open space.

(2)	OPEN SPACE, DEVELOPED (ACTIVE) - Land that is set aside for use as active recreational areas. such as playfields, playgrounds. skating rinks, swimming pools, tennis courts, and areas for water management (storm, waste, potable supply).

(3)	OPEN SPACE. UNDEVELOPED (PASSIVE) - Land used for passive recreation, agriculture. resource protection, amenity, or buffers and protected from future	. development by the provisions of this Ordinance to ensure that it remains as open
space.
 






-.



-'.
-
 
OPEN SPACE RATIO - The total amount of open space witWn a site divided by the net site area.	-
OPEN SPACE RATIO (example)

 


Net Site Area
 
=	3.67 acres	= 0.31
9.17	acres
 


.....
 
PARCEL - A parcel shall be any piece of land, including all adjacent pieces of land held in single and separate ownership by the same owner(s) regardless of the fact that such ownership may be
described in separate deeds.

PEAK HOUR TRAFFIC - The highest number of vehicles found or expected to be found during the a.m. or p.m. hours, passing over a section of street in sixty (60) consecutive minutes.

 
PLAN, FINAL - A complete and exact subdivision plan, including all required supplementary data, prepared for official recording as required by statute, defining property rights, covenants and proposed streets and other improvements.


PLAN, PRELIMINARY  ·Atentative formal subdivision plan (and including aU supplementary data), showing proposed street and lot layout as a basis for consideration prior to preparation of the
final plan.
 





......
-
 
PLAN, RECORD - Acopy ofthe final plan that contains the original required endorsements of  .. the Borough of Taylor and that is intended to be recorded with the Lackawanna County Recorder of Deeds.





I-14
 
-
,-	SUBDIVISION AND.LAND  DEVELOPMENT


PLAN, SKETCH • An informal plan, indicating salient existing features of a tract and its
surroundings and the general layout of  a proposed subdivision or land development.
·-	PLANNING COM.MISSION - The Planning Commission of the Borough of Taylor.
PLANNING MODULE ·An application required by the Pennsylvania. Sewage Facilities Act, § 5
(a)	and (d); and.§ 71.15 (b) and (c) of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection
(or any successor agency), Title 25:  Rules and Regulations, Chapter 71, Ad.ministration of the
Sewage Facilities Program, as amended.
j
PLAT ·The map or plan of a subdivision or land development, whether preliminary or final.

PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION·  Transportation service for the general public provided by a common carrier of passengers generally on a regular route basis.

RECREATION -

(1)	RECREATION COMMERCIAL- Recreation facilities operated as a business and
open to the general public for a fee.

(2)   RECREATION,  PRIVATE, NON-COMMERCIAL-  Clubs or recreation facilities, operated by a non-profit organization and open only to bonafide members of such organization.

(3) RECREATION, PUBLIC - Recreation facilities operated as a non-profit enterprise by the Municipality, and other govemment81 entity or any non-profit organization and open to the general public.

RECREATION COMMIITEE - The Taylor Borough  Recreation Committee, appointed by the governing body.  Where no recreation committee bas been created, the municipal planning commission may perform the functions of the recreation committee.

RESUBDIVISION • Any replattlng or new division of Iaiid. Replattings shall be considered as
constitUting a new subdivision of land. See definition of "subdivision".

REVIEW • An examination of a plan to determine compliance with this Ordinance, the Zoning Ordinance and other pertinent requirements.

RIGHT-OF-WAY • Land set aside for passage, such as utility, street, alley or other means of travel. The legal right-of-way os established by the Conunonwealth. or other appropriate governing authority, and currently in existence.

RUNOFF - The surface water discharge or rate of discharge of a given watershed after a fall of
rain or snow that does not enter the soil but iuns on the surface of the land.
-	I-15
 
.....

SUBDIVISION AND.LAND  DEVELOP:MENI'

SECRETARY, BOROUGH - the Secretary of the Borough of Taylor, herein referred to as the	-
"Secretary."

SECRETARY, PLANNING COMMISSION - The Recording Secretary of the Planning

Commission of the Borough of Taylor.

SEWER - A public or private sanitary sewer system.

(1)	·PUBUC SEWER SYSTEM - A sewer that.is owned by the municipality, or under the	- jurisdiction of PUC, or a sewer that serves or has the potential of serving more than
one individual tract of land.

(2)	PRIVATE SEWER SYSTEM - Any other sewer.

 
SEWER, STORM - A pipe for conveying rain water, surface water, condensate, cooling water, and siinilar liquid waste, exclusive of sewage or industrial waste.

SIGHT DISTANCE • The length of roadway visible. to the driver of a passenger vehicle at any given point on the roadway when the view is unobstructed by traffic.  Sight distance me&Smements. shall be made from a point three and five-tenths feet (3.5') above the center line of the cartway surface to a point three .and five-tenths feet (3.5') above the center line of the  artway surface.
 


-



-

.....
 












 
HORIZONTAL
 

SIGHT DIST»ICE
 









I-16
 
.....


SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT



. SITE • A parcel or contiguous parcels of land intended to have one (1) or more buildings or intended to be subdivided into two (2) or more lots. Also a tract.

SITE AREA-

(1)	GROSS SITE AREA - All land area within the site as defined in the deed. Area shall be determined from an actual site survey rather than from	deed description.
 

....
-
 

(2)	NBT SITE ARBA - The remainder of the gross site area after subtracting all lands within the existing roads or their ultimate rights-of-way and all lands without development opportunities due to restrictions such as drainage easements, restrictive covenants and cons rvation easements, and other environmental constraints such as excessive slope, wetlands and floodplains.
 

SITE CAPACITY CALCULATION - A computation intended to deteanine the appropriate
.intensity of use for a given tract.

LOPE - The face of an embankment or cut section; any ground whose surface makes an angle with the plane of the horizon. Slopes are usu,ally expressed in a percentage based upon vertical difference in feet per 100 feet of horizontal distance.

 






......

....
-
-
-
-
 
SOIL PERCOLATION TEST - A field test conducted by the Borough's Sewage Enforcement Officer to determine the suitability of the soil for on-site sanitary sewage disposal facilities by measuring the absorptive capacity of the soil at a given location and depth.

SOLICITOR, BOROUGH -The Solicitor of the Taylor Borough Council.

STREET- A public or private thoroughfare with a right•of-way not less than thirty (30) feet.in width if in existence prior to the passage of this ordinance or a right-of-way of not less than fifty
(50)	feet iQ width if established subsequent to the passage of this ordinance which affords the principal means of access to abutting property, including avenue, place, way, drive, land
boulevard, highway, road and any other thoroughfares except an alley.

(a)	PRJNCJPAL ARTERIALS - Major regional highways, with full or partial access control, designed for a large volume of through traffic, with an expected average daily traffic count of four thousand one (4,001) trips ·or greater.

(b)	MINOR ARTERIALS - Routes providing interstate and inter-county service with an expected average daily traffic count of three thousand one (3,001) lo four thousand (4,000) trips.

(c)	MAJOR COUECTORS - Streets designed to provide access between local. feeder or minor collector streets and arterials and expressways. Access is·controlled by limiting curb cuts and providing marginal access areas. An average daily traffic count of two thousand one (2,001) to three thousand (3,000) trips is expected.
 

I-17
 


 
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT















. :
: :
'

.
 










EXPRESSWAY
 





--
.....


.....
 
'	-
 



. ...
ARTERIAL	! : .
• · ·-=-·...a.:.--.-.:---:._.....;.........._...._, .......---"'!

.t:_	A.JOA COLLECTOR
 
-




.....
 







(d)	MINOR COI.l.ECTORS - Streets that primarily serve to connect feeder and local streets with major collectors and arterials. An average daily traffic count of twelve hundred one (l,201) to two thousand (2,000) trips is expected:

(e)	FEEDER STREETS - Streets providing connection between local streets and collectors having an average daily traffic count o( from six hundred fifty-one (6Sl) to twelve hundred trips and designed for an operating speed of twenty-five (25) miles per
hour.                                                                                                                                         -
(f)  LOCAL STREETS - Streets used primarily to provide access to more heavily traveled
streets for abutting properties in internally developed areas. An average daily traffic count of up to six hundred fifty (650) trips is expected and designed for an operating speed of twenty-five (25) miles per hour.                                        .


I-18	-
 

SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT


 
......
-I
-
-
 


(g)	MARGINAL ACCESS STREETS -.Minor streets parallel and adjacent to arterials or minor or major collectors, but separated from said arterials or collectors by a planted strip of land, that provide access to abutting properties.  Such roads shall cany only one-way traffic.

(h)	HAI.FOR PARTIAL STREETS .. Streets parallel and adjacent to a property line that have a lesser right-of-way width than required by this Ordinance.	·

(i)	SIDE STREET - Any street, the length of which shall be not more th!lll 50 percent of
 
·	the
 
length
 
of the largest street line of the Municipality's blocks of which it is part..
 

 

-
....



-



........








-
-
 
(j)  SERVICE ROAD - A minor right-of-way providing ondary vehicular access to the side or rear of two or more properties.  Such roads shall carry only one-way traffic.

·	(k) RESIDENTIAL STREET - A street between two intersecting streets upon which an R­ Distr.ict ai;»uts, or where 50 percent or more of the abutting street frontage is in predominantly residential use.


STREET LINE - The dividing line between the street and the lot.· The street line shall be the same as the legal right-of-way provided that where an ultimate right-of-way width for a street has
been established, that width shall determine the location of the street line.

STREET, PUBLIC- A street dedicated to public use.

STREEI' WIDTH - The shortest distance between the lines delineating the right-of-way of a
.  street.

STUDY AREA - An area encompassing a radius of one-half (0.5) mile from all proposed or existing access points; or to and including a major intersection with a collector or arterial, whichever area is greater. ·

SUBDIVIDER- Any .individual, copartnership or corporation (or agent authorized thereby) that undertakes the development or subdivision of land, as defined by this Ordinance, as the owner (or agent authorized thereby) of the land being developed or subdivided.

SUBDIVISION - The division or redivision of a lot or tract of land by any means into two (2) or more lots or tracts or other divisions of land. including changes in existing lot lines for the
pwpose, whether immediate or future, of )ease, transfer of ownership, building or lot development.
mortgage liens or auctions; provid , however, that the subdivision by lease of land for	· agricultural purposes into parcels of more than ten (10) acres not involving any new street or easement of access or residential dwellings shall be exempted.





I-19
 




SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT



SUBDIVISION. MAJOR .. The division of a Jot or ttact ofland, or part thereof, into ve (5) or more lots or tracts for the purpose. whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or of building development, that requires the installation of public improvements.

SUBDIVISION, MINOR - The division of a lot or tract of land into fo r 4) or fewer lots for the purpose. whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or obuildm development, provided that the proposed lots thereby created have fi'? tage on an improved street r streets: and provided further that there is not created by the subdivision any new street, any reqwred pubhc
.. improvements. or the need therefor. No parcel of land held in single or separate ownership at the
··. time of application for a minor subdivision may be further subdivided into an aggregate of more
' than four (4) lots, tracts or parcels of land at any time subsequent to that date except in accordance with the requirements for a major subdivision. A lot line adjustment shall be administered in the same manner as a minor subdivision.

SUBSTANTIALLY COMPLETED - Where in the judgement of the engineer. a( least ninety (90%) percent (based on the cost of the required improvements for which financial security was posted pursuant to Section 206c. hereo:O of those improvements required as a condition for final approval have been completed in accordance with the approved plan, so that the project will be able to be used, occupied or operated for its intended use.

SURVEYOR - A surveyor registered by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. SWALE - A low lying stretch of land which gathers or carries surface water runoff.
TRACT- One (1) large lot or two (2) or more contiguous lots that are held in single and separate ownership. Land held in single ownership which consists of lands to be subdivided or suitable for a land development. The tract shall consist of not less than the minimum area required for subdivision or development as set forth herein.·	.


TRIP GENERATION RATES.- The total count of ttips expected to and from a particular land use.	,·

VOLUMEIC PACITY  ANALY  IS  - A procedure,  as described  in  the Highway Qpacity Manual. Special Report 209 (WasWngton, D.C.: Transportation Research Board National
Research Council. 1985, as may be amended from time to time), that compares the volume of a
street or intersection approach to its capacity (maximum number of vehicles that can pass a given point during a given time period).


W FOR TRAFFIC SIG 'AL INSTALLATION -A series of justifications that
detail  e mm1mum traffic or pedestrian volumes or other criteria necessary for ·the installation of a
traffic signal.. These w ts are contained in the Manual on Uniform Traffic ControJ Deyices for Stree!8_and ghW!J.VS. Umted States Department of Transportation, Federal Highway Adirumstranon. 1971. §4C-1 through 4C-10. as may be amended from time to time.	.




I-20
 
-




......

-
-



-

.....


....









....



-
-
-






-
 
-

(4Jlll!..
-


-I
-
-
-






-
......
-
-
-
 





SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT




WATER COURSE - A permanent  stream, intermittent  stream, river, brook, creek, or a channel o ditch for water, whether natural or man-made.	·

WATER SURVEY - An inventory of the source, quantity. yield and use of youndwater and surface-water resources within a municipality.

WATER SUPPLY, CENTRAL - Any municipal water supply system, or any system fo the supply and distribution of water to more than one (1) user unit (dwelling. business, institution, or
..j combination thereof).

WATER SUPPLY, PRIVATE· A system for supplying and distributing water to a single dwelling or other building from a source located on the same lot.

WETLANDS - Marshes, swamps, bogs and areas where soils are slowly permeable, a high water table exists and there is a slope of less than one percent (1%).

WOODLAND ASSOCIATION - Areas, groves, or stands of mature or largely mature trees [i.e., greater then six (6) inches caliper as measured at a point four (4) feet above grade] covering an
·area greater than one-quarter (114) ·acres; or groves of mature trees [greater then twelve (12) inches caliper as measured at a point four (4) feet above grade] consisting of more than ten (10)
individual trees. Woodlands consist of three (3) different associations that can be determined by
field survey in combination with aerial photo interpretation:

(1)	FLOODPLAIN ASSOCIATION - A woodland association that occurs primarily on
floodplain soils. Mature trees within this association consist of:

(a)	Silver maple/black  walnut/sycamore;
(b)	Ash/red maple/elm;
(c)	Red maple/white oak/pin oak;
(d)	Silver maple/red birch; or
(e)	Silver maple/sycamore/elm.

(2)	MEISIC ASSOCIATION - A woodland association that occurs on poorly drained
soils, and that will, over lime, consist mainly of beech trees. Mature trees within this
of:
 
association consist

(a)	Sweet gumll"ed maple;
(b)	Red maple/ash/tulip poplar,
(c)	Oak/sweet gunl/red maple;
(d)	Oak/red maples/ash/tulip poplar; ot
(e)	Oak/hickory/beech.


-	I-21
 
-
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT



(3)	UPLAND ASSOCIATION - A woodland association that occurs on slightly drier and more well drained soils, and that will, over time. consist mostly of mixed oaks. · Mature trees within this association consist:

(a)	Black locust, or  .
(b)	Oak/hickory.

ZONING OFFICER .. The Taylor Borough Zoning Officer•.

.:: ZONING ORDINANCE .. The Zoning Ordinance of the Borough of Taylor, as amended,
t	.



















.....
-·
-


-
-·
-
I-22	-
 

SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT



ARTICLE JI
Administration
-

§200.  Applicability.


 



·.-
 
;		Itis the intention of the governing body to exercise, through adoption of tWs Ordinance, the maximum lawful jurisdiction over subdivision and land development pennitted by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, its amendments or successors. Without limitation, in the exorcise of this power, the following are subject to the provisions hereof:
 
-	A.   Any subdivision.
B.	Any land development.

C.	Any resubdivision.



§ 201.  Approval Authority.


All applications for subdivision and land developments shall be submitted to the Borough Secretary, who shall then transmit the application to the Borough Engineer for a determination of
 
completeness, as set
 
forth
 
in Section 300.H. hereof. Upon a determination that lhe application is
 
complete, it shall be submitted to the Borough Planning Commission and other agencies for  ·
review and/or approval pursuant to Section 10lb.hereof•.



§ 202. Enforcement.

A.	This Ordinance shall be enforced by the Borough Solicitor or bis designee at the direction of the governing body.

B.	Inspection of actual construction under any approved subdivision or land development plan shall be the sole responsibility of the municipality, which shall undertake
:reasonable measures to'provide an adequate inspection of all projects.

 

.....
 
C.	Any action not in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance shall be subject to
a cease-and-Oesist order and other appropriate measures necessary to .obtain or produce compliance with this Ordinance.
 


-	Il-1
 


SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT

§' 203.  Fees.	-
A.	Review Fees.

1.	Borough Review Fees. Applicants shall furnish an escrow fund sufficient to
pay all fees and costs required by this Ordinance.  The escrow fund shallbe paid
when preliminary and final applications are submitted for review and approval. At the time of filing, the preliminary application and the final application shall
be accompanied by a check payable to the Municipality in the amount specified below. An application shall be deemed incomplete until all fees are paid and
·i
 
the applications are properly signed. Such fees shall be
 
treated as a deposit
 
against the final ·review fee for the preliminary application and the final application, respectively. Said escrow fund shall be replenished upon the
submission of any revised subdivision or land development plan.  The escrow
fund shall be sufficient to guarantee the payment of:	-
(a)	The services of the Municipal Engineer and the Borough Solicitor related
to review and consideration of the application, and all other costs for engineering, traffic surveys, professional certification and other services deemed necessary by the Planning Commission in reviewing plans.

(b)	The actual cost of all drainage. water and material tests.

(c)	The cost of municipal inspection services.	.....

(d)	Legal fees. advertising and other costs involved in the dedication of street easements and public improvements to the Borough of Taylor.

(e)	Actual costs of recording.

2.	Borough Review Fees for Minor and Major Subdivisions.

(a)	Minor Subdivisions. Deposit of $300.00, subject to additional costs if
needed.

(b)	M«Jjo! sup<Uyisfom1_. Separat fee deposits are required for Preliminary Appbcaaons and Fmal Applications. Deposit of $50.00 per lot. but not less than $500.00, subject to additional costs if .needed.

3.	Borough Review Fees for Land Developments.

(a)	AU land development fees shaU also be subject to the review fee provisions of  this Section 203.




Il-2
 
...


SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
-	(b)	eview fee de sits shall be paid for all land development applications
m accordance with the following schedule:

SCHEDULE I REVIBW FEB DEPOSITS LAND DEVELOPMENTS

 
Building Area
in Square Feet

2,000 sq. ft. or less 2,001 sq. ft. or more
 
Amount
of fee

$500.00
$500.00 plus $0.10 per sq. ft.
 
in excess
 
of 2,000 sq. ft. up to a
 


-	4.	Procedure for Borough Review Fees. ·
 
maximum deposit of $5,000.00.
 
a.	Review fees shall include the reasonable and necessary charges by the
Borough of Taylor's professional consultants and engineer for review and report to the Borough of Taylor. Such review fees shall be reasonable and in accordance with the ordinary and customary charges by the Engineer or consultant for similar service in the coinmunity, but in no event shall the fees exceed the rate or cost charged by the engineer or consultant to the Borough of Tayl r when fees are not reimbursed or otherwise imposed on applicants•. A review fee deposit shall be
submitted with each application, preliminary and final, as set forth
herein.

In the event the applicant disputes the amount of any such review fees, the applicant shall, within fourteen (14) days of the applicant's receipt of the bill, notify the Borough of Taylor that such fees are disputed, in which case the Borough of Taylor shall not delay or disapprove a subdivision or land development application due to the applicant's request over disputed fees.

 





.....
 
In the event that the Borough of Taylor and the applicant cannot agree on the amount of review fees.which are reasonable and necessary, then the applicant and the Municipality shall follow the procedure for dispute · resolution set forth herein.

d.		Ifwithin 20 days from the date of billing, the Municipality -and the applicant cannot agree on the amount of expenses which are reasonable and necessary, then the applicant and Munic;ipality.shalljointly, by
mutual agreement, appoint another professional of the same discipline or
 
-	Il-3
 


 
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT


·profession as the consultant whose fees aro being disputed to review .the
said expenses and make a detennination as to the amount thereof which
is reasonable and necessary.

e.	The other professional so appointed shall bear such evidence and review such documentation as the professional engineer in his or her sole
opinion deems necessary and render a decision within 50 days of the billing date. The applicant shall be required to pay the entire amount determined in the decision immediately.

f.	Inthe event that the Municipality and applicant cannot agree upon the professional engineer to be appointed within 20 days of the billing date. then upon application of either party. the President Judge of the Court of Common Pleas of Lackawanna County shall appoint such professional, who. in that case, shall be neither the Borough engineer, the Municipal Engineer, nor any professional engineer who has been retained by, or
·	performed services for, the Municipality or the applicant within the preceding five years.

g.		The fee of the appointed professional for determining the reasonable and necessary expenses shall be paid by the applicant if the amount of payment required iri the decisio is equal to or greater than the original bill. Ifthe amount of payment required in the decision is less than the original bill by $1.000 or more, the Municipality shall pay the fee of the professional. but otherwise the Municipality and the applicant shall each pay one-half of the fee of the appointed professional.

5.		Other Review Fees. ·The applicant shall be required to submit additional fees to all governmental agencies required to review subdivision and land development plans. An application shall be deemed incomplete until all fees are paid and the applications  are properly  signed.

B.  Administrative Fees.


In addition to the above. each application for a Subdivision/Land Development shall  be accompanied by a non-refundable fee to cover the cost of administration required to
process applications.  Such fees shaU be:
 

...


.......
-


-


-
-.



-

.....



-
-
 


I.
.  2.
3.
 


Minor subdivisions:  $100.00
Major Subdivisions:  $20.00 per lot, but not less than $200.00
Other Land Developments:    $300.00	·	-


Il-4	-
 

SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
/	.
-	§ 204.  Effect of Filing.
-	A	When an application for approval of a plat, whether preliminary or fmal, has been
approved or approved without condition or approved by the applicant's acceptance of conditions, no subsequent change or amendment in the zoning, subdivision or other
governing ordinance or plan shall be applied to affect adversely the right of the
the

five-year period shall be ex.tended for the duration of any litigation, including
 
applicant to commence and to complete any aspect of
 
approved development in
 
accordance with the terms of such approval within five (5) years from such approval.
The
appeals. which prevent the commencement  or completion of the development, and for the duration of any sewer or utility moratorium or prohibition  which was imposed subsequent to the filing of an application for preliminmy approval of a plat.  Inthe event of an appeal filed by any party for the approval or disapproval of a plat, the five- year period shall be extended by the total time from the date the appeal was filed until
a fmal order in such matter has been entered and all appeals have been concluded and

any period for filing appeals or requests for reconsideration have expired. Provided, however, no extension shall be based on any water or sewer moratorium which was in effect as of the date of the filing of a preliminary application.

B. When an application for approval of a plat, whether preliminary or fmal, has been approved witbout conditions or approved by the applicant's acceptance of conditions, no subsequent change or amendment in the zoning, subdivision or other governing
ordinance or plan shall be applied to affect adversely the right of the applicant to
commence and to complete any aspeet of the approved development in accordance
with the terms of such approval within five years from such approvat The five-year
period shall be extended for the duration of any litigation. including appeals, which prevent the commencement or completion of the development. and for the duration of any sewer or utility moratorium or prohibition which was imposed subsequent to the filing of an·application for preliminary approval of a plat. In the event of an appeal
f.lled by any party from the approval or disapproval of a plat, the five-year period shall

be extended by the total time from the date the appeal was filed until a final order in such matter has been entered and all appeals have been concluded and any period for
 

....
-
 
filing appeals or requests for reconsideration  have expired.  Provided, however, no extension shall be based upon any water or sewer moratorium which was in effect as of the date of the filing of a preliminary application.

c.	Where fina• approval is preceded by preliminary approval, the aforesaid five-year period shall be counted from the date of the preliminary approval. Inthe case of any doubt as to the terms of a preliminary approval. the terms sball be construed in the
 
.....	light of the provisions  of the governing  ordinances  or plans as_ they stood at the time -
when the application for such approval was duly filed.

/

-	ll-.5
 
-
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT

D.	Where the landowner has substantially completed the required improvements as	-
depicted upon the final plat within the aforesaid five-year limit, or any extension
thereof as may be granted by the Planning Commission, no change of municipal	..i.a
·	ordinance or plan enacted subsequent to the date of filing of the preliminary plat shall modify or revoke any aspect of the approved final plat pertaining to zoning  . classification or density, lot. building, street or utility location.

-






-



-

.....








-


-
-
ll-6	-
 
-

SUBDMSION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
-	ARTICLE ID
Procedures


.....	§ 300.  General out.line of procedures•
A.		There are three (3) stages in the procedure for approval of subdivision and land development plans. These stages are necessary to enable the Planning Commission to have an adequate opportunity to review the submissions and to ensure that their formal recommendations are reflected in the final plans•
 
.....

-
 

B.		The separate stages of approval include the submission of an optional sketch plan, a Preliminary Application and a Fmal Application. The table below indicates the recommended and required plans for the different types of submissions.
 


 





.....
-
 
P•n
Approval	Type of Submission
Stage
 

 






.....


.....
 
Preliminary	Not required	Required	Required

.     Required
(See §303)



C.	Sketch plans should require no more than a sixty (60) day review period.  The review process required for preliminary and final applications: shall include no more than ninety
· (90) days starting from the date of the regular meeting of the Planning Commission next
following the date the application is accepted by the Secretary or after a final court order
remanding an application, provided that should the next regular meeting occur more than thirty (30) days following the acceptance of the application, the said ninety (90) day period shall be measured from the thirtieth day following the day the application has been accepted or the final order of the court has been rendered. and ending with the applicant being
notified of the decision of the Planning Commission.


ill-1.
 


SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT




D.	The submission of a preliminary or final application that, in the opinion of the Bo_ro gh Engineer. has been substantially revised shall constitute a new and sep'?"ate subnuss1on.
Resubmission shall also be required if, subsequent to approval. an appbcant proposes to modify the implementation schedule by converting to a staged development or by
increasing the number of stages.

E.	Except as required by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, the time periods
for review set forth in this Article shall be construed as directory rather than mandatory.

F.		Prior to the initial submission. the applicant is encouraged to meet informally with the Borough Planning Commission and the Borough Zoning Officer to obtain information regarding zoning, and subdivision/land development requirements.

G.	No plan will be considered for review by the Borough Planning Commission unless it is submitted at least 10days prior to its subsequent meeting, and unless it is determined to be complete prior to the meeting. Applications for reconsideration shall also be submitted in writing by the subdivider not less thall'ten (10) calendar days in advance of the meeting at which reconsideration is desired. The Planning Commission may waive
this requirement for minor subdivisions and for such other apRlications that it considers to
be appropriate for such a waiver.

H.		No application will be considered at a meeting of the Planning Commission unless the applicant. or a designated representative is in attendance; provided, however, that the Planning Commission may consider such application for action in the event that action is required in order to preclude a deemed approval or such other concerns of the Planning
Commission that it deems essential for consideration.	.

 
I.	It shall be the responsibility of the Borough Engineer to determine if an application is complete.  Ifthe application is determined to be complete, the Borough Engineer shall return the application to the appUcant with an enumeration of its deficiencies. If the application is found to be complete, the Borough Engineer shall etum the application to the Borough Secretary for distribution in accordance with the distribution requirements set forth herein.


§ 301.  Sketch plan.

A.	Purpose.

(1)	The pu ose of the sketch plan, which is an optional submissiOn, is to afford the ap bc.ant the opportunity to consult early and informally with the Planning Comnussmn before the preparation of the preliminary or final application for approval.
 








.....
 

ill-2	-
 
-

/'""''
-



....
 





SUBDIVISIO AND LAND DEVELOPMENT




(2)		During the sketch plan process, the applicant can advantageously make use of the services of the planning commission to help analyze the problems of the development and plan more adequately for its sound coordination with the commwrlty.  The sketch plan process also affords the opportunity to give informal guidance to the applicant at a stage when potential points of difference can be more easily resolved.  It can also simplify official action and save unnecessary expense and delay.

B.	Deposits and fees.
 

(l)	Deposits and fees for the different types of subdivision and land development submissions are listed in §203 hereof.

....	(2)	The Secretary shall collect and deposit all municipal fees in the proper bank account as directed by the governing body, and shall collect and transmit all
other fees to applicable agencies.

C.	Procedure.

(1)	The applicant may prepare-the sketch plan and appli on form, including the data specified in §400 and §401.	·

(2)	The applicant shall submit nine (9) copies of the sketch plan and one (1) application form to the Secretaey or to the Zoning Officer.

(3)	The Secretary shall transmit the application to the Borough Engineer, who shall check the submission  for completeness  and if the submission  is incomplete shall notify the applicant within seven (7) days and indicate the deficiencies.    If the application is complete, the Secretary or the Zoning
Officer shall accept the sketch plan and application fomi.

(4)	The Secretary shall distribute copies of the sketch plan. application forms and applicable "fees in the following manner:

(a)	One (1) copy to the Engineer.

Q>)	One (1) copy to the Zoning Officer.

(c)		Five (5) copies to be retained by the Secretary for the use of the Borough · of Taylor officials.

(S)		The Engineer shall, within thirty (30) days following acceptance of the sketch plan application:	·
-	ill-3
 





SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT


(a)	Review the engineering considemtions in the applicant's submission; and
(b)	Make recommendations to the PJanning Commission.

(6)	The Zoning Officer shall, within thirty (30) days following acceptance of the sketch plan application:

(a)	Review the zoning considerations in the applicant's subID.ission; and
 
-











....,
 

(b)	Make recommendations to the Planning Commission.

(7)	The Planning Commission may. within thirty (30) days following acceptance	<
of the sketch plan application. meet with the applicant or the applicant's
representative to review the submission.

(8)	The Planning Commission should, within sixty (60) days following
acceptance of the sketch plan application:

(a)	Review the reeommendations of the Engineer and the Zoning Officer.

(b)		Detennine whether the sketch plan meets the objectives and requirements of this Ordinance and other pertinent regulations and ordinances;

(c)  . Recommend revisions. if any. so that the subsequent preliminary or
final plan will conform to municipal regulations and ordinances; and

(d)	Forward their recommendation to the applicant and to the governing
l>ody for informational purposes.


§ 302. Preliminary Applicadon for m or subdivision or land development.

A.  Purpose. The purpose of the preliminary application is to arrive at a final plan that is acceptable to both the applicant and the municipality. No work shall commence in . the proposed subdivision or land development until the preliminary application is approved.

B.	General.


(1)	A preliminary app ication shall be submitted confonning to the changes, if any, recommended dunng the sketch plan process.	·	·





ill-4
 
,...

 


l




·-
...



























......
 
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT



(2)  The preliminary application, and all plans and information and procedures relating thereto  hall in all respects be in compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance, except where variation therefrom may be requested pursuant to
§531.	.

C.	Deposits and fees•

(1)	Deposits and fees for the different types of subdivision and land development submissions are specified in §203 hereof. Fees, pursuant to the Lackawanna County Regional Planning Commission, and the I..aclcawanna County Conservation District Fee Schedules, shall also be required.

·	(2) The Secretary shall collect and eposit all municipal fees in the proper bank account as directed by the governing body, and shall collect and transmit all other fees to applicable agencies.

D.	Procedure.

(1)	The applicant shall prepare the preliminary application, including the
application fo . including the data specified m §400 and §402.

(2)	The applicant shall prepare planning modules for land development as
required by Chap r 71 of the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act.

(3)	The applicant shall submit one copy of the preliminary plan to the Lackawanna County Conservation District and the following to the Secretary or the Zoning officer:

(a)	Twelve (12) copies of the preliminary plan.

(b)	The Taylor Borough subdivision and land development application
form.

(c)	Four (4) copies of the planning module for land development.
 
-	(d)	All  applicable  fees.
(4)	The Borough Engineer shall check the su mission for complete ess. No .
application shall be deemed complete unless and until all i	m ubsect.1o!lS
(3)(a) to (d), hereinabove have been submitted.  If the subIDLSsion is incomplete. the Secretary shall notify the applicant within seven (7) days and indicate the deficiencies.  If the application is complete, the Secretary or the
Zoning Officer shall accept the preliminary application, application form and
fees.

-	m-s
 


.	SUBDIVISION   AND  LAND  DEVELOPMENT




(5)	The Secretary shall distribute copies of the preliminary plan, application forms and sewer planning module and applicable fees in the.following manner:

(a)	Two (2) copies of the preliminary plan and application forms and one
(1)	copy of the planning module for land development to the
Lackawanna County Regional Planning Co ssion.
 


(b)



(c)
 

.Two (2) copies of the preliminary·plan and application forms and one
(1)	copy of the sewer planning module to the Engineer.

One (1) copy of the preliminary plan and application forms to the Zoning Officer.
appropriate Fire Chief.	-.
 
(d)	One (1) copy of the preliminary plan and application forms to the



(e)	One (1) copy of the preliminary plan and application forms and one (1) copy of the sewer planning module to the Lackawanna County Conservation District.

(f)	Five (5) copies of the preliminary plan and application fonns and two
(2)	sewer planning modules for land development to be retained by the Secretary for the use of municipal officials.

(6)	The Engineer shall, within thirty (30) days following acceptance of the
preliminary application:	....

(a)	Review the engineering considerations in the applicant's submission; and

(b)	Make recommendations to the Planning Commission.

(7)	The Zoning Officer shall within thirty (30) days following acceptance of the
preliminary application:	-.
(a)	Review the zoning considerations in the-applicant's submission; and

(b),	Make recommendations to the Planning Commission.

(8)	The Fire Chief shall, within thirty (30) days following acceptance of the preliminary  application:	·





ID-6
 
-

SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT

-

(a	Review the fire protection considerations. in conjunction with the local
fire company. inthe applicant'.s'submission; and

 
.,....

·-


-
 
(b)	Maire recommendations to the Planning Commission.

(9)	Planning Commission  actions: Tue·following activities of the Planning Commission shoul4 occur within the specified number of days following the date of the first meeting of the Planning Commission next following the date of the acceptance of the preliminary application. or after a final court order remanding an application. provided  that should the next regular meeting occur more than thirty (30) days following the acceptance of the application, the specified time period shall be measured from the thirtieth day following the day the application has been accepted or the final order.of the court has been rendered; and, the time period shall end with the applicant being notified of
 
the
 
decision
 
of the Planning Commission:
 

(a)	Review the 11eports of the Lackawanna County Regional Planning
Commission, the Lackawanna County Conservation District and the
·recommendations of the Borough Engineer, Fire Chief, Zoning Officer; and other reviewing agencies;
·-	(b)  ·       Discuss the submission with the applicant;
(c)	Determine whether the prelimimuy application meets the objectives and
requirements of this Ordinance and other pertinent regulations and ordinances; and

(d)	Recommend revisions, if anyy to the applicant so that the plan will conform to municipal codes and ordinances; and

 

-
-
....
 
(e)	Within 90 days (unless the applicant provides a written extension of the 90 day period) approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the preliminary application.  No application shall be approved until the report of the Lackawanna County Regional Planning Commission is received or until the expiration of 30 days from the date the applicati n was forwarded to the Lackawanna  County Regional Planning Commission. Ifapproved. the Borough Planning Commission  shall express its approval and state the conditions of approval, if any. If disapproved, the Borough Planning Commission shall state the reasons
for this action.
 


-	m-1
 

 


SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT




(10)	The decision of the Planning Commission shall be in writing and shall be communicated to the applicant (or his agent) personally or mailed to him at
the last known address not later than fifteen (15) days following the decision or within such time limits as may be required by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. The decision shall be mailed to the applicant
via certified mail with a return receipt requested.

(11)	Approval of the preliminary application shall not constitute approval of the final application or authorize the sale of lots or construction of buildings; it shall only authorize the construction of required improvements pursuant to
Article 7 hereof.	·

(12)	If the preliminary application is disapproved, the applicant may file a revised preliminary application with the Secretary in order to secure approval. No fee will be charged for the first revision, but all successive submissions shall pay the fee for preliminary application and shall replenish the escrow deposit to its original amount.


§ 303. Final Application for major .subdivision or land development.

A.	Purpose. The purpose of the final application is to require formal approval by the Planning Commission before plans for all subdivisions and land developments are recorded as required by §305. No lot located within a subdivision or land development shall be recorded and no zoning permit shall be issued by the municipality until the final application has been approved.

B.	General.

(i)	The final application shall conform to the preliminary application, as approved; provided. however, that where a proposed land development does not include any public improvements. the applicant may submit a written request to die Borough Planning Commission to authorize a combined preliminary and final .application.

(2)	The final application and all plans, information and procedures relating
·	ther to shall in all respects be in compliance wirh the provisions of this Ordmance, except where variation therefrom may be specifically approved by the Planning Commission pursuant to §531.	·







m-s·
 
-




....
-
-



-






-
-




.....


.....












-
 
....
.-·
 




SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
 
-	C.   Deposits and fees.
(1)	Deposits and fees for the different types of subdivision and land development
submissions are set forth in §203 hereof.  Fees, pursuant to the Lackawanna County Regional Planning Commission, and the Lackawanna County Conservation District Fee Schedules, shall also be required.

(2)	The Secretary shall collect and immediately deposit all municipal fees in the proper municipal bank account as directed by the governing body, and shall collect and transmit all other fees to applicable agencies.

D.	Procedure.

(1)	The applicant shall prepare the final plan and application form. including the data specified in §400 and §403.

(2)	The applicant shall submit one (l) copy to the Lackawanna County
or the Zoning
Conservation District, and the following to the Secretary
Officer:

 


-
1-.
·-
......



r-
:-

i-
 

















(3)








(4)
 
(a)	Ten (10) copies of the final plan.

(b)	The Taylor Borough subdivision and land development application
form.

(c)	Written agreements, offers of dedication, covenants and deed
restrictions pursuant to §530 and §701.

(d)	All applicable fees.

(e)	A computer disk containing the Final Plan as approved by the Planning Commission.	·

The Borough Engineer shall check the submission for completeness. No application shall be deemed complete unless ancf until all items in (2)(a) to (d) hereinabove have been submitted. If the submission is ncomplete, the Secretary shall notify the applicant within seven (7) days and indicate the deficiencies. If the application is complete, the Secretary shall accept the final application, including the application form and fees.

The Secretary shall distribute copies of the final application, and applicable fees in the following manner:
 

(a)	Two (2) copies to the Lackawanna County Regional Planning Commission.

_	m-9
 

SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT	-
 


(b)	One (l) copy to the Engineer.

{c)	One (1) copy to the Zoning Officer.

(d)	One (l) ropy to the Solicitor.

(e)	One (1) copy to the appropriate Fire Chief.

(f)	Fiv (5) copies to be retained by the Secretary for use of municipal officials.	·
 
-
-



...
 

{5)	The Engineer should, within thirty (30) days following acceptance of the final application:

(a)	Review the engineering considerations in the applicant's submission; and
(b)	Make recommendations to the Planning Commission.	-
(6)	The Zoning Officer shall. within thirty (30) days following acceptance of the
final application:.

(a)	Review the zoning considerations in the applicant's submission; and

(b)	Make recommendations to the Planning Commission.

(7)	.The Fire Chief shall within 30 days following acceptance of the Final application:	·

(a)	Review the fire protection considerations.

(b)	Make recommendations  to the Planning Commission.

(8)	The Solicitor shall. within thirty (30) days following acceptance of the final
application:	....

(a)	Review the proposed agreements, offers of dedication, covenants and
deed restrictions; and

(b)	Make recommendations to the Planning Commission and, when applicabJe. to the Governing Body.	·






ID-10
 

SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT



(9)	Planning Commission actions: The following activities of the Planning Commission should occur within .the specified number of days, following the date of the iJISt meeting of the Planning Commission next following the date
. of the acceptance of the final application, or after a f'mal court order remanding an application, provided that should the next regular meeting occur more than thirty (30) days following the acceptance of the application, the
 
......
-
,....
I
 
specified time period shall be measured from the thirtieth day following the
day the application has been accepted or the final order of the court has been rendered; and, the time period shall end with the applicant being notified of the decision of the Planning Commission:

(a)	Review the reports of the Lackawanna County Regional Planning
·	Commission, the Lackawanna County Conservation District and the recommendations of the Borough Engineer, Fire Chief."Z.Oning Officer; and Solicitor
 

(b)	Discuss the submission with the applicant;
-	(c)	Detennine whether the final application:
meets the objectives and requirements of this Ordinance and other
pertinent regulations and ordinances; and

(<;I)	Complies with any conditions of preliminary  application approval.

(e)	Make recommendations for revisions. if any. sothat the plan will
 

.....
 
conform to municipal
 
codes
 
and ordinances; and
 






.....

,..
I
 













(10)
 
(t)	Within 90 days (unless the applicant provides a written extension of the
90 day period) approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the final application.  No application shall be approved until the report of the Lackawanna County Regional Planning Commission is received or until the expiration of 30 days from the date the application was forwarded to the Lackawanna County Regional Planning Commission.  If approved, the Borough Planning Commission shall express its approval and state the conditions of approval, if any.  H disapproved, the Borough
Planning Commission shall state the reasons for this action.

The decision of the Planning Commission shall be in writing and shall be communicated to the applicant (or his agent) personally or mailed to him at the last known address not later than fifteen (15) days following the decision or within such time limits as may be required by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning  Code. The decision shall be mailed to the applicant via certified mail with a return receipt requested.
 


-	W-H
 
-
SUBDIVISION  AND  LAND  DEVELOPMENT	.....




(ll}  Ifthe final plan is approved:

 

(a)



(b)



(c)
 
The Planning Commission shall adopt a resolution approving the final plan.

Approval shall  ot be final until entry into contract and production of completion guaranty as set forth in Article VII, when applicable.

Signatures shall be placed on two (2) exact mylar copies and two (2)
 



(12)
 
ex.act paper copies of the approved fmal plan, as specified in §406.

Ifthe final plan is disapproved, the applicant may file a revised final plan with the Secretary in order to secure approval.  No fee will be charged for the first revision, but all successive submissions shall pay the fee for final plans and shall replenish the escrow deposit to its original amount
 

-...
-
 

(13)   When requested by the applicant, in order to facilitate financing, the Planning Commission shall furnish the applicant with a signed copy of a resolution indicating approval of the final application contingent upon the applicant obtaining a satisfactory financial security.  The final plat or record plan shall not be signed nor recorded until the financial improvements agreement is executed. The resolution or Jetter of contingent approval shall expire and be deemed to be .revoked if the financial security agreement is not executed within 90 days unless a written extension is granted by the Planning Commission; such extension shall not be unreasonably withheld and shall be placed in writing at the request of the developer.
§ 304.  Final application for minor subdivision.	-
 
A.	Purpose.
 
Jn the case of minor subdivisions it is the purpose of this section to provide
 
a simplified procedure by which said minor subdivisions may be submitted and approved.	·

B.	General.  Inthe event that the proposed subdivision shall involve a change in the location of streets, sanitary or storm sewers, water mains, culverts, or other municipal improvements, then the provisions of this section on minor subdivisions shall not be applicable, and the applicant shall be required to comply with the
requirements of §303.	·	·
 



....
 







ill-12
 
-
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT


.....	C.      Deposits and  fees•

(1)	Deposits and fees for the submission of a final minor subdivision plan are specified in §203 hereof. Fees, pursuant to the Lackawanna County Regional Planning Commission and Lackawanna County Conservation District Fee
 
....
-
 
Schedules, shall also be :required.

(2)	The Secretary shall collect and immediately depositall municipal fees in the proper municipal bank account as directed by the governing body, and shall
·collect and transmit all other fees to applicable agencies.

D.  Procedure.
 

 

....
-


-
....
I
 
(1)	The applicant shall prepare the f.wal minor subdivision application form,
including the data specified in §400 and §404•

(2)	The applicant shall prepare planning modules for land development as
required by Chapter 71 of the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act.

(3)	The applicant shall submit to the Secretary or the Zoning Officer.

(a)	Twelve (12) copies of the final minor subdivision plan.

(b)	The Taylor Borough subdivision and land development application
fonn.

(c)	Six (6) copies of the planning modules for land developmenL
 

 


r-
(4)
,_

-
 
(d)	All applicable fees.

The Secretary or the Zoning Officer shall check the submission for completeness.   No application shall be deemed   complete unless and until all items in §304D(3)(a) to (d) hereof have been  submitted.  If the submission is incomplete, the Secretary shall notify the applicant within seven (7) days and indicate the deficiencies.  If the application is complete, the Secretary or the  · Zoning Officer shall accept the fJ,Dal minor subdivision plan, application form
and fees.
 

(5)	The Secretary shall distribute copies of the final minor subdivision plan, application fonn. sewer planning module and applicable fees in the following
manner:

(a)	Two (2) copies of the final plan and application forms and one (1) copy of the planning module for land developm nt to the LCRPC.

...	m-n
 
-

SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT



(b)	Two (2) copies of the final plan and application forms to the Engineer.
(c)	One (1) copy of the final plan and application forms to the Zoning	-..
Officer.

(d)	One (1) copy of the final plan and application forms to the Solicitor.

(e)	One (1) copy of the final plan and application forms and one (1) copy of the planning module·for land development to the Lackawanna County  ·
 



(f)
 
ConservatiOn District.

Five (5) copies of the final plan and application forms and one (l)
 
planning module for land development to be retained by the
for use of municipal officials.
 
Secretary
 

(6)	The Engineer shall, within thirty (30) days following acceptance of the final
minor subdivision application:	....

(a)	Review the engineering considerations in the applicant's submission;
and

(b)	Maire recommendations to the Planning Commission.

(7)	The ZOning Officer shall, within thirty (30) days following acceptance of the
:final minor subdivision application:

(a}	Review the zoning considerations in the applicant's submission; and
(b)	Make recommendations to the Planning Commission.	-
(8)	The Solicitor should, within thirty (30) days following acceptance of the final application:

 
(a)	Review the proposed agreements; offers of dedication, covenants and deed restrictions; and

(b)	Make recommendations to the Planning Commission.

(9)	The Planning Commission may, within thirty (30) days foUowing acceptance of the final minor subdivision application, meet with the applicant to review the submission.
 



-­"

......
 




m-14	-
 
-
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT




(10)	The Planning Commission s ou.ld, within sixty (60) days following
.  acceptance of the final minor subdivision plan application:


(a)	Review the reports of the Lackawanna County Regional Planning Commission and Lackawanna County Conservation District; and the recommendations of the Engineer, Zoning  Officer, Solicitor and other reviewing agencies;

(b)	Discuss the submission with .the applicant.

(c)	Determine whether the fmal min<;tr subdivision application meets the. objectives and requirements of this Ordinance and other pertinent regulations and ordinances;

 

,...
'



-
 
(d)	Recommend revisions, if any, so that the plan will conform to municipal regulations and ordinances.

(11)	The Planning Commission shall, within ninety (90) days following the date of the f.in>t meeting of tho Planning Commission next following the date of the acceptance of the fmal application, or after a final court order remanding an application, provided that should the next regular meeting occur more than thirty (30) days following the acceptance of the application, the said ninety
(90)	day period shall be measured from the thirtieth day following the day the · application has been accepted or the final order of the court has been rendered, and ending with the applicant being notified of the decision of the Planning Commission:	·
 

(a)	Review the reports of the Lackawanna County Regional Planning Commission and Lackawanna County Conservation District; and the recommendations of the Engineer, Zoning Officer, Solicitor and other reviewing agencies;


(b)	Determine whether the final minor subdivision plan meets the objectives and requirements of this Ordinance and other pertinent regulations and ordinances; and
,,....
I	(c)	Approve or disapprove the final minor subdivision application. No .
application shall be approved until the report of the Lackawanna County Regional Planning commission is received or until the
expiration of 30 days from the date the application was forwarded to the
Lackawanna County Regional Planning Commission.  Ifdisapproved, the Planning Commission shall state the reasons for this action.



ill-15
 


SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT



(12)	The decision of the Planning Commission shall be in writing 8;11d shall.be communicated to the applicant (or his agent) personally or m iled to ht t the last known address not later than fifteen (15) days followmg .the decision
or within such time limits as may be required by the Pe  ylvama	. Municipalities Planning Code. The decision shall be. mailed to the appbcant via ified mail with a return receipt requested.

(13)	Ifthe final minor subdivision application is approved:

(a)	The Planning Commission shall adopt a resolution approving the final minor subdivision application.

 

(b)
 
Two (2) exact mylar copies and two (2) exact paper copies of the approved final plan, with th signatures of the required agencies as specified in §406, shall be submitted to the Planning Commission.
 



......
 

 

(14)
 
Ifthe final minor subdivision application is disapproved, the applicant may file a revised final minor subdivision plan with the Secretary or the Zoning Officer in order to secure approval. No fee will be charged for the first
revision. but an successive submissions shall pay the fee for final minor
subdivision plans and shall replenish the escrow deposit to its original amount
 

 

§ 305. Recording of fin.al plan for minor and major subdivisions and for land
developments.

A.	Prior to recording the approved final plan. the applicant shall submit two (2) mylar copies and two '(2) paper copies of said plan to the Secretary in order to obtain the seals and signatures of municipal officials, as req ired by §406. One (1) set shall be retained by the Borough and one (1) set shall be recorded by the applicant.
 
.....


.....
-
 

B.    Upon the approval of the final plan the developer shall, within ninety (90) days of the date of such final approval, or the date of the approved plat signed by the Planning Commission foUowing completion of conditions imposed for_such an approval, whichever is later, record such plan  Jn the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Lackawanna County.  The applicant shall notify the PJanning Commission in wrjting of the date of such recording and the plan book and page wherein snch subdivision or fand development is rec<?rded.  If the plan is not recorded within the required period. the approval shall lapse and become void.

C.	Effect of recording.

(1)	After a subdivision or land development has been duly recorded, the streets, parks and other public improvements shown thereon shall be considered to be a part of the Official Map of the municipality.
m-16	-
 
-
,.	SUBDIVISION   AND   LAND  DEVELOPMENT
i


(2)	Streets, parks and other public improvements shown on a subdivision or land development to be recorded, may be offered for dedication to the municipality by formal notation thereof on the plan, or the owner may note on the plan that such improvements have not been offered for dedication to the municipality.

(3)	Every street, park or other improvement shown on a subdivision or land development plan that is recorded, as provided herein, .shall be deemed to be a private street. park or irqprovement until such time as the same has beeri
 
,,_
I
-
-
-



....
I





.....



-
,....
I
-
 
offered for dedication to the municipality and  ccepted, by resolution, and
recorded in the office of the clerk of the Court of Common Pleas of Lackawanna County, or until it has been condemned for use as a public street, park or improvement.

D.	Recorded plan.   All plans recorded shall contain the information specified in §407.
 




ill-17
 
 
 
......


SUBDMSION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT

-	ARTICLE IV
Application and Plan Requirements

§ 400. Application requirements.


For the purpose of having a subdivision or land development considered and approved by
the Borough Planning Commission, the applicant sh.all flle with the Secretary the following items

at the initial submission, in addition to the required number of plans:

A.	A signed subdivision and land development application.

B.	A list of all encumbrances and, if appearing on record, the book and page numbers.

C.	A statement setting forth indetail the character of the improvements the applicant
proposes to make on the property to be developed, if )mown.

D.	A development schedule indicating the approximate date when construction can be
expected to begin and be completed, if known.

E.  A copy of all restrictions, covenants and limitations, if any, under which lots are to
be sold.
--	F.	A copy of the deed evidencing ownership by the applicant.
§ 401. Sketch plan application

The sketch plan application shall show the following information:

A.	Site plan, showing:

(1)	Name of subdivision or land development.

(2)	Name, address, and phone number of the owner/applicant.

 


••
.,...
..
 
(3)	Tax parcel number(s) of the site.

(4)	Name and address of the engineer, surveyor, hltect. landscape architect or planner responsible for the plan.

(5)	Zoning requirements, including:

(a)	Applicable district and district boundaries.
 

(b)	Maximum density pennitted and proposed density, if applicable.
·-	IV-I
 
-

SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT


 

(c)	Lot size and yard requirements.
 
....
 

 






(6)
 
(d)	·   Required and/or proposed open space and impervious surface ratios.

(e)	Any variances or special exceptions granted.

Location map showing relation of site to adjoining properties and streets, within one tJiousand (1,000) feet of all of the boundaries of the subdivision or land development  (Scale: one (1) inch equals four hundred (400) feet)
 

.....


....
-
 
(7)	North point.

(8)	Written and graphic scales (including scale of location.map).

(9)	Total acteage of the site9  both gross and net.	.....

(10)	Site boundaries with bearings and distances.

(11)	Boundaries of all adjoining properties (with names of landowners in the case of unplatted land).	·

(12)	Existing cartways of streets on and adjacent to the site with existing and
ultimate rights-of-way.

 
(13)	The following shall be shown for a radius of 100feet around a minor subdivision and for a radius of 500 feet around a major subdivision/land development: Existing principal buildings (and their respective uses). sewage disposal systems, wells and driveways, storm drains. culverts. bridges, utility
easements, quarries, railroads, and other significant man-made features.
 


....
 

 
(14)	Outline of the net site area.

(15)   Proposed general street layout. if applicable.

(16)	Proposed general lot layout. if applicable.

(17)	Types of buildings proposed.
 


.....
 

(18)	Number of dwelling units proposed or square footage of non-residential.
buildings.	.
(19)	Open space areas, existing and proposed.	-

(20)	·   Recreation  areas,:existing and  proposed.


IV-2
 
-

SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT


(21)     Parking areas wi dimensions and number of par.king spaces.

B.	Natu  eatures map (on separate sheet}. This plan is required for all major subdivlSlon and land development submissions. For minor subdivisions, the
the site plan in Subsection A above. The
following information shall be indicated:
information below may be included on

(1)	Water courses

(2)	Floodplain areas.
-	(3)	Lakes and ponds.

(4)	Wetlands as delineated on the National Wetlands Inventory Map.

C.	Acknowledgments.


(1)	A written statement indicating the method of administration and maintenance
of open space pursuant to §528, §529 and §530.


 
. '-


·-
 
§ 402.  Preliminary application

A.	Drafting standards•

(l)		The plan shall be drawn at a scale of one (1) inch equals fifty (50) feet or larger. Plans showing proposed construction, including, but not limited to, grading, piping and other improvements, shall be drawn at a scale of one (1) inch equals fifty (50) feet or larger.
 
(2)

-
 
Dimensions shall be set in feet and decimal parts thereof; and bearings in
degrees, minutes and seconds.


number of sheets.
 
.J-
 
(3)	Each sheet shall be numbered and shall show its relationship to the total



(4)  Where  a resubdivision  is proposed,  or when  the plan  is a revision  of  a previously   approved  plan,  dotted  lines shall  be  used  to show  lot  lines  to  be
abandoned and solid lines to show the currently proposed lot lines.
 
-	(5)	Notations of .revisions shall be dated.
(6)		The plan shall be so prepared and bear an adequate legend to indicate clearly which featui-es are ex.isling.and whlcli are proposed.



IV-3
 





SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT



(l)		The boundary line of the subdivision or land development shall be shown as a solid heavy line.

B.	The preliminary plans shall be complete engineering plans that show or shall be accompanied by the following information:

(1)	Sire plan (on separate sheet), showing:

(a)	Name of subdivision or land development.

(b)	Name, address and phone number of owner/applicant.

(c)	Tax parcel number(s) of the site.

(d)	Name, address. and seal of surveyor and other applicable names, addresses and seals of other professionals who participated in the
design of the proposed development.
 
-






















.....
 
(e)	Zoning requirements, including:	-

[l]	Applicable district and district boundaries

 
[2]	Maximum density or intensity permitted, if applicable.

[3]	Lot size and yard requirements, including building setback Jines shall be shown on all lots.

[41	Open space and impervious surface ratios, if applicable.
 


.....

...
 

[5]	Any variances or special exceptions granted.	.....

 
(f)	Proposed standards: [1]	Density.
[2]	Open space ratio.

[3]	Impervious surface ratio.
 

....
 

[4]	Dwelling .unit or non-residenti l  use mix. if known.
[5]	Size of units (in bedrooms) or square footage of non-residential	-
buildings. if known.




IV-4
 

 

.-!'!'!_





.,_

·I ­
-
......
'



-





-

-
 
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT




(g)	·    Location map showing relation of site to adjoining properties, streets, and sewer and water lines within one thousand (1,000) feet.  (Scale: one (1} inch equals four hundred (400) feet)	·

(h)	North Point.

(i)	Written and graphic scales (including scale of location map).

(j)	Total acreage of the site, both gross and net.

(k)	A complete field or photogrammetric survey of the property to be subdivided or developed, showing all courses, distances, and tie-ins to all adjacent intersections and areas.

(1)	Location of all existing monuments.

(m)	Boundaries of all adjoining properties (with names of landowners in the case of unplatted land).

(n)	Existing cart.ways of streets on and adjacent to the site with existing and ultimate rights-of-way.	·

(o)	Existing principal buildings (and their respective uses), sewage disposal systems, wells and driveways within two hundred (200) feet of the site. Sewer lines, storm drains. culverts. bridges. utility easements,  quarries. railroads, and other significant man-made features within two hundred
(200)	feet of and within the site, including properties across streets.

(p)	· Pursuant to Act 287of1974. all underground utility lines with
indications as to:
 

..-
 
[1]
[21
[3]
 
Ownership.
Size.
Widths of rights-of-way or easements.
 

(q)	The proposed layout, including the following, both existing and proposed, where applicable:

 

.....



-
 
[1]
[2]
 
Outline of the net site area.
The layout of streets, including widths of cartways, and existing
and ultimate rights-of-way; and proposed improvements pursuant to Subsection B (8)(d)[6] below.  The governing body shall retain exclusive jurisdiction to name all proposed streets.



IV-5
 






SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
 
-
...
 


 

[3]

[4]





[5]

[6]
[7]

[8]
[9]
[10]

[ll]
[12]
[13]
[14]
[15]
 
The Jot layout and approximate  dimensions,  areas    d uses of lotS; building setback lines and rear and side y d Imes.  ·•
The arrangement and use of buildings and parking areas m non­
residential developments and multifamily residential developments with all necessatjr dimensions and number of parking  spaces.   Elevations  and perspective  sketches  of proposed  buildings  are encouraged.	·
. Open space areas, and indication as to whether offered for
dedication.
Recreational  facilities.
Rights-of-way and/or easements for all drainage facilities.
·utilities or other purposes.	·
Sidewalks and pedestrian paths.
Street lights.
Fire hydrants. including all existing hydrants within 600 feet of
the site boundary line.
Monuments. Gas  mains. Water mains.
Driveway locations.
Locations of public and/or private sanitary and storm sewer
systems, if applicable.
 

 
(r)	Where the subdivision or land development is proposed to be developed in sections, a delineation of and numbering of the sections in their proposed  order of development.

(s) .	Where the preliminary plan involves a portion of the applicant's entire tract, a sketch plan of a feasible future subdivision or land development
 
.....

....
 
of the remainder of the tract.	-
(2)	Natural Features map (o:n separate sheet), showing:


(a)	Unless the proposed development is to be served by a central sewage disposal system. soil types within the site, based on maps contained in
the Soil Surveyofl,ackawannaand Wyoming Counties, U.S.	-
Depaitment of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, March 1982, as amended.  An attached table shall indicate each soil's limitations for community  development.

·(b)		Contours at vertical intervals of two (2) feet if the general slope of the site is less than ten (10%) percent and at vertical intervals of five (5) feet if the general slope is greater than ten (10%) percent.  Such elevati?ns.shall be determined by on-site or photogrammetric survey, not by mterpretation  of United States Geological Survey maps•.
IV-6	-
- - -··---------
 
-

SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
I


{c) ·     ·  Datum to which contour lines refer.  Where practicable. data shall refer to established elevations.	·

(d)	Floodplain areas.

(e)	Base flood elevation data, if available.

(t)	Floodplain soil areas.

(g)	Slope areas.

 
......	[1]
[2]
 

Fifteen percent (15%) to twenty-five percent (25%). Twenty-five percent (25%) and over.
 
-	(h)	Vegetatio map, showing:
 
....	[l]
[3]
 
Woodland association areas•.
Large trees over ten (10) inches caliper standing alone. Other significant vegetation.
 

-	.......	(i)  ·	Water resources map (on separate sheet), showing:

[1]	Streams.
[2]	Swales.
[3]	Lakes and ponds.
[4]	Wetlands, delineated on the'subject site. Hthe applicant claims
that there are no wetlands on the site, a certified statement to that effect shall be provided by a surveyor or other qualified professional. The name and the address of said professional shall be provided; and, if wetlands are delineated, proof of jurisdictional determination shall be provided.
[5]	Major and minor watersheds.

(3)	Sedimentation and erosion control plan pursuant to the Pennsylvania Clean Streams Law, prepared in accordance with standards and specifications of the Lackawanna County Conservation District (on separate sheet).

(4)	Storm water management plan pursuant to the Borough's current Stonn Water Management Ordinance.

 



,,.

-
 
(5)	Sewer plan (on separate sheet), showing:

(a)	Public sanitary and storm sewer facilities, if applicable.

(b)     · Central water supply facilities, if applicable.
 
-

SuBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT

(6)	Landscaping plan (on separate  heet), showing:	-
(a)	Existing and proposed grades for the entire site.

(b)	Existing vegetation  to be removed.

 

(c)

(d)


(e)
 
Existing vegetation to be preserved.

Proposed planting schedule indicating the locations, species and sizes
of plantings as required by §514, §523 and §527.

When applicable the landscaping plan shall be in accordance with the requirements of the Municipality's zoning ordinance.
 

(7)	Tentative typical cross sections and center-line profiles for each proposed
street shown on the site plan (on separate sheet).

(8)	Transportation   impact   study.	....

(a)	A transportation impact study, as defined in subsection B(8)(d) below may be required of all major subdivisions and land developments.  This study, if required, will enable the Borough of Taylor to assess the impact of a proposed development  on the local transportation system. The study purpose is to ensure that proposed developments do not adversely affect the transportation network and to identify any traffic problems associated with access from the site to the existing
 
transportation network. The' study's purpose is also to delineate solutions to potential problems and to present improvements to be incorporated into the proposed development.  The study will assist in the protection of air quality, the conservation of energy, and the encouragement of public transportation  use.


(b)	Subdivisions and land developments for which a transportation  impact study wm be required. .

[1]		A trapsportation impact study shall be required for all subdivisions and land developments that meet one (1) or more of the following criteria:

[a]		A residential subdivision/land development of one hundred 000) or more dwelling units.

lb]		A nonresidential Jand development of one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet or more of gross Jeasable floor space.	.
 
.....

-
-
....

....

-
 
IV-8	-
 
-
-	SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOP.tv.IENT


[c]		A development which will generate an ADT of at least 1500 vehicles; provided, however, that the Engineer may determine that a study shall be required for an ADT of less than 1500 vehicles on heavily traveled roads or roads with poor sight distances; and, provided further that all vehicular traffic projections shall be based on ultimate
 
build-out, and
Engineer.
 
shall
 
be subject
 
to verification
 
by the
 
·--
-



-


-
 


[d]		For any Conditional  Use as specified in the Taylor Borough Z.Oning Ordinance, for which an environmental assessment is required.

[2]		The Planning Commission, upon the recommendation of the Engineer, shall have the discretion to require the preparation of a traffic impac study for any other subdivision or land development if, in their opinion, such a study is required.

{c)		The Borough of Taylor shall select a qualified engineer and/or transportation planner with previous traffic study experience to review the applicant's transportation impact study. The Borough of Taylor may utilize applicant's fees, placed in escrow, to fund such studies. The procedures and standards for the traffic impact study, which shall be adhered o by the consultant. are set forth in subsection B{8)(d) below.
 

(d)	The transportation impact study shall contain, but not be limited to. the following information:
 
·-	[1]
 

General site description.  The site description shall include the size, location, proposed land uses. construction staging and
If the
 


-!"""

.....


.-





,,.
-
 
completion date of the proposed land development.
development is residential, types of dwelling units and number of bedrooms shall also be included.  A brief description of other major existing and proposed land developments within the study area shall be provided and shall be addressed by the traffic impact study. The general site description shall also include probable socioeconomic characteristics of potential site users to the extent that they might affect the transportation needs of the site (for example, the number of senior citizens).

[2]	.   Transportation  facilities  description.

[a]		The description shall contain a full documentation of the proposed internal and existing external transportation system. This description shall include internal verucular,


IV-9
 





SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT


bicycle and pedestrian circulation, all proposed ingress and egress locations, all internal roadway widths and rights-of-way,   parking  conditions.  traffic  channelization, and any traffic signals or other intersection control  ·	· devices within the site. The site design shall be shown to maximize potential public transportation usage to and from the development, such as providing adequate
·	turning radii at all access points to allow a bus to enter the
 
-







.....
-
 


















































-·	-
 
development. Bus shelter and sign locations shall be
designated where appropriate.

[b]	The report sh8ll describe the entire external roadway system within the study area. Major intersections in the
·	study area shall be identified and sketched. All existing
and proposed public transportation services and facilities within a one-mile radius of the site shall also be documented.   All future highway improvements, including proposed construction and traffic signalization, shall be noted.  This information shall be obtained from the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation 12-Year Highway Capital Improvements Program, and from the Municipality's Comprehensive Plan and Official Map. The applicability of current updates prior to the application under consideration shall be detennined by the Engineer. Any proposed roadway improvements resulting from proposed surrounding development shall also be recorded.	·

[3]	Existing traffic conditions.

[a]		Existing traffic conditions shall be measured and documented  on all streets and intersections in the study area.  Traffic volumes shall be recorded for existing average daily traffic. existing peak hour traffic ·and for the land development's peak hour traffic. Complete traffic counts at all major intersections in the study area shall be conducted, encompassing the peak highway and development- generated hour(s), and documentation shall be included in the report. A volume/capacity analysis based upon existing volumes shall be performed for the peak hour(s) and the peak development-generated hour(s) for an roadways and major intersections in the study area. Levels of seIVice shall be determined for each location.




IV-10
 
-








....









.....


.....

....

-








\
-
 
-

-	SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
( -
'	[b]	This analysis wm determine the adequacy of the existing
·roadway system to serve the current traffic demand.
 
.....


......
-
 
Roadways and/or intersections experiencing levels of
service E or F shall be noted as congestion locations.

[4]		Transportation impact of the development. Estimation of vehicular trips to result from the proposed development shall be completed for both the street system and the development­ generated peak hours. Vehicular trip generation rates to be used
 
for this
 
calculation
 
shall be obtained from the Institute of Traffic
 

......
·-
.....
 
Engineering (lT.E.) or other recognized traffic authorities. These development-generated traffic volumes shall be provided for the inbound and oulbound traffic movements as estimated. The reference source(s) and methodology followed shall be cited. These generated volumes shall be distributed to the study area and assigned to the existing streets and Intersections throughout the study area. Documentation of all assumptions used in tile distribution and assignment phase shall be provided • Traffic volumes shall be assigned to all access points.
 

Pedestrian volumes shall also be calculated, if applicable. If
school crossings are to be used. pedestrian volumes shall be
assigned to each crossing. Any characteristics of that site that
will cause unusual trjp generation rates and/or traffic flows shall
be noted.

[5]	Analysis of transportation impact.
 
[al	The total future traffic demand based on
 
full occupancy
 
.of the proposed subdivision or land development shall be calculated. This demand shall consist of the combination of existing traffic expanded to the completion year, the development-generated traffic, and the traffic generated by other proposed developments in the study area. A volume/capacity analysis shall also be conducted using the total future demand and the future roadway capacity. Ifstaging of the proposed development is anticipated, calculations for each stage of completion shall be made. This analysis shall be performed using the peak highway
hour(s) an«;! peak development-generated  hour(s) for an
streets and major intersections in the study area.
Volume/capacity calculations shall be completed for all major intersections.


-	IV-11
 


SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
 
-
-	SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT


(9)	Planning modules for land development as required by·Chapter 71 of the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act, as amended.

(10)	Acknowledgments.

(a)	Letter from utility companies  indicating the availability of required
utilities;	·

(b)	Schedule of all proposed sections of the subdivision or land development,, if applicable.  Said schedule shall propose deadlines within which fmal	o.r land	plans for each section are intended to be filed.

(c)	General proposal for the maintenance of open space and/or private
streets, sewer systems, central water  upply and other major
improvements; and method of management. A formal contract is not
 
-	required
 

at this point.
 

§ 403. Final plan for major subdivision or land development.

A.	Drafting standards.

(1)	. The plan shall be drawn at a scale of one (1) inch equals fifty (50) feet or larger.  Plans showing proposed constmction. including, but not limited to,  · grading piping and other improvements,  shall be drawn at a scale of one (1)
I


(2)	Dimensions shall be set in feet and decimal parts thereof; and bearings in degrees, minutes and seconds.	·

(3)	Bach sheet shall be nwnbered and shall show its relationship to the total number of sheets.

 



.,...
 
(4)	Where a resubdivision is proposed. or when the plan is. a revision of a previously approved plan, dotted lines shall be used to.show lot lines to be abandoned and solid lines to show the currently proposed lot lines.

(5)	Notations of revisions shall be dated.

(6)	The plan shall be so prepared and bear an adequate legend to indicate clearly which features are existing and which.are proposed.

(7)	The boundary line of the subdivision or land development shall be shown as a solid heavy line with bearings and distances.

IV-13
 
.....

 
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT



(8)	Final plans shall be on sheets either eighteen b twe?ly-four (18_x 24) inches, twenty-four by thirty-six (24 x 36) inches or thirty-six by forty-eight (36 x 48}
inches, and all ]ettering shall be so drawn as to be legible if the plan sh<:mld be
reduced to half size.

B.	The final plan shall be complete engineering plans that show or shall be accompanied  by the following  information:

(1)	Site plan (on separate sheet), showing:

(a)	Name of subdivision or land development.

(b)	Name and address of owner/applicant

(c)	Tax parcel number(s) of the site.

(d)	Name, address and seal of the engineer or surveyor responsible for the plan.

(e)	Zoning requirements. including:
 
...





.....




-







-
 

 
[1]
[2]
[3]

[4]
[5]
 
Applicable district and district boundaries.
Maximum density or intensity permitted, if applicable.
Lot size and yard requirements. Setback lines shall be shown on all lots.
Open space and impervious surface ratios, if applicable.
Any variances or special exceptions granted.
 


....

.....
 

(t) '	Proposed standards:

 
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
 
Density.
Open space ratio. Impervious surface ratio.
Dwelling unit or non-residential use mix, if known.
Size of units (in bedrooms) or square footage of non-residential buildings, if known.
 

(g)	Location map showing relation of site to adjoining properties and streets, within one thousand (1,000) feet of the subdivision or land development.  (Scale:  one (1) inch equals four hundred (400) feet.)
(h)	North point.	-
(i)	wn.uen and graphic scales (including sc e of location map).



IV-14
 
-
I  -	SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
.....
!	(j)	Total acreage of the site, both gross and net

(k)	A complete field or photogrammetric survey of the property to be
su divided or developed, showing all courses, distances. and tie-ins to
 
-	(1)

"""'	.    (m)

·r-	(n)
,-
 
all adjacent intersections and areas. Location of all existing monuments.
Boundaries of all adjoining properties (with names of landowners in the
case of unplatted land).

Existing cartways of streets on and adjacent to the site with existing and
ultimate rights-of-way.
 







..
-
....



.'llllliol
..
 
(o)







(p)







(q)
 
Existing principal buildings (and their respective uses). sewage disposal
systems, wells and driveways within one hundred (100) feet of the site. Sewer lines, storm drains, culverts, bridges, utility easements, quarries, railroads, and other significant man-made features within five hundred
(500) feet of and within the site. including properties across streets.
.	.

Pursuant to Act 287 of 1974, all underground utility lines with
indications as to:

fl]   Ownership.
[2]      Size.
[3]      WidtbS of rights-of-way or easements.

The proposed layout shall include the following, both existing and
proposed where applicable:
 
-


,..
....

-



-
 
[l]
[2]




[3]

[4]





[5]

[6]
 
Outline of the net site area.
The layout of streets, including widths of cartways and existing
and ultimate rights-of-way; and proposed improvements pursuant to §402 B (8)(d)[6]. The governing body shall retain exclusive jurisdiction to name all proposed streets.
The lot layout with exact dimensions, areas and uses of lots,
·	building setback lines, and rear and- side yard lines.
The arrangement and use of buildings and parking areas in
nonresidential developments and multifamily residential developments with all necessary dimensions and number of parking spaces. Elevations and perspective sketches of proposed buildings are encouraged.
Open space areas, and indication as to whether offered for
dedication. Recreational facilities.


IV-15
 
-
SUBDIVISION   AND   LAND   DEVELOPMENT	..
 


[7]		Rights-of-way and/or easements for all drainage facilities, utilities or other purposes.
(8]	Sidewalks and pedestrian paths.	.
[9]	Street lights.
[10]	Fire hydrants, including all existing hydrants within 600 feet of
the site boundary line.
[11]	Monuments.
[121	Gas mains.
[13]	Water mains.
[14]	Driveway locations.
j	[15]	Locations of public and/or private sanitary and·storm sewer
systems, if applicable.

(2)	Where the subdivision or land development is proposed to be developed in sections, a delineation of and numbering of the sections in their proposed order of development.

(3)	Where the final plan covers only a portion of the applicant's entire tract. a sketch plan shall be submitted of a feasible future subdivision or land development of the remainder of the site. Said sketch plan shall be drawn in accordance with the approved preliminary plan and the approved schedule of sections.

(4) Sedimentation and erosion control plan pursuant to the Pennsylvania CJean Streams Law, prepared in accordance with standards and specifications of the Lackawanna County Soil Conservation District (on separate sheet).

S)	Storm water management plan (on separate sheet), as specified in §402B(4)
 
-


-
-




....

-



-
-
 
(
hereof.	-
(6)	Sewer plan in accordance with §402B{5) hereof.
(7)	Landscaping and grading plan in accordance with §402B(6) hereof.	-
(8)	Improvement construction plan (drainage and construction) prepared by an
 

engineer. The improvement construction plan shall be at a horizontal scale on the plan and profile of fifty (50) feet to the inch and a vertical scale on the profile of five (5) feet to the inch. It shall contain the following:

(a)	Horizontal plan (streets):
 
.....
 

[I]		Center line with bearings, distances, curve data and stations corresponding to the profile.

[2)	Right-of-way and curb lines with radii at intersections.
IV-16	....
 

SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT

 
-

,....
 


[3]

[4]
 


Beginning and end of proposed construction.

Tie-ins by courses and distances to intersections of all public streets, with their names  and widths.
 
-	[5]	Location of all proposed monuments with reference to them.
[6]	Property lines and ownership of abutting properties.

i.	[7]	Location and size of all drainage structures, sidewalks, public
utilities, lighting standards, street trees and street name signs.

(b)	Profile (streets):

[1]	Profile of existing ground surface along the center line and both right-of-way lines of streets.
 
-	[2]
 

Proposed center line grade with percent on tangents and· elevations at fifty-foot intervals, grade intersections and either end of curb radii.
 

 

-
-




=-
·-

.,.....
 
[3]	Vertical c'urve data, including length, tangent elevations and minimum sight distance as required in Article V.

(c)	Cross section (streets):

[l]	Right-of-way width and location, and width o_f paving.

[2]	Type, thickness  and crown of paving;

[3]	Type and size of cmb.

[4]	Grading  of  sidewalk  area.

[5]	Location, width, type and thickness of sidewalks.

[6]	Typical location of sewers and utilities, with sizes.

(d)	Horizontal plan (storm drains and sanitary sewers):
 

 

[1]
 
Location and size of line with stations corresponding to the
profile.
 

 



.....
 
[2]
 
Location of manholes or inlets with grades between and elevations of flow line and top of each manhole or inlet•


lV-17
 
-
SUBDIVISION   AND   LAND   DEVELOPMENT	....

Property lines and ownership, with details of easements where	-
 
[3]  .
 
required.	-
 
[4]	Beginning and end of proposed construction.
[5]	Location of laterals and wyes.	.....

[6]	Location of all other drainage facilities and public utilities in the vicinity of storm and/or sanitary sewer lines.

[7]	Hydraulic design data for culverts and/or bridge structures.	.:.;.

(e)	Profile (storm drains and sanitary sewers):

 
[1]	Profile of existing ground surface with elevations at top of
manholes or inlets.
 



......
 
[2]
 
Profile of storm drains or sanitary sewers showing type and size
of pipe, grade, cradle. manhole and inlet locations.
 

(9)	. Management information.  A formal contract for the maintenance of open space and/or private streets. sewer systems, central water supply and other
major improvements; and method of management.	.....

(10)	Acknowledgments.
(a)	All offers of dedication and covenants governing the reservation and	-
maintenance of undedicated open space, bearing certificate of approval
of the Borough Solicitor.	.....

(b)	Such private deed restrictions. including building setback lines, as may
be imposed upon the property as a condition of sale, together with a	._
statement of any restrictions previously imposed that may affect the titJe to the land being subdivided.

(c)	All required permits and related documentation from the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection or its successor agency where any alteration or relocation of a stream or watercourse is proposed.

(d)	A notice on the plan stating that access to any highway under the jurisdiction of the PennsyJvania Department of Transportation shall be only as authorized by a highway occupancy pennit pursuant to §420 of th Act of June 1, 1945 (P.L. 1242, No. 428), known as the "State
Htghway Law".

 



-  --------
 
IV-18
 
--

SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT

-	(11)  A written agreement regarding public improvement guarantees pursuant to
§701.
-
§ 404.  Final plan for minor subdivision.
 
,....	A.
 

Drafting standards shall be in accordance with §402A hereof.
 
-I

,.
L.

i

,...





.....



:f!l/lll"llA'


r
·-


-
-







....
 

B.	The minor subdivision plan shall show or be accompanied by the following
information:

(1)	Site plan (on separate sheet), showing:

(a)	Information specified in §402B(l)(a) through (l)(p) hereof.

(b)	Proposed layout. including the requirements of §402B{l)(q)[l], [3], [4], [5], [7], [10] through (15].

(2)	Natural features map.(on separate sheet).  The following information shall be
indicated:

(a)	Contour lines measured at vertical intervals f two (2) feet. Slopes may be determined by .interpretation of United States Geological Survey maps.

(b)	Wetlands, delineated on the subject site. If the applicant claims that
there are no wetlands on the site, a certified statement to that effect
shall be provided by a surveyor or other qualified professional.

(c)	Floodplain areas.

(d)	Steep slope areas.

[1]	Fifteen percent (15%) to twenty-five percent (25%). [2]	Twe ty-five percent (25%) and over.
(e)	Lakes and ponds.

(3)	Management information. A formal contract for maintenance of open space and method of management and maintenance, if applicable.

(4)	Planning modules for land development as required by Chapter 71 of the: Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act. as  ended •



IV-19
 

SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT	..


(5)	Acknowledgments.

(a)	AU offers of dedications and covenants governing the reservation and
maintenance of undedicated open space, bearing certificate of approval
of the Borough Solicitor.
 


(b)





(c)
 

Such private deed restrictions, including building setback lines,_as may be imposed upon the property as a condition of sale, together with a  . statement of any restrictions previously imposed that may affect the title
to the land being subdivided.

A notice on the plan stating that access to any highway under the jurisdiction of the Pennsylvania Department of T sportation shall be only as authorized by a highway occupancy peJ'Dllt pursuant to §420 of the Act of June 1. 1945 (P.L. 1242, No. 428), known as the "State Highway Law.,.
 
-
-

......

-
 


§ 405. Lot Line Change.

Whenever the application is ohly for a change in lot lines which will not create additional
lots, the following shall be provided:

A.	Drafting standards shall be in accordance with §402A hereof.

B.	Information specified in §402B(l)(a) through (l)(p).



§ 406. Resubdivisions.

Resubdivisions, wherein a parcel of land is added to an existing lot for the purposes of increasing the size of the existing Jot or a number of small lots are resubdivided or re-allotted so as to make a lesser number of larger lots, shall be exempt from the provisions of this Ordinance, provided that:	·

A.	The grantor's remaining lands comply in all respects to the provisions of this
Ordinance; and

B.	Three (3) copies of the subdivision plan are submitted to the Borough Secretary.

After the Borough has determined that the conditions for a lot improvement waiver have been met. the Borough Planning Commission shall sign the plans at their next regular meeting. The following notation shall be placed on the plans which are processed as a waiver under this action: "Action is granted for recording purposes only in accordance with Section 406 of the Taylor Borough Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance."    ·	·


IV-20
 
.....




-
....
-
-
......

-·
-
 
·-

SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT




-	§ 407.  Record plan.
A.	The record plan shall be a:clear and legible blue or black line mylar and shall be an

exact copy of the approved final plan on a sheet of the size required for final plans.
I

B.	The following information shall appear on the record plan, in addition to the information required in §403 and §404 for the final plan:

(1)	Seals.

(a)	The impressed seal of the surveyor who prepared the survey, and the of the _engineer who prepared the details of all improvements for
seal
the site plan. Facsimile (stamped seal) may also be required for duplication purposes.

(b)	The impressed corporate seal, if the subdivider is a corporation.

(2)	Acknowledgments.

(a)	A statement to the effect that the applicant is the owner of the land proposed to subdivided and/or developed and that the subdivision and/or land development shown on the final plan is made with his or their free consent and that it is desired to record the same.

(b)	· An acknowledgment of said statement before an officer authorized to
talre acknowledgments.

 


.,....
I
 
(c)	A certification by a surveyor that shall read as follows:

I HEREBY CERTIFY THAT I AM A REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL LAND SURVEYOR, LICENSED JN COMPLIANCE WITH THE LAWS OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA: THAT THIS IS A TRUE AND ACCURATE SURVEY MADE ON THE GROUND COMPLETED BY MB ON
 	(DA.TE}; THAT ALL THE MARKERS
SHOWN THEREON ACTUALLY EXIST; THAT THEIR LOCATION.  SIZE, TYPE AND  MATERIAL  ARE  ACCURATELY SHOWN; AND TIIAT NO  ENCROACHMENTS,   RlGHfS-OF-WAY OR EASEMENTS EXIST EXCEPT AS SHOWN HEREIN.
 






.i.	IV-21
 





SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT





I HEREBY CERTIFY THAT, TO THE BEST OF MY KNOWLEDGE,
AIL OF THB REQUIREMENTS  OF THIS ORDINANCE HAVE	·
BEEN MET.
 
-

·









....
 



(SEAL)
 
Signature. Registered Professional Surveyor.



Date


(d)	Certification by an engineer (if applicable) shall read as follows:

THE UNDERSIGNED HEREBY CERTIFIES THAT THE SUBJECT PLAN AND RELATEDDRAWJNGS, REPORTS. ETC. BEARING
ms SEAL ARE TRUE AND ACCURATE AND WERE PREPARED
BY HIM OR UNDER HIS DIRECT SUPERVISION AND FOR
WIIlCH THE UNDERSIGNED ACCEPTS FUIL AND COMPLETE
RESPONSIBILITY. THE UNDERSIGNED FURTHER CERTIFIES THAT THE ABOVE ARE OF ADEQUATE DESIGN IN
ACCORDANCE WITH ACCEPTED ENGJNEERING STANDARDS
AND THAT. TO nm BEST OF ms KNOWLEDGE. ALL
REQUIREMENTS OF THE TAYLOR BOROUGH SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT  ORDINANCE HAVE BEEN MET.


(PRJNTED NAME)	REGISTRATION  NUMBER
 


.....
-. '
.....









.....


.....
 


 
(SIGNATURE)	(DATE)

(3)	Signatures. in black ink:
 

.....
 

(a)	The signatures of the owner or owners of theJand.  Jfthe owner of the	..... land is a corporation. the signatures of the president and Secretary of the
 
corporation shall appear.	.

(b)		The signature of the notary public, or other qualified officer, acknowledging the owner's statement of intent.

(c)	The signature of the Engineer.




IV-22.
 
.....


.....
 
-










·-



·.-




-








......

.....

I...







!,....
.,.I
 





SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT



(d)	The signatures of the titular head and the Secretary of the Borough Planning Commission to evidence approval by the Planning Commission.

(e)	The signature of the plan reviewer of the LCRPC to evidence revi w by
theLCRPC.
 

'I"""
'
l

_f
 

'·­
 



IV-23
 
 
 


SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT



ARTICLEV
Design StandardS

§ 500.  Scope; minimum standards; adjustment of standards.

A.	The following subdivision and land development principles. standards and requirements will be applied io evaluating plans for proposed subdivisions and land
developments.

B.	The standards and requirements outlined herein shall be considered minimum standards and requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare.
.  .
C.	Where literal compliance with the standards specified herein is clearly impractical,
the Planning Commission may modify or adjust the standards to permit reasonable utilization of property while securing substantial conformance with the objectives of  .
this Ordinance.

D.	Pursuant to the provisions of §$31, substantive changes may be made with regard to selected standards inkeeping with §503{5) of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.

§ 501. General standards.

A.   All portions of a site being subdivided shall be taken up inlots, streets. public lands or other proposed uses such as common open space or other common areas, so that remnants and landlocked areas shall not be created.

 
.....
;·
 

B.	Ingeneral, lot lines shall follow municipal boundary lines rather than cross them.

C.	The developer shall conform to all applicable performance standards, including, but not limited to, those contained in the Zoning Ordinance.	·
 

·	D. . Subdivisions and land developments shall be laid out so as to avoid the necessity for excessive cut or fill.
·-	be platted for residential use or for such other uses as may increase danger to
 
E.	Land subjeet
not
 
to subsidence and land deemed to be topographically unsuitable, may
 
health, life or property until all such hazards have been eliminated, or unless
adequate safeguards against such hazards , subject to review and approval  Y. e Borough Engineer and the Planning Commission, are provided by the ubd1v1s10n
plan5. Such land within the subdivision or land development shall be set aside on
the plan for uses that shall not endanger life or property or further aggravate  r
increase the existing menace.


V-1
 


SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT


§ 502. Community Facilities and Comprehensive Plan Requirements.

Jn accordance with the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance -and other ordinances and
regulations of the municipality:	....

A.  Inreviewing subdivision plans, the Planning Commission shall consider the
adequacy of existing or proposed community facilities to serve the additional	-
dwellings or non-residential uses proposed by the subdivision or land development.

B.  Where deemed necessary by the Planning Commission, upon consideration of the particular type of development proposed and especially in large-scale residential developments. the Planning commission may require an offer of dedication or reservation of such areas or sites of an extent and location suitable to the needs created by the development for schools. parks and other pmposes. Where such areas proposed for public use are within the subject subdivision/land development area, they shall be reserved for public use in accordance with the Municipality's Official
Map Ordinance.

C.    Areas provided or reserved for such community facilities shall be adequate to provide for building sites, landscaping and off-street parking as appropriate to the use proposed.

D.  Where a proposed park, playground. school or other public use shown in the Comprehensive Plan is located in whole or in part in a subdivision or land development, the Planning Commission niay require an offer of dedication or reservation of such area within the subdivision or land development. in those cases in which the Planning Commission deems such requirements to be necessary.

 
E.  The layout of the proposed subdivision shall be in general conformity with the features or developments proposed in the Comprehensive Plan of the Borough of Taylor.
 

....
 
F.	The subdivider shall plan the layout to preserve the natural features of the site.	....



§ 503. Streets generally.

A.  Proposed streets shall confonn to such municipal, county and state street and highway plans as have been prepared, adopted and/or filed, as prescribed by law.

B.	Str ts shall be_Jogically related to topography so as to produce reasonable g ades, satisfactory dramage and suitable bui1ding sites.

C.	All streets s all be graded to the full width of the r.ight7of•way. In wooded areas this
may be modified to preserve existing trees.	·	·


V-2
 


SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT



D.	Streets shall be laid out to avoid hazard areas and environmentally sensitive areas such as floodplains, wetlands, cliffs, steep slopes or ravines.  A secondary means of access to a higher order stteet that avoids the same hazard area shall be provided when one of the access stteets serving a subdivision of more than twenty dwelling units travefSes a hazard area.

·	B.  Residential streets shall be so laid.out as to discourage through traffic; however, the
ammgement of streets shall provide for continuation of existing or platted streets

and/or proper access to adjoining undeveloped tracts suitable for future subdivision, unless the Commission deems such extension undesirable for specific reasons of topography or design.

 


,,..,
-
 
F.	If lots resulting from original subdivision are large enough to permit resubdivision, or if a portion of the tract is not subdivided, adequate street rights-of-way to permit further subdivision shall be provided. as necessary.

G. Improvements shall be made to existing streets abutting the proposed subdivision or land development. The type of improvements shall be determined by the
 
classification
 
and standards required of
 
said
 
street, pur8uant to §504 and §505.
 
..	H.
 

Dead-end streets shall be prohibited, except as stubs to permit future street extension into adjoining tracts, or when designed as cul-de-sacs. Stub streets shall be properly closed to through traffic until such time as the street is extended.
 

L		Stub streets greater in length than one (1) lot depth shall be provided with a turnaround designed to meet the standards required for cul-de-sacs and shall be provided with sufficient rights-of-way to permit the further extension of the street onto the adjacent property.

J.	Streets that· are extensions of or obviously in alignment with existing streets shall
 
bear
 
the
 
names of the existing streets.  Stteet names shall not be repeated within the
 
municipality or postal delivery area, and all street names shall be subject to approval
by the governing booy.

K.	Any applicant who encroaches within the legal right-of-way of a state highway is
·	required to obtain a highway occupancy permit from the Pennsylvania Department of

Tr sportation .
.
L.	No street required to provide access shall be a private street, except as otherwise
provided herein.	·

M.	Alleys shall be prohibited .in residential districts. In commercial and industrial areas adequate service roads shall be provided where needed for access to loading and unloading facilities.
·-	V-3
 
-

SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT



 
N. Whenever the proposed subdivision contains or is adjacent to a highway designated as a "Limited Access Highway" by the appropriate highway authorities. provision shall be made for a marginal access street at a distance acceptable, for the appropriate use of the land between the highway and such street. The commission may also require rear service roads, reverse frontage lots or such other treatment which will provide protection for abutting properties. reduction in the number of intersections with major streets, and separation of local and through traffic.

O. New half or partial streets will not be permitted, except where essential to-reasonable subdivision of a tract inconformance with the other requirements and standards of these regulations and where, in addition, satisfactory assurance for dedication of the remaining part of the street can be secured.

. P.	Wherever a tract to be subdivided borders an existing half or partial street, the other part of the street shall be plotted within such tract.

Q.  New reserve strips. including those controlling access to streets shall be prohibited.

R.  The location of a collector street in the proposed subdivision shall conform in general alignment to the Traffic Plan included in the Municipality's Comprehensive Plan.


street, the municipality may require marginal-access streets, reverse-frontage lots, or
 



"'"II
I



-













-
 
S.  Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed arterial or collector
such other treatrrumt as will provide separate local and through traffic.

 
T.  Access to parking areas on commercial and industrial sites shall be controHed and shall be so located as to provide a minimum of two hundred (200) feet between points of access. For access to commercial uses, service roads or common access drives shall be provided where feasible.


§ 504. Classification of streets.

A.	Streets shall be classified inaccordance with the definitions included in Article I hereof.

B.	The determination of traffic volumes applicable to the classification of streets shall be based on !he data presented from the Institute of Traffic Engineering (I.T.E.) or other recognized traffic authorities.







V-4
 

-




....





....



-
 


SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
(


C.	New streets will be classified according to the ADT that may be expected to use the street, pursuant to the Institute of Traffic Engineering (1T.E.) or other .recognized traffic authorities.  If,however, such streets shall be classified on the basis of a traffic impact study (§ 402B.(8) hereof) and such a classification shall be approved by the
Planning Commission. Ha new street will serve as a stub, its classification must be
based on the ultimate traffic to be generated upon full development.


§ SOS. Street standards.

A.	The following chart indicates the required basic dimensional standards for the various classifications of streets as defined herein:	·

T ble.1

Basic Street Dimensional Standards "'**

Right-
of-way	Cartway	
Class	(feet)*"'.	Curbs	Sidewalks
 




'!"""'










,,
I""""
'
 
Expressways	*	*	*	No
Arterials	100	*	*	*

Collectors	60	40	Yes	4 ft.ea.

Local Streets	50	36	Yes	4 ft.ea. Marginal Access Streets	33	20	Yes		No Service Road  {Internal)	33	20	Yes		No
 
* As recommended by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
** There shall be a 7-foot utility easement on both i;ides of any public right-of-way.
outside of the cmtway; such easements shall be within the right-of-way, but outside
of the cartway.  All utilities shall be placed within such easements.
*** Except as otherwise provided 1nTable 2 hereof.









V-5
 


SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT




Table2

Street and Roadway Design Standards

 



RC Zone
Design Factor	Local Access Road

light of Way Width                                                 50 feet
Cartway Width                                                         18 feet

Type of Curb                                                            Ref.  §521
Sidewalk Width                                                             4 feet, special circumstances only * ·

Sidewalk Distance from Curb                                  NIA

Design Speed                                                        25mph

Minimum Sight Distance Looking Ahead 200feet Minimum Sign Distance From Side Street 350feet Maximum Grade                                                      8%
Minimum Intersection Spacing                                150feet

Minimum Centerline Radius	iBOfeet Minimum Tangent Between Reverse Curves	50 feet
Maximum cul-de-sac length                                    1,000 feet, loop streets preferred,
25 units maximum
 
.....
-



-
 


* Multi-family (density)


,





     ,


V-6	.....
 
-
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT




B.	Additional right-of-way and/or cartway widths may be required by the Planning Commission in order to lessen traffic congestion, to secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers, to facilitate the adequate provision for transportation and.other public requirements and to promote the general welfare.

C.	Short extensions of existing streets w.ilh lesser cartway widths than generally prescribed may be permitted; provided, however, that no section of new cartway shall be less than eighteen (18) feet in width and such extensions shall be Jess than one hundred (100) feet in length.

 


-







.....
·-
 
D  Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing street of inadequa_te right-of-way width, the Planning Commission may require the reservation or dedication of rights­ of-way to conform to the current standards. The center line of tho future right-of­ way shall be the same center line as the existing right-of-way.

E.   New half or partial streets will not be permittep, except where essential to reasonable subdivision of a tract in conformance with the other requirements and standards of these regulations and where, in addition, satisfactory assurance for dedication of the remaining part of the street can be secured.

F.		Wherever a tract to be subdivided borders an existing half or partial street. the other part of the street shall be plotted within such tract•


·	§ 506. Cul-de-sac


A.	Permanent cul-de-sacs shall.have a minimum length of _two hundred fifty (250) feet. but shall n_either exceed one thousand (1000) feet inlength nor furnish access to
more than twenty-five (25) dwelling units.

B.	Cul-de-sacs shall have at the closed end a turnaround with a right-of-way having a minimum outside right-of-way radius of sixty (60) feet and shall-be paved to a radius of not less than fifty (50) feet.	·
 

C.	Grades across cul-de-sacs shall not exceed three percent (3%).

D.	Cul-de-sacs shall be constructed with a minimum paved area of fourteen (14) feet in width, and shall be designed for one-way counter-clock-wise circulation.

E.	Cul-de-sacs for commercial or industrial uses shall be designed as needed to provide for the movement of the design-vehicle of the proposed use.


-	V-7
 
-
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT


F.	Curbs shall extend around the entire outer circumference of the cul-de-sac and  around the entire outer circumference of the internal circle area, if one is constructed.

G.	Cul-de-sac serving residential lots shall have sidewalks around the entire perimeter	'°"'\
unless specifically designated otherwise by the Planning Commission ..
-
§ 507. Building Lines.

A.  Building lines shall	as required by the Zoning Ordinance.  On plans where subsurface disposal is indicated. the distance from the right-of-way lines to the building line shall be adequate to provide area for the subsurface drainage field.

B.   Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to street lines.  Side
building lines shall be as required by the Zoning ordinance.	-
C.   Comer lots shall have extra width. sufficient to provide a setback of not less than
twenty-five (25) feet from both streets.	·	.....


§ 508. Street alignment.

A.	Whenever the lines of a local street or lower classification are deflected in excess of five (5) degrees. connection shall be made by horizontal curves. No other streets shall be permitted to have angle points in their alignments, except as otherwise provided herein.	·

B.	Minimum center line radii .for horizontal curves shall be as follows:

(1)	Local streets:  two hundred (200) feet.

(2)	Collectors:  three hundred (300) feet

(3)	Arterials:  nine hundred (900) feet.

C.	On local streets and lower classification, a minimum tangent of fifty (50) feet shall	""' be required bet-ween curves; on aU other streets. the minimum tangent shall be two
hundred fifty (250) feet.

D.	A long radius curve shall be preferred to a series of curves and tangents.

E.	The approaches to·an intersection shall follow a straight course for a least one
 
hundred (100) feet
 




V-8	-
 
--







.....


.....


.,,,,,.















'·­
 





SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT




§ 509. Street grad.es.

A. Center line grades shall nQt be less than one percent (l%)•

B.	The maximum street grades shall be as follows: .

(1)	Local streets: ten percent (10%)•

(2)	Collectors: seven percent (/%).

(3)	Arterials: four percent (4%).

C.	Vertical curves shall be used at changes of grade exceeding one percent (1%).

D.	A leveling area. measured from the point of intersection·of the ultimate rights-of­
way? shall be provided at the approach to an intersection as follows:

(1)	Four percent (4%) grade or less for a minimum distance of fifty (50) feet for local and feeder streets•.

(2)	Three percent (3%) grade or less for a minimum distance of one hundred (100)
feet for arterials and collectors.	·


§ 510. Street intersections.
 

 
A.

B.
a:

lllllill.	c.
r -
i!

:.....
 

No street shall intersect another at an angle of less than eighty degrees (80).

Streets intersecting a street of higher classification, as defined herein, shall be designated as a stop street and shall be provided with proper signage.

Multiple intersections .involving the junction of more than two (2) streets shall be prohibited.

Minor collectors, feeder streets and IOcal streets shall not intersect on the same side
of a major collector or arterial at an interval of less than six hundred (600) feet.
 


.,....
 
E.	Streets entering opposite sides of another street shall be laid out directly opposite one another or have a minimwn offset of two hundred (200) feet between their center
lines.
 




·-	V-9
 





SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT



F.	The minimum curb radii at street intersections, which shall be concentric with the street line, shall meet Pennsylvania Department of Transportation standards.  Inno instance shall curb radii be less than ten (10) feet for local streets and thirty-five (35) feet for higher order streets.  Where streets of different categories intersect, the  radius requirement of the higher order street shall apply.  A property line comer shall
be rounded to the same radius as the curb which it adjoins.

G.	The minimum curb radius for driveways serving an expected average daily traffic
. (ADT) count of twenty (20) or fewer trips shall be ten (10) feet; For driveways.
serving an expected ADT of more than twenty (20) trips. the curb radius shall be increased to fifteen (15) feet, unless a greater radius is required by the Engineer to
safely accommodate expected traffic. A permit shall be required for aU driveways in order to determine adequate site distance. No fee shall be charged for such permits.

H.	Private driveways. where provided, shall be located not less than forty (40) feet from the tangent point of the curb radius of any intersection and shall provide access to the street of lower classification when a corner lot is bounded by streets of two (2) different classifications as defined herein.

I.	Driveway grades for residential development shall not exceed 15%; and for commercial or industrial development, such grades shall not exceed 10%.

J.		In general. no private driveway shall have direct access to an arterial or major collector street. Driveways shall be so located and designed as to provide a reasonable sight distance in accordance with §512.


§ 511. Lots.


.		.  The arrangement and other design standards of lots shall conform to the following requ.rrements:

A	Every lot shall abut a public street

R		Double rontage lots shall not be platted, except that where desired along limited access highways. lots may face on an interior street and back on such thoroughfares. In th t event, a planting strip for a screen. at least fifteen (15) feet in width, shall be prov1ded al?ng the back of the lot. Where lots back on a railroad, creek, or other natu b?mer, ther may also be required a fifteen (15) foot planting screen strip; and Intenor lots havmg frontage on tWo streets shall be prohibited except where
unusual conditions make it desirable.

C.	The r tio of the depth of any lot to its width shall not be greater than two and one­
h:alf to one (2.5 :l) except as may be specified in the Zqning Ordinance.



V-10
 
-



·--- - !







....
'




-




.....




















.....
-
-


-
 


,---	SUBDIVISION  AND LAND  DEVELOPMENT


D.	Ifremnants of land exist after subdividing, they shall be incorporated inexisting or proposed lots, or dedicated to public use if acceptable to the Governing Body.

E.	Lot size shall be controlled by the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance.

F.	Where either or both water supply and sanitary sewage disposal facilities are provided by individual on-lot facilities, the municipality shall require that the  . Subdivider/Developer request that the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection or local Sewage Enforcement Officer, make the necessary tests to determine the adequacy of the proposed facilities inrelation of the lot size, existing grade, and soil conditions.  A certificate from such an official .indicating that the proposed facilities are adequate, shall be required before final approval of the plan.

Lot °:imensions and areas shall not be less than specified by the Zoning Ordinance.

Residential lots shall front on an existing or proposed public street.

Through lots are prohibited, except where employed to prevent vehicular access to arterial and collector streets.

S de lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to street lines.

The depth of single-family detached .residential lots shall not be less than one (1) nor more than two and one-half (2-112) times their width. All lots shall be designed to provide a building envelope (depth minus front and rear yards) of at least forty (40)
feet in dep .

Ifremnants of land exist after subdividing, they shall be incorporated into existing or proposed lots, or offered for dedication to public use for recreation or open space. The Municipality may or may not accept such offer of dedication.

The subdivision of a tract that creates nonconforming side and rear yards for existing buildings will not be approved unless variances have been granted by the Zoning Hearing Board prior to final application submission.	·



§ 512. Sight distance.

A.	The control of grades, curvature and obstructions at intersections is required to ensure adequate sight distance for safety and efficient vehicular operation. There are three (3) types of sight distance:

 
(1)
(2)
-	(3)
 
For intersections to ensure safe crossing or entering of an intersecting street. For stopping.	.	·
For passing overtaken vehicles on two- and three-lane streets.

V-H
 


SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT



B.	Comer sight distance.

(1)	At intersections. the street of lower order shall be designed to provide a minimum comer sight distance as speeified in the accompanying diagram an	
	table:	

(2)	
The entire area of the clear sight triangle, described by points a, b and c in the attached diagram, shall be designed to provide an unobstructed view across it	
-
	from point b to an points three and five tenths (3.5) feet above the cartway	
	along the center line from point a to points c and d.	

C.	The following table indicates the minimum sight distance required for stopping and
passing on the various street types:	'"'II!
 


Sight
 
Street Classification	-.
 
Distance	Arterial	. Collector	LggJ.

25mph 200feet l,lOOfeet


§ S13.  Off-street parking facilities.

The design standards specified below shall be required for an off-street parking facilities
with a cap ity of five (5) or more vehicles.	.	·

A. The minimum dimensions of stalls and aisles shaU be as follows:

Parking	.

Stan	Stall
  Angle of		Width*	Depth	One-Way	Two-Way
Parking	(feet}


24
21
20
20

* For dicapped-accessible parking spaces, the minimum width shall be not less
than rune (9 feet plus a minimum five (5) feet access aisle for cars and eight (8) feet access aisle for vans.



V-12	-.
 





SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT






'Y: CQRNER 'SIGHT DISTANCE
measured ftom point a to
point c and point o to point d•
.
a and d ::::   Points 3.5 •-et above the center
line of  the higher order street
b	a point  3.5 feel above !he c ay.
20 feet from the edgo of paving of
the  hi;her  order  street	·

.   C::  center line lnteraecilon of the two streets.




ft.



 
HIGHER  ORDER
STREET
-
 
----Y
 
shaded area represents•
CLEAR  SIGHT  TRIANGLE




 
-
-
-
-

_......
 
MINIMUM CORNER SIGHT DISTANCE (Y)
 








300
.
 



V-12A
 


SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT




B.   Parking areas shall be designed to permit each motor vehicl to pfroceed  o and ;rom the parking space provided for it without requiring the movmg o  any ot  er mo or
vehicles.

c.  All parking spaces shall be marked so as to provide for safe and orderly parking.

D.	At no time shall angle or perpendicular parking be permitted along public streets.


E.	Except at entrance and exit drives. an parking areas shall be set back from the right­ of-way line and all property lines pursuant to the provisions of the :ZOning Ordinance.  The distance between this required setback and the cartway shall be maintained as a pianting strip or planting strip and sidewalk.

F.	No more than twenty (20) parking spaces shall be permitted in a continuous row without being interrupted by landscaping for a minimum of ten (10) feet.

G.	No one (1) area for off-street parking of motor vehicles shall exceed eighty (80) cars in capacity. Separate parking areas on a parcel shall be physfoally separated from one another by ten-foot-wide planting strips.

H.	Parking Jots shall not have a grade exceeding five percent (5%). No grade cut, fill, or height difference between terraced parking areas shall exceed four (4) feet unless approved by the Planning Commission.  As needed for safety purposes, guide rails
..	may be required .
L	Inno case shall parking areas be designed to require or encourage cars to back into a
..	pubJic street in order to leave the lot.
J.	Entrances and exits·to and from off-street parking areas shall be Jocated so as to
..	minimize   interference   with  street  traffic.

K.	For the purpose of s rvicing any property under single and separate ownership, entrance and exit drives crossing the street line shall be limited to two (2) along the
"'	frontage of any single street for each five hundred (500) feet of frontage, and their
center lines shall be spaced at least eighty (80) feet apart.  On all comer properties, there shall be a minimum spacing of sixty (60) feet,. measured at the street line, between the center line of any entrance or exit drive and the street line of the street
parallel to said drive.

L.	The width of entrances and exit drives shall be:

(1)	A minimum of fourteen (14) feet for one-way use only.
..
V-13
 
.....

SUBDIDSION AND LAND DEVELOPMENr



(2)	A minimum of twenty-five (25) feet for two-way use.

(3)	A maximum of thirty-five (35) feet at the street line.

M.	Tire bumpers or landscape berms shall be installed so as to prevent vehicle overhang on any sidewalk area.

N.	No less than a five-foot radius of curvature shali ·be permitted for all curbs in parking
areas.

1.	· All dead-end parking areas shall be designed to provide sufficient backup area for
the end stalls of parking area.

P. ·    Pedestrian crosswalks inparking areas shall not be subject. to passage or
concentration of surface water.

Q.  ·All common parking areas shall be adequately lighted during after-dark operating
hours. AU light standards shall be lcicated on raised parking islands and not on the
parking surface.
 

R.   All artificial lighting used to illuminate any parking space or spaces shall be so arranged that no direct rays from such lighting shall fall upon.any neighboring property or streets, nor shall any high brightness surface of the luminaries be visible from neighboring residential properties or from a public street. No such lighting shall exceecl O.S FC at the proi)erty line.	.

S.	Handicapped accessible spaces shall be provided as follows:
 
-
-
.....
 

Total Parking in Lot	Required  ccessible Spaces

 
1to25 26to50 51 to75 16to100
101to150
151 to200
.201to300 301 to400
401 to500
501to1000
1001 and over
 
·l
2
3
4
5
6
1
8
.9
2 percent of total
20 plus 1for each 100 over 1000






V-14
 





.....
-
-



-
 



SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT


§ 514.  Landscaping of parking facilities.

A.	The following requirements shall be applied to all parking lots with ten (10) or more spaces.
B.	AU parking areas shall have at ieast one 1) tree of ne and-obne-halfd·inche(sl) *	·r minimum caliper for every ten (l0) parking spaces m smgle  ays an  ?ne	lre  o one-and-one-half-inches  caliper minimum for every twenty  (20) parking spaces m.
double bays..

c.  Trees shall be planted in such a manner to afford maxim m protection from the sun for parked vehicles.	·

D.	A minimum of ten percent (10%) of any parking lot facility shall be devoted to
landscaping, inclusive of required trees.

E.	Plantings shall be able to survive soot and gas fumes.

F.	Trees that have low growing branches. gum or mois re that may drop on vehicles, blossoms. thorns. seeds or pods that may clog drainage facilities shall be avoided.
Approved  trees include, but are not limited to, those listed in §523 (H) or as
recommended by the PA Bureau of Forestry.
.	.
G.	Interior landscaping shall not be required for any lots ofless than 20 spaces.


§ 515.  Off-street loading facilities.

..	Off-street loading facilities shall be designed to conform to the following specifications:
A.   Each space shall be no less than fifteen (15) feet wide, fifty (SO) feet long and have a
..		vertical clearance of sixteen (16) feet, exclusive of drives and maneuvering space, and located entirely on the lot being served.

B.  There shall be appropriate means of access to a street or alley as well as adequate maneuvering space.
..	C.    The maximum width of driveways and sidewalk openings measured at the street lot
line shall be thirty-five (35) feet; the minimum width ·shall be fourteen (14) feet.

D.  All accessory driveways and entrance ways shall be graded, have a bituminous surface, an be drained to the satisfaction of the Engineer to the extent necessary to prevent nmsances of dust, erosion or excessive water flow across public streets or
•	sidewalks.	·



V-15
 

SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT



E.	Such facilities shall be designed. d used in such a manner so as to at no time constitute a nuisance, a hazard or an unreasonable impediment to traffic.

F.	The lighting requirements of §513 (Q) and (R) shall be met, if applicable.	.....


§ 516. Storm water management and surface runoff control.

A.	·General. For an subdivisions and land development proposals. a stormwater management plan is required showing an drainage within the watershed affecting the subject property and the erosion and sediment control procedures and facilities to be
utilized. The developer shall construct and/or install such drainage structures, on­ and off-site, as necessary to comply ·with the Municipality's Storm Water Management Ordinance. Drainage systems shall be designed and sealed by a
registered Professional Engineer.	.

.B.  Objectives. Storm drainage systems shall:

(l)		Prevent erosion damage and to satisfactorily off or detain and control the rate of release of surface waters.

(2)	Encourage run-off control measures that percolate the storm water into the
growid to aid in the recharge of ground waters.	-.
(3)	Carry surface water to the nearest adequate street, storm drain. detention basin,
natural watercourse or drainage facility.

(4)	Take surface water from the bottom of vertical grades, to lead water away from springs, and to avoid excessive use of cross gutter at street intersections and elsewhere.

(5)	Handle the anticipated peak discharge from the property being subdivided or developed and the existing run-off being ·contributed from all land at a higher elevation in the same watershed.

(6)	Maintain the adequacy of the natural stream channels. Accelerated bank:
 

erosion shall be prevented by controlling the rate and velocity of run-off discharge to these water courses. so as to avoid increasing the occurrence of stream bank overflow.

(7)	Preserve the adequacy of existing culverts. Bridges and similar structures shall be preserved by suppressing the new flood peaks created by new land development.




V-16
 
-
-
-
.....
 



SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT



c.	Retention of existing watercourses and natural drainage features.

 

(1)
 
Whenever a watercourse, stream, or intermittent stream is located within a development site, such a watercourse, stream, or intermittent stream shall remain open in its natural state and location and shall not be piped.
 

(2)	The existing points of natural drainage discharge onto adjacent property shall not  b altered without the written approval of the affected landowners.

(3)	No stormwater run-off or natural drainage shall be so diverted as to overload existing drainage systems, or create flooding or the need for additional drainage structures on other private properties or public lands.

D.	Design criteria.

AU plans and designs for stonn water management facilities shall determine the maximum expected discharge and run-off in accordance with the Borough's current Storm Water Management Ordinance.

"
§ 517. Erosion and sediment controls; grading.
..	A.      General provisions  and compliance•.

(1)	With the exception of tree cutting necessary for survey purposes,  no changes shall be made in the contour of the land and no grading excavation, removal·
nor destruction of the topsoil, trees or other vegetative cover of the land shall
..	be commenced, until such time that a plan for minimizing erosion and sedimentation has been:

..	{a)		Processed and reviewed by the Engineer and approved by the Lackawanna County Soil Conservation District; and
..	(b)	Approved by the Planning Commission .

(2)	The Planning Commission, .in its consideration of all preliminary subdivision and hmd development plans, shall condition its approval upon the execution of erosion and sediment control measures as contained in the standards and specificatio?s of the Lackawanna County Soil Conservation District, and the. Pennsylvama Department of Environmental Protection. Bureau of Soil and
Water Conservation or its successor agency.	.



..
V-17
 
.....
SUBDMSION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT	-

(3)	Final approval of plans and specifications for the control of erosion and sedimentation shall be concurrent with the approval of the final subdivision or land development plans. and become a part thereof.

(4)	Final plans for minimizing erosion. and sedimentation as approved will be
incorporated into the agreement and bond requirements as required by the
municipality.  (See Article. VIl.)

(5)	No subdivision or land development plan shall be approved unless:

 
(a)	There shall be an improvement bond or other acceptable security is deposited with the municipality in the fonn of an escrow guaranty that will ensure installation and completion of the required improvements; or
 

••••r

-.
 

(b)	There has been a determination by the Planning Commission that a plan for minimizing erosion and sedimentation is not necessary. The Planning Commission may waive the above requirement for minor subdivisions.	·

(6)		The Engineer shall review plans and inspect the development site during the construction of site improvements to insure compliance with the approved plan.

(7)	The Engineer shall review stream channel construction ·on watersheds with a drainage area in excess of three hundred twenty (320) acres, or in those cases
where downstream hazards exist, and shall submit a review of said construction to the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection or its successor agency.  Said construction shall be approved by the Department of Environmental Protection or its successor agency prior to final plan approval.

B.	·   General erosion control standards.

Measures used to control erosion and reduce sedimentation shall, as a minimum,
 
meet the standards and specifications of the Lackawanna Coµnty Soil Conservation
District, and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, Bureau of Soil and Water Conservation or its successor agency.

Jn cases wb re the Lackawanna County Soil Conservation District does not have standards and specifications for erosion and sedimentation control. other known and commonly accepted standards and specifications approved by the Engineer may be used.
 
.....



"""

-
 


V-18
 


SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT



§ 518. Blocks.

A.	The length, width and shape of blocks shall be determined· with due regard to the following:

(1)	Provision of adequate sites for the types of buildings proposed.

(2)	Zoning requirements as to lot sizes, dimensions and minimum lot areas per dwelling unit.

(3)	The limitations and opportunities of the topography.

"	(4)	Requirements for safe and convenient vehicular and pedestrian circulation and access.
..	B.   Blocks shall have a maximum length of one thousand six hundred (1,600) feet and minimum length .of three hundred (300) feet. Jn the design of blocks longer than one
•	thousand one hundred (1,100) feet, special consideration shall be given to the requirements of satisfactory fire protection.

"	§ 519.  Planting Strip.

..		Where a planting strip is provided, the subdivider shall seed.the planting strip between the curb and sidewalk, if both are required. Ifcurb and/or sidewalk is not required, the planting strip shall be located in the same area as th ugh they both were required .
•

§ 520. Easements.

A.	Utility easements shall be provided. as needed; such easements shall be designed in accordance with the provisions hereof.

B.	Roadway tility easements·shall be in accordance with §505, Table 1hereof.

C.	Utility easements not located within a public right-of-way shall be located along side or rear property lines and shall have minimum widths, as follows:

 
1)	Underground utility
2)	Overhead utility
3)	Drainage facilities
 

fifteen (15) feet
ten (10) feet
twenty (20) feet
 

 
D.	No s c.ture requiring a building permit or plantings, except for lawn, shall be set or put within the area of a utility easement.
 


_.....·
 

V-19
 
-.
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT



E.	Where a subdivision or land development is traversed by a watercourse. there shall be provided a drainage easement or right-of-way conforming substantially with the line of such watercourse and of such width as will be adequate to preserve natural drainage and afford adequate access for maintenance but not less than fifty (50) feet in width, or as may be required or directed by the engineer and/or the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection or its successor agency.  The owner shall properly grade and stabilize slopes and fence any open ditches when it is deemed · necessary by the engineer.
F.		Where stonnwater or surface water will be gathered within the subdivision or land development and discharged or drained in volume over lands within or beyond the boundaries of the subdivision or land development, the applicant or owner shall
reserve or obtain easements over all lands affected thereby; such easements shall be adequate for discharge or drainage and for the carrying off of such water, and for the maintenance, repair and reconstruction of the same vehicles, machinery and other equipment for such purposes, and shall be of sufficient width for such passage and · work. The owner shall convey, free of charge or cost, such easements to the  · municipality upon demand.

G. ·  No right-of-way or easement for any pmpose whatsoever shall be recited or described in any deed unless the same has been shown on the approved plan.

H.  Transmission lines.  Where natural gas, petroleum, or high tension lines are located within or adjacent to the subdivision/Development, the Subdivider/Developer shall provide the Planning Commission with a statement from the utility company involved setting forth any special conditions which they may require.



§ 521.  Curbs.

A.	Curbs shall be provided along  treets pursuant to Table 1and Table 2 unless swales are substituted pursuant to §53l(A}(2}.  Wherever the lots in a proposed Subdivision will result in a density of more than one (1) dwelling unit per net acre, or where
multi-family dwellings are provided, curbs and gutters shall be installed  accordance with the following specifications. The Commission may require installation of curbs and/or gutters inany Subdivision where the evidence indicates
that such improvements are necessary for proper drainage.

B.	Curbs shall be constructed in accordance with municipal specifications, and as follows:

(1)	Curbs shall be provided on all streets and parking compounds located within all major subdivisions and land developments.


V-20	.....
 

SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT


(2)	All curbs shall be depressed at intersections to sufficient width to
accommodate wheelchairs. Depression shall be in line with sidewalks where
provided.

 

(3)
 
Curbs shall be the vertical type.
 

(4)	AU curbs shall be constructed of cement concrete with expansion joints every twenty (20) feet, and shall follow PennDOT standards, as follo s:

(a)	Straight Portland cement curb. 18" x 7", top rolled and battered fo 8" at bottom, 8" face exposed above finish road surface.

c.	When the sole purpose of the curb is to protect the pavement edge, cement concrete
headers may be utilized, subject to the approval of the Borough Engineer.



§ 522. Sidewalks and pede8trian paths.

A.	Wherever a proposed Subdivision shall average five (5) or more dwelling units per gross acre included in the Subdivision, or where any Subdivision is immediately adjacent to, or within one thousand (1,000) feet of any existing devel pment or recorded Subdivision having sidewalks, then sidewalks shall be installed on each side of the street in accordance with the specifications set forth herein. The commission may require the installation of sidewalks in any subdivision where the evidence indicates that sidewalks are necessary for the public safety.

B.	Sidewalks shall be installed and shall have a minimum width of four (4) feet, except that sidewalks serving apartment houses or proposed commercial areas shall be five
(5)	feet in width unless the Commission determines that such additional width is
..	unnecessary for the public safety and welfare in the vicinity of the subject site.
Sidewalks shall be concrete, 4" in thickness. 1 :2 114 :3 mix placed on 4" crushed
stone, in accordance with current PennDOT specifications.

C.	Sidewalks and public paths shall be installed for convenience and access to aU dwelling units from streets, driveways, parking areas or garages and located within a public right-of-way, a public easement or a common open space area.

D.	At comers and other pedestrian street-crossing points, sidewalks shall be extended to the c?rbline with ramps for adequate and reasonable access of physically
handicapped persons, including those in wheelchairs, across curbs.

E.	SidewaJks and pedestrian paths away from streets shall be adequately lighted.





V-21
 




SUBDI ISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT




F.	The grades and .paving of sidewalks and pedestrian paths shall be continuous across driveways.  Where heav}' traffic volume is expected, a special paving treatment may be required by the Planning Commission. Small jogs in the alignment shall be avoided.

G.   Sidewalks and pedestrian paths shall be laterally pitched at a slope of not less than three-eighths (3/8) inch per foot to provide for adequate surface drainage. The concentration of surface waters shall be prevented from passing on or across sidewalks.  The design of sidewalks shall not cause surface waters to pocket.

H.  Where sidewalk grades exceed :five percent (5%). a non-slip surface texture shall be
used.

L		Sidewalks and pedestrian paths shall be of a hard surface composition if heavy pedestrian or bicycle traffic will be served and shall be constructed according to municipal specifications. An occasionally-utilized footpath may use gravel, pine bark chips, or other material approved by the Borough Engineer.

J.		Sidewalks adjacent to angle parking areas shall be set.back a minimum of five (5) feet to prevent car overhang from restricting pedestrian movement along the · sidewal\C.                                                    ·                                           ·
 
-
-
-
-

-,
-



-.

.....

-
 
§ 523.  Street trees.	-

A.	Within any land development o.r major subdivision, street trees shall be planted along all streets where suitable street trees do not exist.

 
B.	Large street trees shall be planted at intervals of not more than forty-five (45) feet, and small street trees at intervals of not more than thirty (30) feet along both sides of new streets	along one (1) or both sides of an existing street within the proposed subdivision or land development. An equivalent nwnber may be planted in an informal arrangement, subject to the approval of the Planning Commission.

C.	Street trees shall not be planted opposite each other, but shall alternate.
 




.....
-
 
D.	At intersections, trees shall not be located within the clear sight triangle.	-
E.	Street trees shall be planted in the right-of-way, within the planting strip, rather than
on lots.  Where sidewalks are required, the planting strip shall be between the curb
and the sidewalk.
-

V-22
 


SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT




F.	Street trees shall be of nursery stock. They shall be of symmetri al g1:°thwthth, free of insects. pests and disease, suitable for street use, and inoonforrmty w1	e standards of the American Association of Nurserymen.

G.	.The minimum trunk diameter. measured at a height of six (6) inc es above the finished grade level. shall be two and one-half (2-in) inches.

H.  Species shall be as specified herein and as otherwise approved by the PA Bureau of Forestry.  Ingeneral, trees shall be mature shade trees. Trees such as Norway Maple and Amur Cork trees shall be prohibited.



§ 524. Crosswalks.

A.  Interior crosswalks.may be required wherever necessary to facilitate pedestrian circulation and to give access to community facilities in blocks of over one thousand six hundred (1,600) feet in length.


B.   Such crosswalks shall have an easement width of not less than ten (10) feet and a paved walk of not less than four (4) feet. They shall be clearly marked by bollards, paving material, signing. lights or similar provisions to ensure their visibility to motorists.


§ 525. Re8idential developments.

A.	Approval of the preliminey application must be obtained for the entire proposed development  F.maJ approval may be obtained section by section, but such sections shall be specified on the preliminary plan and must be numbered inthe proposed order that they are to be developed.  Such order of development must be adhered to. and if changes are required, plans must be resubmitted  and processed pursuant to ArticJem.	.	·

B:  Design standards.

(1)	The land development shall be designed to be harmonious and efficient in relation to topography. the size and shape of the site, the character of adjoining properties and the type and size of proposed buildings.

(2)	Buildin.gs shall e well-related to the natural topography, existing desirable vegetat10n, bodies o ater, views within and beyond the site, and exposure to the sun and. other ex1stmg and proposed building .



V-23
 

SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT




(3)	Attached dwelling types shall incorporate varied designs, architectural modes and setbacks.	·
C.	Access and circulation.	-
 
(1)	Access to the dwellings and circulation between buildings and other important project facilities for vehicular and pedestrian traffic shall be comfortable and convenient·fortheoccupants.

(2)	Access and circulation for fire-fighting and other emergency equipment, moving vans, fuel trucks, garbage collection, deliveries and snow removal shall be planned for efficient operation and convenience.

(3)	Walk:ing distances from the main entrance of a building or a single-family
 




.....
-..
 
dwelling unit to a parking area shall be less than one hundred (100) feet.	-...
Exceptions to this standard shall be reasonably justified by coropensating
advantages, such as desirable views and site preservation through adaption to
topog:ra:pby.  In no case shall the distance exceed two hundred fifty (250) feet.	-.

D.	Grading.

(1)	Grading shall be designed for buildings, lawns, paved. areas and other facilities to assure adequate surface drainage, safe and convenient access to and around the buildings, screening (Jf parking and other service areas and conservation of desirable existing vegetation  and natural ground forms.	·
 

(2)	Grading around buildings shall be designed to be in harmony with the natural topography.

E.	Streets and driveways.
 
.....

....
 

(1)	Streets and/or driveways shall be provided on the site where necessary for convenient access to dwelling units, garage compounds, parking areas,·service entrances of buildings, collection of refuse and all other necessary services.	. Internal streets and driveways shall enter public streets at safe locations.

(2)	Streets and/or driveways shall be planned for convenient circulation suitable for traffic needs and safety•

(3)	. AU streets and/or driveways shall be laid out to conform with the design, service, and access standards c.ontained herein for public streets based upon projected  average daily traffic.




V-24
 


SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT



(4)	Streets and/or driveways shall be paved and constructed in accordance with municipal standards.

F.	Refuse collection stations.

(1)	Outdoor collection stations shall be provided for garbage d trash re oval
when individual collection is not made and indoor storage 1s not_prov1ded.

 

.. (2)
 
Collection stations shall be located so as to be adequately separated from habitable buildings to avoid being offensive, but at the same time be
.convenient for both ci>Uectors and residents and shall be adeq ately screened
and landscaped. in accordance with the Borough Zoning Ordinance.
 

G.	Planting.

(1)	The appeal and character of the site shall be preserved and enhanced by
retaining and protecting existing trees and desirable topographic features.

(2)	Additional plant material shall be added for privacy, shade, beauty of buildings and grounds. and to screen out objectionable features.


§ 526. Nonresidential developments.

A.  Additional width of streets adjacent to areas proposed for nonresidential use may be
required as deemed necessary by the Planning Commission tO assure the free flow of
·through traffic from vehicles entering or leaving parking/loading areas.

B.	When tWo (2) adjacent lots proposed for nonresidential uses front on an arterial or major collector street. the applicant may be required to provide common ingress and egress as well as common parking facilities.  When three (3) or more adjacent lots are prop<>sed for nonresidential uses, the applicant may be required to provide a service road for common ingress and egress.

C.	Dead-end alleys shall be avoided; but where this proves impossible, they shall be terminated with a paved turnaround of adequate dimensions as approved by the Planning Commission.

D.	. Outdoor collection stations shall be provided for garbage and trash removal when indoor coUection is not provided.  CoUection stations shall be screened from view and landscaped.





V-25
 

SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT



§ 527. Buffer yards.

A.	Buffer yards are required between subdivisions and land developments and along
existing streets to soften visual impact, to screen glare, and to create a visual barrier between conflicting land uses. Buffer areas shall be developed in accordance with the standards set forth in the Municipality's zoning ordinance.  ·
-
§ 528. Recreation areas.

A.   In accordance with the Municipality's recreation plan, upon consideration of the particular type of dev lopment proposed; the Planning Commission may require the offer of dedication or reservation of such other areas or sites of a character, ex.tent, and location suitable to the need created by such development for parks and recreation areas.

B.	The following standards shall apply to the provisions of parks, other recreation areas
and permanent open space:	·	.....
(1)	Single-family detached developments.   In the case of residential developments  . designed exclusively with single-family detached dwellings, the applicant
shall provide a minimum of one thousand (l,000) square feet per dwelling unit
for parks and recreation areas.
(2)	Single--family cluster developments.  Insingle family cluster developments,	-
the open space and recreation requirements as set forth in the Zoning
Ordinance shall be adhered to.

(3)		Multi-family developments. In multi-family residential developments, the open spa and recreation requirements as set forth in the Zoning Ordinance shall be adhered to.

C.	Recreation areas, as required by the Zoning Ordinance. shall be laid out in accordance with the best principles of site design. The recreation areas shall form part of an interconnecting open space system that extends throughout the development.  The following criteria shall be utilized to determine whether the
recreation areas have been properly designed:

(1)	Recreation   areas shall be readily  accessible  to  all development  residents,  or in  the case of recreation  areas dedicated  to the municipality,  shall be easily  and safely accessible  to the  general public.    At  least one  (!).side of  the  recreation
area shall abut a street for minimum distance of fifty (50) feet for access of
emergency and maintenance vehicles.	-

V-26
 


SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT


(2)	Recreation areas shall have suitable topography, drainage and soils for use and development of recreational activities.

 

(3)




(4)




(5)
 
When active recreation activities are proposed that entail _the construction and installation of equipment or playing surfaces, a buffer, as described in §527, shall be provided when such activities abut residential uses.

Recreational areas shall not be traversed by streets or utility easements unless said utilities are placed underground and no part of them or their supportive equipment protrudes above ground level.

The shape of the recreational area shall be suitable to accommodate those recreation and open: space activities appropriate to the location and needs of future .residents.
 

D.   The Governing Body may accept or reject the dedication of any recreation area.

E.   Except as othenvise provided herein, for any development of ten (10) or more dwelling units under one (1) or more applications, the developer shall, as a condition precedent to final plan approval. either pay a .recreation fee or dedicate land to the Municipality in lieu of such a recreation fee. The Governing Body, however, may reject an offer of dedication of land•.Such decision shall be rendered by the Governing Body prior to the approval of the Preliminary Application for the subject development. The procedure for both alternatives shall be as described in §528 F, and 528 G hereof.

F.	Alternative Procedure for Payment of a Recreation Fee. Where it is determined that a recreation fee shall be paid, such fee shall be used only for the purpose of  providing park or recreational facilities accessible to the subject development. The amount of such recreation fee shall be three hundred dollars ($300.00) per dwelling unit included in the subject land development; provided, however. that said fee shall
be .refundable. with interest, upon request of the payer of the fee in the event that the
Municipality has failed to utilize such funds for the purpose set forth herein within three (3) years of the date of payment of said fee.

G.	Alternative Procedure for Dedication of I.and in Lieu of a Recreation Fee. This option shall only be considered for developments of 20 or more dwelling units. The developer may be required to dedicate 1,000 square feet of Jand for each dweIIing unit.. The delineation of the area to be dedicated shall be the choice of the developer; provided, however, that such lands shall be suitable for recreational use as · determined by the PJanning Commission. If,however, the Municipality fails to develop the dedicated site within three (3) years of the date of dedication, the site shaII be returned to the developer.




V-27
 





SUBDJ.V:ISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT



§ 529. Open space designation and design.


A.	All land held for open space shall be so designated on the plans. The plans shall contain the following statement for lands in the categories listed insubsection B below:
 
"Open space land may not be separately sol nor shall
such land be further developed or subdivided."

B.	Indesignating the use of open space and the type of maintenance to be provided on  ·
the plan, the following classes may be used:
 

......
 

 
·	(1)		Lawn. A grass area with or without treeS that may be used by the residents for a variety of purposes and that shall be mowed regUlarly to insure a neat and tidy appearance.

(2)	Natural area. An area of natural vegetation, undisturbed during construction or related activities. Such areas may contain pathways. Meadows shall be maintained as such and not left to become weed infested. Maintenance may be minimal, but shall prevent the proliferation of weeds and undesirable plants such as honeysuckle and poison ivy•. litter, dead trees and brush shall be removed, and streams shall be kept infree-flowing condition.

(3)	Recreation area. An area designated for a specific recreation use, including, but not limited to, tennis. sw.imining, shuffieboard, playfield and tot lot. Such areas shall be maintained so as to avoid creating a nuisance, and shall perpetuate  the proposed  use.

(4)	Agricultural area.  An area designated for the preservation of Class I, Il and
 







-.



-..
-·
 
magriculture
 
soils for agricultural usage, as may be required by the Z.Oning
 
.....
 
Ordinance. Such open space areas shall be designed to provide the maximum
amount of farmland for usable fields or garden plots.

C.	Permanent Open Space to be provided inaccordance with certain Sections of this Ordinance shall be designed in accordance with the following standards:

(1)	Permanent Open Spa.Ce shall be so designated on the submitted plans, and the plans and property deeds shall contain. a notation stating, "Permanent Open Space shall not be separately sold and shall not be further developed or subdivided;"	·

(2)	Permanent Open Space shall be contiguous to the development:. not separated
by existing streets, and shall not be a part of any lot within the development;
-

V-28	-.
 


SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT



(3)	Permanent Open Space areas shall be designed as a continuous system of open space and shall be interconnected with open space areas on abuttmg parcels
whenever possible;

(4) Permanent Open Space shall be provided with safe and convenient access to the residentlally-:developed  area of the tract by adjoining frontage on streets or
easements capable of accommodating pedestrian, bicycle, and maintenance vehicle traffic. The Permanent Open Space shall contain appropriate access improvements and shall be provided with perimeter parking areas where
appropriate;

(5)	All portions of a tract not occupied by buildings and required improvements shall be maintained as landscaped areas consisting of natural environmental
features and/or planted vegetation. Permanent Open Space shall	. predominantly consist of natural environmental features or planted and
·maintained vegetation that may contain walking and biking trails. Permanent Open Space may also contain impervious surface areas such as tennis courts, clubhouses, or other active recreation facilities, but such active recreation facilities shall consist of less than twenty-five percent (25%) of the Pennanent Open Space;	·

(6)	Permanent Open Space shall be configured so as to create areas of adequate size and shape to permit a variety of uses, active or passive. throughout the system.


§ 530. Ownership and maintenance of permanent open space.

A.	Permanent open space to be provided in accordance with certain Sections of this ordinance may be offered for dedication to the municipality, although the municipality need not accept any such offers. Provision for ownership and maintenance of the open space shall be made in a manner so as to ensure its prese ation, in accordance with one (1) of the following alternatives:

•	1.	The municipality may accept dedication of the open space or any interest
the in _for public use and maintenance, but the municipality need not accept a
dedication of the open space if offered;

2.	With permission of the municipality, and with appropriate deed restrictions in
fav?r.of the municipality ·and in language acceptable to the municipality's
Soh 1tor, the developer may transfer the fee simple title in the open space or a portion thereof to a private, not-for-profit organization, provided that:

a.	The o ga?izati n is acceptable to the municipality and is a bona fide orgamzatmn with a perpetual existence;

"	V-29
 



SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT	-
b.	The conveyance contains appropriate provision for proper retransfer or
reverter in the event that the organization becomes unable or unwilling
to continue to carry out its functions, and;

c.	A maintenance agreement acceptable to the municipality is entered into
 
by the developer, the organization and the municipality;

3.	The developer shall provide for and establish an organization for the ownership and maintenance of the open space consistent with the requirements for unit owners' associations found in the Pennsylvama Uniform Condominium Act, 68 Pa. C.S.S. 33101 et seq. If such an organization is created, the deeds for the open space and for all individual lots within the development shall contain the following requirements inlanguage acceptable to the municipality's Solicitor.

a.	Such organization shall not dispose of the open space by sale or otherwise except to the municipality or other goyemment body unless the municipality has given prior approval. Such transfer shall be made only to another organization that shall maintain the open space in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance;

b.		The organization and all lot owners within the development shall agree to maintain the open space. Ifprivate ownership fails to do so, the municipality may proceed to maintain a deteriorating open space and may assess and lien the properties within the development accordingly;

c.		All lot owners shall be required to become members of the organization and pay assessments for the maintenance of the open space, which may be increased for inflation and which may provide for professional
management.



§ 531. Varying of design standards.

The Planning Commission, recognizing that a situation may arise where additional flexibility is warranted, is authorized to alter the design standards specified below. The applicant shall present evidence and demonstrate that the variation requested will result in improving the ptoposed subdivision or land development. The standards and requirements of this Ordinance also may be modified by the Commission in the case of plans for complete conununities or neighborhood units or other large scale developments of twenty (20) acres or more which, in the judgment of the Commission, achieve substantially the objectives of the regulations contained herein and which are further protected by such covenants or other legal provisions as will assure confomtlty to and achievement of the plan. Requests for modifications shall be submitted in writing by the Subdivider at the time the Preliminary Application is filed with the Commission. The application shall state fully the grounds and all the facts relied upon by the Applicant

V-30
 
-
-






-
.....
-
-






-
-




......
-
 


SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT


A.	Streets. Standards for streets expressed in this Ordina ce ar int ndded tto r?vide for the safe and intelligent layout of streets that can be easdy mamtame  a rmmmum
cost

(1)	Cartway width. The width of streets has been established .to ensure adequate movement of traffic in times of greatest parking loads.

 

(a)
 
Where a street is designed so that all dwelling units face Qn local s ets and where on-street parking is not permitted and n? safety  az d .w1 l  be created, the cartway width may be reduced.  This reduction 1s lumted to twenty-eight (28) feet on collector or twent.r (20) feet on local streets.
 

(2)	Curbs. Curbs are used to channel water to storm sewers, protect pavement edges and keep vehicles off of grassed.areas. Where topography and soils permit, roadside swales. set back a minimum of ten (10) feet from the edge of the cartway. may be substituted for curbs, provided that the alternate design:.

(a)	Ensures adequate means. for the protection of pavement edges.

(b)	Handles stormwater in a manner to ensure against erosion or other conditions detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare.

(c)	Has the approval oftheMunic.ipal Engineer.

(3)	Right-of-way widths.  Right-of-way widths are intended to provide enough land for streets, sidewalks, driveway aprons, street trees, cut or fill slopes, and utilities.  They are intended to provide an additio.nal buffer between dwelling units and streets.  Where sidewalks are not run along streets, cartway widths are reduced, utilities are located outside of the right-of-way, or dwellings will not front on the streets, a reduction in the widths of rights-of-way may be permitted.  Inno instance shall a right-of-way width be reduced to less than thirty-three  (33) feet.

B.	Sidewalks. Sidewalks are intended to provide a separate means of movement for pedestrians. Occasionally, it may be appropriate for the location of sidewalks to be away from streets. Inorder for the Planning Commission to waive the requirement for sidewalks to be within a street right-of-way, all of the following provisions for relocated sidewalks shall be met:

(1)	The walks shall be all-weather and easily cleared of snow.

(2)	They shall be convenient .for the most frequent trips, such s children walking to school bus stops.




V-31
 
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT	-

(3)	Ifthe walks shall remain as private property, then the responsibility for their maintenance shall be clearly established, such as by a homeowners' association, or the respective property owners.

C.	Where the Planning Commission shall detennine that sidewalks are not essential for the safety of pedestrians in a low-density (l dwelling unit or less per acre), they may void any and all sidewalk. requirements.

D.	The standards and requirements of this Ordinance also may be modified by the Commission in the case of plans ·for complete communities or neighborhood units or other large scale developments of twenty (20) acres or more which, in the judgment of the Commission, achieve·substantially the objectives of the regulations contained hereill and which are further protected by such covenants or other legal provisions as will assure conformity to and achievement of the plan.

E.	Inauthorizing a modification, the Commission shall record its actions and the grounds for authorizing the modification in its minutes.  A statement showing the date that such modification was authorized shall be affixed to the final plan.

....

-





-
-






-

V-32


 
 
 
 

SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT

-	ARTICLE  VI
-	Improvements
§ 600. Purpose; conformance required.

 



111111111




. .
-
 
A.   The purpose of this Article is to establish and define the public improvements that will be required by the municipality to be constructed or caused to be constructed by the applicant.

B. All improvements shall be constructed in accordance with the specifications of the municipality•


§ 601. Minimum requirements.

.	The improvements included in this Article are minimum requirements; however the Planning Commission reserves the right, in any case, to increase the same if conditions so warrant.


§ 602. Revision of plans.
 

When changes from the accepted drawings and specifications become necessary during construction, written acceptance by the municipality, upon the advice of the Municipal Engineer, shall be secured before t e execution of such changes. As-built drawings shall be provided •
.-	§ 6 3. Maintenance.
Adequate provisions for the satisfactory maintenance of all improvements shall be made
by dedication to, and acceptance for maintenance by, the governing body.
-	§ 604.  Streets and driveways.
Streets shall be surfaced to the grades and dimensions drawn on the plans, profiles and
·cross sections submitted by the subdivider and approved by the Borough. Before paving the street surface. the subdivider must install the required utilities and provide, where necessary,
adequate stormwater drainage for the streets, as acceptable to the Borough Engineer. The
in contract
construction of streets and driveways. as shown upon final plans and.as contained
agreements, shall in every respect conform to such requirements as the municipality may by resolution require, and as follows:


VI-l
 






SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT


A.  Minor Street. Except where otherwise specified, there shall be a 6" subbase inf accordance with §350 of the current edition of the Pennsylvania Department o Transportation  Publication No. 408.  There shall also be a bituminous  base course
. (BCBC) of 4" ID-2 in accordance with §305 of the current edition of the .	• Pennsylvania Department of Transportation  ublication No. 408, and	1tummous wearing course of 1W' ID-2 in accordance with §420 of the current edition of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Publication No. 408.

B.	Collector Street  Except where otherwise specified. there shall be an 8" subbase in accordance with §350 of the current edition of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Publication No. 408. There shall also be a bituminous base course
. (BCBC) of 5" ID-2 in accordance with §305 of the current edition of the Pennsylvania Department  of Transportation Publication No. 408, and a bituminous wearing course of 1Y.z" ID-2 in accordance with §420 of the current edition of the Pennsylvania Department  of Transportation  Publication No. 408.

C.	Arterial Streets. For the construction of arterial roads or highways. the subdivider shall consult with and be governed by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation for the method of construction to be used. The Borough shall decide if a collector or arterial street is required as a direct result of the construction of this subdivision in which case the subdivider is responsible for paving the additional width required.

D.	Schedule. Streets shall be constructed in accordance with a schedule to be submitted
by the developer and approved by the Planning Commission.  Streets shall be graded, · surfaced, and improved to the grades and dimensions shown on plans, profiles. and cross-sections submitted by the subdivider/developer and approved by the
commission. No surface paving shall be provided until the base course has beeri in
place for a full Winter, nor, shall such surface be provided until all required utilities have been properly installed.

E.	Alternative Improvements, For local access streets, including service roads and marginal access streets, the Municipality will consider any alternative supported by a maintenance bond to be provided by the developer to cover a period of 3-years from the date on which the street is opened to traffic.

F.	Dri eways. J?riveway designs shall be subject to the approval of the Municipal Engmeer. Dnveway entrances or aprons within the street right-of-way shall be surf !o their	idth. the type of surface to be the same as specified by the
E gineenng s 1fications for the streets. Where sidewalks are installed, the required
driveway surfacmg shall end at the street side of the sidewalk. This requirement
shall be  h ?bJigation of the parties who shall erect structures on any parcel within the subdivmon/development.  The developer shall include such requirements in the sales contract and in the deed restrictions.



VI-2
 
-

.......
'
....









.....


.....
-.
-
-
-






-
-
-
-
 
-
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT



·§ 605.  Street signs, regulatory signs and traffic signalization.

A.	The Subdivider shall provide street signs at all intersections. There shall be not less than two (2) street signs at each Intersection; they shall be placed in a manner which will make the legible to traffic flows entering the intersection from all directions.
The signs shall be placed on iron posts, eight (8) feet in height; and. signs shall be white lettering on a green background at the top of each post. Modifications of these standards, shall be subject to the approval of the Municipal Engineer.  · .	·

 



-















......
·-
 
B.	Street signs are to be erected when the first dwelling on the street is occupied.
Temporary street signs may be erected on the approval of the municipality but shall be made permanent before final offer fo.r the dedication of roads is made.

C.	The developer shall provide regulatory signs {such as stop signs) and traffic signalization as may be recommended in a traffic impact study, by the Municipal Engineer, and/or required by the governing body.

§ 606. Street lights.

A. The developer shall install or cause to be installed at the developer's expense metal or fiberglass pole street lights serviced by underground conduit in accordance with a plan to be prepared by the developer's engineer and approved by the governing body and by the electric utility company serving the area.

B.	The requirement of metal or fiberglass poles may be waived in such instances as approved by the Planning Conunission due to the existence of wooden poles already. in place.  Provision shall be made for energizing said lighting with the electric utility company serving the area.	·	·
 


•··
.......

·-
......


-
 
C.	The developer shall be responsible for all costs involved in lighting the streets until such time that the streets are accepted or condemned as public streets by the municipality•



§ 607. Monuments and markers.

A.	Monuments shall be placed at the intersection of all lines forming angles in the boundary of the subdivision and at the intersection of street lines as determined by the Planning Commission  in each change in direction of boundary  alon the street line; two (2) to be placed at each street intersection and one (1) on each side of any street at angle points and at the beginning and end of curves.  Areas to be conveyed for public use shall be fully monumented at their external boundaries. Monuments may be of the following three (3) types:
 


-	VI-3
 
.....

SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT


1)	Cut stone 5" x 5" x 3' - O" ling with a drill hole in the center.
2)	Concrete 4" x 4" x 3' -0" long with a 1/2" round brass pin in the center.
3)	A 2" round galvanized 3' -0" long pipe with a grass or aluminum cap with a
punch hole for center.	-
B.	Monuments shall be placed in the ground after final grading is completed, at a time
specified by the Municipal Engineer.

C.  All monuments may be checked for accuracy by the Engineer, or their accuracy certified· by the owner's registered surveyor. Accuracy of monuments shall be within three one-hundredths (31100) of a foot.

D.	Markers shall be set at the beginning and ending of all curves along street property lines. at all points where lot lines intersect curves, either front or rear, at all angles in property lines of lots; at all comer lots. Markers shall consist of iron or steel bars at least thirty-six (36) inches long and not less than five-eighths (5/8) inch in diameter, or any alternate type which the Commission deems suitable and of sufficient quality to adequately fulfill its function.

E.	Any monuments or markers that are removed must be replaced by a registered engineer or a registered land surveyor at the expense of the person removing them.


§ 608. Sidewalks.

All sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with §522 of this Ordinance.


§ 609. Curbs.

AU curbs shall be constructed in accordance with §52l of this Ordinance.


§ 610. Storm sewerage system.

A.	The storm sewerage system shaU be constructed in accordance with this §610  and
§516 of this Ordinance; and. where applicable, in accordance with the Munici ality's current Storm Water Management Ordinance.

B.	The  unicipality shall have the option of requiring that those areas set aside as ret:nti n or detention basins be dedicated to the municipality or owned and mamtamed by another appropriate legal entity.





VI-4
 
-
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT

I


C.	The Stonn Water Drainage Plan for any subdivision or land development shall meet
the Department of Environmental Protection requirements for an Erosion and
 
-	Sedimentation  Control Plan,
 

inaddition to the requirements of this
 

Ordinance.
 
D.	Storm Drainage Systeuis
 
and
 
facilities
 
shall be
 
constructed in accordance with
 
The
 


.!'I-
 
Design and Construction Standards as set forth in PennDOT Publication 408 and Publication 72. Stonn drainage systems and facilities shall be constructed in order to provide for the following:
 

(1)	Permit unimpeded flow of natural water courses except as modified by stonn water detention  facilities•
......	(2)	Insure adequate drainage of all low poin along the line of streets.


 



.....


..


......
 
(3)	Intercept storm water runoff along streets at intervals related to the extent and grade of the area drained.

(4)	Provide positive drainage away from on-site sewage disposal systems, if
applicable•

(5)	Take surface water:from the bottom of vertical grades and lead water from springs. Use ·of cross gutters at slreet intersections and elsewhere is prohibited .
 

(6)	Prevent overloading of drainage systems and watercourses downstream as a
result of increased runoff caused by the proposed development.

(7)	Stonn drainage facilities and appurtenances· shall be so designed and provided
as to minimize erosion in watercourse channels and at all points of discharge.
 
.·.
 

(8)	Energy dissipaters shall be placed at the outlets of all
 

pipes
 

where flow
 
velocities exceed maximum pennitted channel velocities.

(9)	The minimUm. size diameter of a drainage pipe shall be fifteen (15") inches, unless otherwise approved by the Borough Council, based upon a recommendation by the Borough Engineer.  The minimum value for "v" (velocity) inpipes shall be based on engineerlngjudgemenl and experience. Pressure flow is permitted in storm sewers. The elevation of the hydraulic gradient shall be at least one (1') foot below ground level. Pressure heads up to·twenty five (25') feet can be used with concrete pipe with rubber gasket
joints •




.....	Vl-5
 


SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT



(10)	Inlets shall be provided so that surface water is not: carried across or around any intersection, nor for a distance of more than 600 feet in t tter. When
calculations indicate that curb capacities are exceeded at a pomt, m accordance with PA DOT Standards, no further allowance shall be made for flow beyond that point, and catch basins shall be used to intercept flow at that
point. Surface water drainage patterns shall be shown for each and every lot and block.· Design of inlets must account for any bypass flows from upgrade inlets. Capacity calculations for inlets shall be submitted with the design
report.

 

j	(11)
 
AU  storm water drainage.facilities  shall be designed  to handle, at minimum,  · the peak discharges  from  a  10-Year post-development   storm event.   The Borough  Council,  shall have  the discretion  to require  that  certain  drainage facilities be  designed  for peak discharges  which  may exceed  a  10-Year post­ development  storm event, if  so warranted   in  the recommendation  of the Borough    Engineer.
 


.....
 

(12)	· Storm drainage systems required by this Ordinance shall be designed to provide protection from a 10 to 100 year storm as determined by the Borougl\ Engineer.

(13)	Stormwater runoff calculations shall be calculated from methods described in the "Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control Manual", April, 1990Edition as prepared by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection and PA DOT Design Standards, or as approved by the Borough Engineer.

(14)	Stonnwater control system design calculations shall be based on methods described ii\ the "Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control Manual" and PA
• DOT Design Standards, or as approved by the Borough Engineer.
 
....




-
-·
 

 
(15)
 
AU inlets and manholes shall be either precast or poured-in-place concrete. No block construction will be allowed. Inlets and manholes shall be provided with grade djustment rings to facilitate raising or lowering as may be required.	·
 

(16)	St :mn sewers and related piping shall be fully coated corrugated metal. reinforced concrete. polyethylene, PVC or other material approved by the Pennsylvania.Department of Transportation and/or the Borough Engineer. The Borough reserves the right to require specific material or materials upon the recommendation of the Borough Engineer.

(17)	Inlets shall be designed and/or located to prevent hazardous conditions for vehicles. bicycles, or pedestrians.	.	·


VI-6	.-
 

SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT




E.	A site drainage plan for the proposed subdivision or land development shall be
! .	prepared which ill0&trates the following information:
.	(0	Mapping of the watershed are or ar as in which the proposed subdivision or
land development is located.

(2)	Calculations of runoff for all points of runoff concentration.

(3)	Complete drainage systems, facilities and easements for the subdivision or
land development. All existing drainage features which are to be incorporated in the design shall be so identified.  H the subdivision or land development is. to be constructed in stages, a general drainage plan for the entire subdivision
or land development shall be presented with the first stage and appropriate
development stages for the drainage ystems shall be indicated.

·	(4)	Pre-development and post-development peak flows.

(5)		Individual drainage area boundaries  shall be provided  for au points of discharge for both  pre and post  development  conditions  along with  each  flow path  required   for  time-of-concentration    calculations.

l .•	· F.		Storm drainage facilities required by this Ordinance shall be designed to pi:ovide protection from storms with a frequency of ten (10) years.  The acceptable methods
 
I
....
 
of computation for calculating storm water runoff shall be those contained in the following publications:	·
 

I'	(l)	Techllical Release 55. URBAN HYDROLOGY FOR SMALL WATERSHEDS, as published by the Soil Conservation Service of the United
States Department of Agriculture.

 
,

1.-


.....



......


·"
 

(2)	·	RECOMMENDED  HYDROLOGIC  PROCEDURES  FOR  COMPUI'ING URBAN  RUNOFF FROM SMALL WATERSHEDS  IN PBNNSYLV ANIA,
as published by Bureau of Dams and Waterway Management, Pennsylvania
Department of ijnvironmental Protection.

The applicant shall confer with the Borough Engineer prior to the selection of a specific method for the computation and calculation of storm water runoff.
Complete detailed drainage calculations, prepared and certified by a registered
professional engineer, shall be submitted to the Borough Engineer for his review and
comment to the Planning Commission .

G.	All lots or sites within a subdivision or land development shall be laid out and graded to prevent cross-lot drainage away from proposed building area Natural drainage courses shall be maintained.

VI-7
 
-

SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
-
H.	Drainage  easements  may be  incorporated  into  lots  or establi·shed  separd	ly anthd apart therefrom.   To minimize  sheet flow of storm water  across 1ots 1.oc:ate     cu.ong	e
lower side of roads or streets. and to divert flow away from buildmg areas, the cross section of the street as constructed shall provide for parallel ditches, swales or curbing on the lower side which shall discharge only at drainage easements.


I.	The existing points of natural drainage discharge onto adjacent property shall not.be altered nor shall the rate of water runoff be increased as a result o development,
unless design measures are incorporated to prevent damage and appropriate drainage easement is obtained from the affected adjoining land owner.

J.	No storm water runoff or natural drainage water shall be so diverted as to overload existing drainage systems. or create flooding or the need for additional drainage structures on other private properties or public lands, without complete approval of
provisions being made by the developer for properly handling such conditions, including water runoff impoundments, if necessary.

 
K.	Storm drainage facilities shall be designed not only to bandie the anticipated peak discharge from the property being subdivided or devefoped, but also the runoff that occurs from property at a higher elevation in the same watershed.

L.	Where a subdivision or land development iS traversed by a watercourse. a drainage easement shall be provided conforming substantially to the line of such watercourse of such width as will be adequate to preserve the unimpaired flow of natural drainage. Such drainage easement shall be at least fifty (50') feet away recognized high water mark of any water course or body of water; Inthe event that any regulation or ordinance of the Borough, Commonwealth or federal agency requires a distance greater than fifty (50') feet, then such regulation shall take precedence.
 

-

.......
-
-
 
M.	Drainage structures that are located on State Highway rights-of-way shall be
approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation. and a letter from that office indicating such approval shall be directed to the Planning Commission.

N.	All streets shall be so designed to provide for the discharge of surface water from their right-of-way.  The slope of the crown on proposed streets shali be one:.quarter
(114)	inch per foot away from the centerline.

1.	AU proposed surface drainage structures shall be indicated on the Preliminary Pinn.
Drainage plans shall include all appropriate designs, details, and dimensions	.
necessary to clearly explain proposed construction materials and elevations.

P.	Whenever storm sewers are required by the planning Commission, such stonn sewer system.shall be separate from the sanitary sewer system. Storm sewer facilities shall be provided where the Planning Commission, with the advice of the Borough

VI-8
 
...

SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT

-	excessive erosion and lot or road maintenance problems.	.
..	Engiru:er, dete:mines that surface drainage facilities are inadequate to prevent

Q.	Drainage easements shall be provided as follows:

(l)		Drainag easements shall be provided  adjacent to street rights-of-way, st.reams. side property lines and rear property lines as required by the Planning Commission.	·


(2)	Drainage easements shall be minimum width of:

(a)	Ten (10') feet adjacent to a street right-of-way plus the width of any required pipe or other nece8sary improvements.

(b)	Fifteen (15') feet when following side and rear Jot lines.  Such easements shall to the fullest extent possible, either immediately adjoin or be centered on such lot lines; or

(c)	Fifty (50') feet from any recognized boundary of a 100-Year Flood Plain
or a recognized high-water mark of any water course or body of water.

R.  Accommodation of Upstream Drainage Areas.

A culvert or other drainage facility shall in each case be large enough to accommodate potential runoff from its entire upstream drainage area, whether inside or outside the subdivision. The Borough Engineer shall give his recommendation as to the necessary size of the facility, based on the provisions of the construction
standards and specifications  suming conditions of maximum runoff rate and proposed facility sizing design as calculated by the applicant's Engineer or Surveyor and reviewed by the Borough Engineer. The calculation of this runoff rate shall take into account any land use and development regulations including runoff controls in effectin th.e tributary areas.

S.	Effect Downstream Drainage Areas.

No storm water runoff or natural drainage shall be so diverted as to overload existing drainage systems, or create potential flooding or the need for additional drainage structures on other private properties or public lands, without approved provisi ns
being made by the developer for properly handling such conditions.  The Plannmg
Commission may withhold approval of the subdivision until provisions have been
made for the improvement of said potential conditions.  No subdivision shall be approved unless adequate drainage will be provided to an adequate drainage watercourse or facility.


-	VI-9	 	
 
..
SUBDIVISION  AND  LAND  DEVELOPMENT	-
-
T.	Stonn Water Detention

(1)	Areas of extremely poor drainage should be discouraged by the Planning Commission.

(2)	Storm water detention facilities shall be utilized whenever the Storm Water Management Plan indicates post-development runoff rates for each point of discharge exceeds the pre-development runoff rates unless the increase would not cause an overload of downstream drainage system or significant increases in flood levels in any downstream area. This will be detennined by comparing the increase in runoff caused by the land development with existing runoff rates and capacity of the downstrellfil drainage systems and watercourses. AH required computations will be provided by the Developer·s Engineer and
reviewed by the Borough Engineer.

(3)	Whenever detention facilities are required, facilities will be designed to provide that the_ peak runoff rate at all points of discharge from the site, when developed, will not exceed the peak runoff rate at each of those points prior to development unless existing or planned detention facilities located elsewhere in the same drainage basin will provide that the peak runoff rate from the drainage basin after the site is developed will not exceed the peak runoff rate prior to development.

(4)	Where detention facilities are included as part of the storm drainage system,
the following provisions will·apply:

(a)	Detention ponds shall be designed so that they return to 95% dry conditions or normal pool elevation within approximately twelve (12) hours after the tennination of the storm, unless downstream conditions warrant other design criteria for storm water release, approved by the Planning Commission .

. (b)		The developer shall demonstrate that such ponds are designed, protected and/or located .to assure that public safety is maximized and health problems are prevented. All detention ponds or basins shall be enclosed by a chain link fence with a minimum height of six (6') feet, unless specificallywaived  y Planning Commission.

(c)	The developer shall verify that the operation of the detention facilities
will  not  aggravate potential  downstream  peaking  conditions.	......
-
VI-IO	-·
 

SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
·
.
 

.,.,..	(d)


(e)

·-
.,....
(f)
·-
 


Emergency overflow facilities shall be provided for detention facilities to handle runoff in excess of design flow.

If the lands of the proposed land development will remain in common ownership, the developer shall provide written assurances to the municipality that the detention ponds will be properly maintained •

If the lands of the proposed land development will be conveyed to two or more separate owners, the developer shall provide written assurances to the municipality that the detention ponds will be properly
maintained, or dedicate the·land on which the detention ponds are
located to the municipality which shall then be responsible for maintain!ng the detention pond,.if accepted by the Borough for dedication.
 

 
















·!' -


-
 
(g)	Required stonn detention basins shall be designed to detain at a minimum a 25 year frequency storm to pre-developed rate8. Larger design storm detention may be required as recommended by the Borough Engineer when in bis opinion greater protection is required for downstream area. In any case, each basin must be provided with an emergency spillway capable of passing an undetained 100 year design storm. The emergency spillway will be constructed in undisturbed ground where at all possible. Lining protection may be required to control erosion. Basin construction requirements shall be as provided
in the "soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Manual" of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection for "sedimentation basins!'  Additional detention basin construction requirements shall be provided as may be requested by the Borough Engineer.

(h)	The developer's engineer shall provide routing computations of all required storm hydrographs through the detention facility to ensure adequacy of the facility.

(i)	Adequate provisions for maintenance of all detention facilities shall be incorporated into the plans.
 
...
......
-
 

(j)
 

Alternate detention or retention facilities may be considered for approval at the discretion of the Borough Planning Commission and Borough Council based on the Borough Engineer's review and approval of appropriate design of such facility by the Developer's Engineer.
I
 


-	VI-11
 
-

SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT




§ 611.   Centrni water supply and fire hydrants.

A.	·Where a water main supply system is within one thousand (1,000) feet of. or where plans approved by the Governing Body or t Planning_ <? mmiss on: as the case may be, provide  for the installation  of .s ch public  w t facilities to   1thin  one th?u.s d (1 000) feet of a proposed  subdivision, the Subdivider shall provide the Subdivision with a complete water main supply system to be connected to the existing or  proposed water main supply system.  Where a water main supply system is proposed to be located within  1,000 feet of a proposed  Subdivision. with two  (2) years of  the  date of the Subdivision Application.  the Subdivider shall provide the Subdivision with a comp\ete water main supply system which shall be capped.  The system shall
be designed by a Registered Engineer and be approved by the Municipal Engineer.
B.	Inall subdivisions and land developments to be served by a central water supply, the	-l
developer shall construct water mains in such a manner as to make adequate water
service available to each lot or dwelling unit within the subdivision or land development.

C.	The water supply and pressure must comply with the regulations and the standards of
the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection or its successor agency.

D.	Said supply shall be located or constructed so as to eliminate the possibility of flood damage.

E.		The system shall also be designed with adequate capacity and appropriately spaced fire hydrants for fire-fighting purposes pursuant to the specifications of the Middle Sta s Department Association of Fire Underwriters.  Review and approval by the Engmeer and the appropriate Fire Chief shall be required in order to ensure that adequate fire protection is provided. No building permit shaU be issued prior to the
installation of operable fire hydrants.


§ 612. Reserved


§ 613. Public sanitary sewer systems.


A.	e:e a public sanitary sewer system is available to the subdivision/development within one 1!1ousand (1?0?0) feet of, or where plans approved by the Governing Body or th Pl mng Comnuss1on. as the case my be, provide for the installation of such publi	utary sewer  ilities to within one thousand (1,000) feet of a proposed Subdivmon. the Subdivider shall provide the Subdivision with a complete sanitary sewer system _to be onnected to the existing or proposed sanitary sewer system. Where a pubhc santtary sewer system is proposed to be located within one thousand

VI-12
 
-
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
(


(1,000) feet of a proposed Subdivision, within two (2) years of the date of the Subdivision Application, the Subdivider shall provide the Subdivision with a complete sanitary sewer system which shall be capped.  The system shall be designed by a Registered Engineer and be approved by the Municipal Engineer.

(1)	A sewer shall be considered to be planned for extension to a given area any time after preliminary engineering and related studies have been completed by the municipality and the construction of facilities adequate to serve the area
containing the subdivision or land development has been programmed for completion within two (2) years of completion of such engineering plans.

 
-.,...
 
(2)   ·       When capped_ sewers are provided,  approved  on-site disposal facilities shall
·also be provided.	·

B.	A1i public sanitary sewers shall be designed and constructed in accordance with municipal specifications.  Such sewers shall be located or constructed so as to
·	eliminate the possibility of flood damage.

C.  No public sewer system or treatment plant shall be constructed until plans and specifications have    nsubmittC;d to the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection or its successor agency and the municipality and approved
in accordance with existing laws.	·

D.  The governing body may require the developer to provide a capital contribution for any off-site sanitacy sewer capital improvement necessary to·serve the proposed subdivision or land development.



§ 614. Private sewer systm:m.
 

 






.....



-
 
·	A.  Where installation of a sanitary sewer system is not required, the Subdivider or Owner of the lot shall provide for each lot, at the time improvements are erected thereon, an approved, private sewage disposal system. The design and construction of such individual sewage disposal systems shall be subject to the approval of the Municipality's Sewage Enforcement Officer.

B.	On-lot sewage disposal facilities must comply with the provisions of Chapters 7 l and 73, Administration of Sewage Facilities Program and Standards for Sewage
Disposal Facilities, Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (Act of January 24, 1966), P.
L. 1535, No. 537, as amended (35 P.S. 750). Prior to t)le granting offmal approval
by the municipality,,. ¥ proposed facilities shall be deemed satisfactory by the Pennsylvania Departiilent  of Environmental  Protection  or its successor agency.
 
I

-	VI-13
 

 

SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT



C.   The construction of on-lot systems shaU be inspected by the Municipal Sewage
 
-
....
 



(1)
 
Upo completion of the excavation.	-
 
Enforcement Officer. as follows:

 

(2)
 
Upon installation of the major equipment such as septic tanks, distribution boxes and drain tiles before any back filling.
 

 
D.  Each owner or occupant of a dwelling unit with on-lot facilities shall be provided by the developer with a plan of the system and an instruction manual for the use and proper maintenance of the system.	·


§ 615.  Gas, electric, telephone, communication facmties, and manholes.

A.   Where natural gas is to be made available in a development, such transmission lines shall be placed in the public right-of-way, between the curb line and the property line.

B. All electric, telephone and communication service facilities, both main and service lines, shall be installed in accordance with the prevailing standards and practices of the utility and other companies providing such services; and, where applicable, the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation

C.	Such facilities shall be located or constructed so as to eliminate the possibility of
flood damage.

D.	Where practicable, all utilities shall be located within the street right-of-way; otherwise, easements or rights-of-way of sufficient width for installation and maintenance shall be provided.

E.   All manholes shall be.made weather-tight with a neoprene seal on all inlets to manholes.



§ 616. Grading.

Grading shall confonn in all respects to the final plan.


§ 617. Plantings.	 
A.	Street trees and other required plantings shall be installed in accordance with §514
§523 and §527.	'



VI-14
 



-···..


-
-













-



-


-
 
,.,...

SUBDIVISION AND.LAND DEVELOPMENT



B.	Street trees and other required plant material shall not be planted until the finished grading of the subdivision or land development has been completed.	.	· ·

C.	The developer shall replace, in accordance with landscaping plans, any plantings that die, or in the opinion of an expert, such as a landscape architect retained by the municipality, are in an unhealthy or unsightly condition and/or have lost their natural shape due to dead branches, excessive pruning, inadequate or improper maintenance, or any other causes due to the developer's negligence, prior to an offer o.f dedica:tion. The developer shall not be held responsible for acts of vandalism occurring after the commencement of the guaranty period.


§ 618. Community facilities.

 









-..
 
Additional community facilities, as set forth in §502, may be required to serve the proposed lots or dwellings in a subdivision or land developmenl  Where a proposed park, playground or other public facility shown in the Comprehensive Plan is located inwhole or in
part in a subdivision or land development, or when additional facilities are made necessary by the
<ievelopment, the dedication or reservation of such areas, or financial contribution. for the construction of such facilities, may be required by tile municipalit}r in those cases in which it deems such requirements  to be reasonable.


§· 619.  Preliminary inspection of streets and improvements.

A.   Prior to commencing construction, the developer shall notify the Municipal Engineer
proposed construction schedule. Pursuant to notification by the developer, the
 

I

r-

fii'
I.
r


-

(
•


i.li.
 
of the
Municipal Engineer shall inspect required improvements during the initial construction phase. and on a periodic basis thereafter, as may be required to ensure proper adherence to this Ordinance. The Municipal Engineer shall submit reports to the governing body and the developer specifying those items of construction, material and workmanship that do not comply with municipal specifications or the
approved final plan.

B. The developer, upon notification from the Municipal Engineer, shall proceed a	· own cost to make such corrections as shall be required to comply with the muruc1pal specifications and approved final plans; and shall notify the Municipal Engineer and governing body upon completion  requesting  final inspection.


§ 620. Final inspection of streets and improvements.

A.   The Municipal Engineer shall make a final inspection, with the developer, of all required improvements.


VI-15
 


SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT


 
B. The Municipal Engineer shall run the finished center-line profifi othe omple d streets; submit a report to the governing ?ody indi ating the mm e evations; an affix to the final profile plan such elevations; provided, however, that as.an alternative, the developer may provide as-built drawings sealed by a registered
surveyor.
c.	Sanitary sewers shall be air tested. and pavement cores for new road construction shall be taken in the presence of the Municipal Engineer.


.
§ 621. Acceptance of streets and improvements.

A.	The governing body shall notify the developer of acceptance of required   · improvements if satisfied that the applicant has complied with all specifications and ordinances of the municipality.

B.	The developer shall furnish the munidpality with one (1) mylar and two (2) paper prints of the completed required improvements, including drainage, profiles and utilities; and pay all costs for the Clerk of the Lackawanna County Court of Common Pleas on the petition and resolution of the governing body to said Court for its approval of the acceptance of the required improvements.

C.	No streets or other improvements will be accepted by the municipality if such improvements were. constructed during the period from November 15 to April 15 of each year. No treets or other improvements will be accepted by the municipality	· within a period of less than one (l) year from the date of completion.

D.	No streets or other improvements will be accepted by the Borough of Taylor should said streets contain structures erected within the street rights-of-way.  This prohibition shall not apply to curbside mailboxes, appurtenant structures of public utilities and improvements required pursuant to Article VI herein.



§ 622. Ownership and maintenance of retention basins.

A.  Detention basins to be provided in accordance with certain Sections of thls ordinance may be offered for dedication to the municipality, although the municipality need not accept any such offers. No zoning permit for any development which provides for a detention basin shall be issued until there has been an acceptable disposition of the detention basins. Provision for ownership and maintenance of th detention basins shall be made in a manner so as to ensure its effectiveness in accordance with one (1)
of the foUowing alternatives:





VI-16
 






-·.



-
-



-









.
-







-


-
 

 


("""-··
 
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
 


l.		The municipality may accept dedication of the detention basin or any interest therein for public use and maintenance, but the municipality need not accept a dedication of the detention basin if offered;

2.	With permission of the municipality, and with appropriate deed restrictions in favor of the municipality and in language acceptable to the municipality's Solicitor, the developer may transfer the fee simple title in the detention b in or a portion thereof to a priva e. not-for-profit organization, provided that:

a.	The organization is acceptable to the municipality and is a bona fide organization with a perpetual existence;

b.		The conveyance contains appropriate provision for proper retran8fer or reverter inthe event that the organization becomes unable or unwilling to continue to carry out its functions, and;

 


.....




..,.
 
c.		A maintenance agreement acceptable to the municipality is entered into by the developer, the organization and the municipality;

3.	The developer shall provide for and establish an organization for the ownership and maintenance of the detention basin consistent with the requirements for unit owners' associations found in the Pennsylvania Uniform Condominium Act, 68 Pa. C.S.S. 33101 et seq. If such.an. organization is
created, the deeds for the detention basin and for all individual lots within the  ·
development shall contain the following requirements in language acceptable to the municipality's   Solicitor.
 
·-	a.
·i.' -
 

Such organization shall not dispose of the detention basin by sale or otherwise except to the municipality or other government body unless
 
the municipality
 
has
 
given prior approval. Such transfer shall be made
 
only to another organization  that shall maintain the detention basin in
accordance
 
......


=.,-
-
-

1·
 
with the provisions of this Ordinance;

b.	The organization and all lot owners within the development shall agree to maintain the detention basin.  H private ownership fails to do so, the municipality may proceed to maintain a deteriorating detention basin and may assess and lien the properties within the development
accordingly;

c.	All lot owners shall be required to become members of the organization and pay assessments for the maintenance of the detention basill, which may be increased for inflation and which may provide for professional
management.
 



 
VI-17
.:
 


----------- -
 
.....


SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT



.§ 623.  Water Storage Areas.

A.	Settling Ponds and Reservoirs.  H the contents of settling ponds is poisonous, toxic or caustic. the settling pond must be fenced by an eight (8) foot fence of cyclone fencing or tighter. If the contents emit noxious fumes, suitable ventilation controls must be exercised to prevent air pollution.

B. Retention: and Detention Pondsfflasins. Except as otherwise provided herein. any man-made water storage areas shall be fenced by a six (6) foot fence of cyc one fencing or tighter.


§ 624. Fire Hydrants.

Fire hydrants shall be required wherever a public water supply system is available, and shall be spaced to provide a hydrant witWn 500 feet of aU property Jines in the
· subdivision/development.    The location  and placement  of fire hydrants  shall be subject  to  the
review and approval of the Municipal Fire CWef.


§ 625.   Changes.	.....

Incases where any of the foregoing :requirements are not deemed appropriate by the
Planning Commission to serve the public interest, the Planning Commission reserves the right to	llllill
increase, change, alter or substitute materials. manner and specification for any utility or street improvements.




·

-
-










VI-18	-
 

 
·'·-'·
 

SUBDMSION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
 
.....	ARTICLE    VII
Contracts and Guaranties


 


_.,...
 
§ 700.  Installatlon of improvements or suitable guaranty required.•
No. subdivision or land development shall be approved for recording until the municipality bas been assured by means of a proper contract containing, among other items, performance and maintenance guaranties, that the required improvements will subsequently be
.installed by the owner and/or applicant, hereinafter referred to as the •·developer".
 
·-	§ 701.   Contracts.
 
....



·!""""
•
 
Inall cases where the necessary grading, paving and other subdivision improvements
(including both public and private improvements) required herein shall not have been installed in
.s	trict accordance with the standards and specifications of the municipality prior to the municipality approving .any subdivision or-land development plan for recording, the developer
shall enter into a written agreement with the municipality in the manner and fonn approved by
the Borough Solicitor wherein the developer shall agree, to the extent applicable:
 

·To construct or cause to be constructed  at hls own expense all streets, roadways, cartways, driveways, monuments, street signs and street names, off-street parking/parking  lots, curbs, sidewalks, street tree and buffer plantings, lighting, fire hydrants. water mains, sanitary sewers (including capped sewers). stonn sewers, drainage and erosion control improvements, .including but not limited to stonnwater detention and/or retention basins and other related facilities, recreation  facilities, open space improvements  and other improvements  shown on the approved subdivision or land development plan, all in strict accordance with the standards and specifications of the municipality and within the time specified in said agreement.

To deposit with the municipality financial security in an amount sufficient to cover the cost of all required subdivision improvements (including both public and private improvements). The applicant shall not be required to provide financial security for . the cost of any improvements for which security is required and provided to the PA Department of Transportation inconnection with the issuance of any occupancy permit  The financial security shall be posted contemporaneously with the execution of the agreement, in the form of either a bond from bonding company authorized to do business within the Commonwealth or such other type of financial security that
the governing body may approve. The bonding company may be chosen by the developer, provided that the bonding company shall stipulate that it submits to Pennsylvania jurisdiction and Lackawanna County venue in the event of legal action. The fmancial security shall provide for, and secure to the public, the completion of  all site improvements for which the security is being posted within one (1) year of
the date fixed in the subdivision plan or subdivisi n agreement for completion of the

p-	VIl-1
 


SUBDJVISION .AND LAND DEVELOP.MENT

 

cost of the required improvements for which financial se urity is to be i:>osted. The amount of financial security to be posted for the completion of the reqmred improvements shall be equal to 1t0% of the cost of completion estimated as of 90 days following the date scheduled for completion by the developer. Annually, the	. municipality may adjust the amount of the financial security by c mparing the actual cost of the improvements which have been completed an? t e st1mated cost for the completion of the remaining improvements as of the expiration of the 90th day after either the original date scheduled for completion or a rescheduled date of completion. Subsequent to said adjustment, the municipality may  uire the. developer to post additional security in order to assure that the financial sec nty equals said 110%. Any additional security shall be posted by the developer m accordance with this subsection. The amount of financial security required shaU be based upon an estimate of the cost of completion of the required improvements, submitted by an applicant or developer and prepared by a professional engineer licensed as such in this Commonwealth and certified by such engineer to be a fair and reasonable estimate of such cost The municipality, upon the recommendation
of the municipal  ngineer. may refuse to·accept such estimate for good cause shown. If the applicant or developer  nd the municipality are unable to agree upon an estimate, then the estimate shall be recalculated and recertified by another professional engineer Jicensed as such in this Commonwealth and chosen mutually by the municipality and the applicant or developer. The estimate certified by the third engineer shall be presumed fair and reasonable and shall be the final estimate. Inthe event that a third engineer is so chosen, fees for the services of said engineer shall be paid equally by the municipality and the applicant or developer. If the developer requires more than one (1) year from the date of the posting of the· financial security to complete the required improvements, the amount of financial security shall be increased by an additional ten percent (10%) for each one-year period beyond the first anniversary date from posting of financial security or to an amount not exceeding one hundred ten percent (110%)"of the cost of completing the required improvements as reestablished on or about the expiration of the preceding one-year period by using the above bidding procedure. The municipality shall be identified on such security as a party to be notified in the event that said security is canceled. revoked or redeemed by the bolder thereof.

C.	In the case where a development is projected over a period of years. the governing body or the Planning Commission, as the case may be, may authorize submission of final plans by sections or stages of development, subject to such requirements or guaranties as to jmprovements in future sections or stages of development as it finds essential for the protection of any finally approved section of the development.

D.	If water mains or sanitary sewer lines, or both, along with apparatus or facilities related.thereto. are to be installed under the jurisdiction and pursuant to the rules and regu a on of a pub ic udli or municipal authority separate and distinct from the mumc1pabty, fimmcial secunty to assure proper completion and maintenance thereof shall be posted in accordance with the regulations of the controlling public utility or

Vll-2
 
.....















-
-




.....




-
-




...,
:







..
 
-
...(	SUBDIVISION  AND  LAND  DEVELOPMENT


. municipal  authority and shall not be.included with the financial security as otherwise required by this section.
 
-
-





:!'"""'

·-
·-
 

B.	As the work of installing the required improvements proceeds, the developer may request the governing body to release or authorize a reduction, from time to time, of the financial security consistent with the completion and acceptance of portions of the required site improvements. Any such request sbal.l be in writing addressed to the governing body, and the governing body shall have forty-five (45) days from receipt of such request within which to allow the Municipal Engineer to certify, in writing, that such portion of the work upon the improvements has been completed in accordance with the approved plans. Upon such certification, the governing body shall authorize the bonding company or lending institution to reduce the financial security in an amount as estimated by the Municipal Engineer fairly representing the value of the improvements completed. The governing body may. prior to final approval of the reduction at the time of completion and certification by the
·	Municipal Engineer, require retention of ten percent (10%) of the estimated cost of
·	the aforesaid improvements. The Municipal Engineer, in certifying the completion of work for a partial reduction, shall not be bound to the amount requested by the developer, but shall certify to the governing body his independent evaluation of the proper amount of partial reduction.
 

F.	To make adequate provisions with the Municipal Engineer for the inspection of the construction of the aforesaid improvements to assure strict compliance with municipal standards and specifications.

G.	To pay all costs, charges or rates of the utility furnishing fire hydrant and electric service for the fire hydrants and street-lighting facilities installed by the developer until such time as the streets shown on the subdivision and/or land development plans shall have been accepted or condemned by the municipality for public use, and to indemnify and save harmless the municipality from and against all suits, actions,
..		claims and demands for electric service and fire hydrant. service as aforesaid, or any part thereof, to the time that said streets shall be accepted or condemned as public
streets in the manner bereinabove set forth.

•··	H.    To reimburse the municipality promptly for:

(1)	Reasonable attorneys' and engineers' inspection fees.

(2)	Fees for other professionals employed by the municipality to review, inspect or process subdivision and land development plans.
 
-	(3)
 

An administrative charge, representing ten i}ercent (10%) of the attorneys', engineers' and other professionals' fees.
 



V.II-3
 
.....


 

SUBDNISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT



I..		The developer shall, when the improvements are completed to the satisfaction of the governing body, offer for dedication, and the municipality may accept said streets and/or other parcels, together with any improvements thereunder or thereupon by a deed in a form approved by the Borough Solicitor. Such deed shall include a reference to a plan of the streets and/or other parcels dedicated; title thereto shall be clear title and be such as will be insurable by a reputable title insurance company of Pennsylvania at regular rates; all in connection therewith to be borne by the developer.

J.	Where the governing body accepts dedication of all or some of the required improvements following completion (whet.her such dedication is of the fee-simple form or of an easement), the developer shall post financial security to secure the
·structural integrity of the improvements and the functioning of the improvements in
·	accordance with the design and specifications as depicted on the final plan. The
_security shall be in the form as authorized in Subsection B above and shall be for a tenn of eighteen (18) months from the date of the acceptance of dedications and shall be in an amount equal to fifteen percent (15%) of the actual cost of installation of the improvements so dedicated. The percentage used to determine the amount of the maintenance guaranty may be increased if all lots in the subdivision or land development do not have dwellings or other principal buildings erected thereon prior to acceptance of dedication.	.































VIl-4
 
......
-




_...


.....



""""'












.....




-'
-











......

-
 
-
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT



ARTICLEVIll
Amendments; Penalties; Severability; Repealer
 

.,_


.......

.....
 


§ 800.  Amendments.

The regulations set forth in this Ordinance may, from time to time, be amended by the
governing body; pursuant to Article V of the Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.

§ 801.  Violations and penalties. ·
 

A.	Enforcement

Inaddition to all those who may by law have the authority to enforce and/or
prosecute, it is specifically designated that it shall be the duty of the governing body
·	to enforce this Ordinance.

B.	Enf9rcement remedies

 




·-
,..,...


.....
 
Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated the provisions of this subdivision and land development ordinance shall, upon being found liable therefore in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the municipality. pay a judgment of not more than $500 plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees in by the municipality as a result thereof.  No judgment  .shall commence or be impos levied or be payable until the date of the determination of a violation by the district justice.   Ifthe defendant neither pays nor timely appeals tbe judgment, the municipality may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure  Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation, unless the district justice determining that there has been a violation further
determines that there was a good faith basis Jor the person, partnership or
corporation violating the ordinance to have believed that there was no such violation,
in which event there shall be deemed to have been only one such violation until the fifth day following the date of the determination of ·a violation. by the district justice and thereafter each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
 
--	C.      Preventive remedies

(1)	In addition to.other remedies. the municipality may institute and maintain appropriate actions by law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate.violations, to prevent unlawful construction, to recover damages and to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises.  The description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other documents used in the process of selling or transferring shall not exempt the seller or transferor from such penalties or from the remedies herein provided.

-	Vill-1
 






SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT



(2)	The municipality may refuse to issue any permit or grant any_approval necessary to further improve or develop any real property which has been
developed or which has resulted from a subdivision of real proJ?CrtY .in violation of this ordinance..This authority.to deny such a pemut or approval shall·apply to any of the following applicants:

(a)	The owner of record at the time of such violations.

(b)	The vendee or lessee of the owner of record at the time of such
violation without regard as to whether such vendee or lessee had actual
or constructive knowledge of the violation.

(c)	The current owner of record who acquired the property subsequent to the time violation without regard as to whether such current owner bad actual or constructive knowledge of the violation.

(d)	The vendee or lessee of the current owner of record who acquired the property subsequent to the time of violation without regard as to whether such vendee or lessee had actual or constructive knowledge of the violation.

As an additional condition for issuance of a permit or.the granting of an approval to any such owner, current owner, vendee or lessee for the development of any such real property, the municipality may require compliance with the conditions that would have been applicable to the property at the time the applicant acquired an interest in such real property. Inaddition, failure to comply with any conditions attached to the approval of a subdivision or land development application or plan shall constitute a violation of this Ordinance.

§ 802. Severability.

Itis hereby declared to be the legislative intent that:

A.  Ha court of competent jurisdiction declares any provision of this Ordinance to be invalid or ineffective in whole or in part. the effect of such decision shall be limited to those provisions that are expressly stated in the decision to be invalid or ineffective, and aU other provisions of this Ordinance shall continue to be separately and fully effective.

B.	If a court of competent jurisdiction finds the application of any provision or provisions of this Ordinance to a lot, building. or other structure, or tract of land to be invalid or ineffective, in whole or in part, the effect of such decision shall be ' limited to th? P':rson, property or situation immediately involved in the controversy, and the apphcation of any such provision to other persons,. property or situations shall not be affected.	·


VDI-2
 
-









-
-


-.
....
-
.....

-
















-:,






......
 
-








.,,...
I

•..,...








·-
.,,,,..





.....
 





SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT



§ 803. Repealer.

All ordinances and resolutions of the Borough of Taylor inconsistent herewith or with any
part thereof are hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency•


§ 804. Effective date•

·This Ordinance shall become effective immediately upon enactment.



§ 805. Enactment.
Enacted and ordained inlo an Oidinaru:e this ·<Jib	day of	:;JiJ.	ib993 ·

-

BOROUGH COUNCil.. OF THE BOROUGH OF TAYLOR
/),uJ[
President
.'z/tl /
 


·	Attest:	!Lw
 
f..P
L

r­
:1
L
......
,.•.
:-­
i'
 
•	Secn tacy"..
:..
 
...


 

"fl""'
·'
 
Vill-3
 
 
 



STORMWATER  MANAGEMENT  ORDINANCE






ORDINANCE NO. 9 - 2017

MUNICIPALITY OF TAYLOR BOROUGH
LACKAWANNA COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA








Adopted at a Public Meeting Held on

September 13, 2017
 
Article I - General Provisions

 
Section 101.
Section 102.
Section 103.
Section 104.
Section 105.
Section 106.
Section 107.
Section 108.
Section 109.
Section 110.
 
Short Title
Statement of Findings
Purpose
Statutory Authority
Applicability Repealer Severability
Compatibility with Other Requirements
Erroneous Permit Waivers
 

Article II • Definitions

Article Ill. Stormwater Management Standards

 
Section 301.
Section 302.
Section 303.
Section 304.
Section 305
 
General Requirements Exemptions
Volume  Controls Rate Controls Riparian Buffers
 

Article IV· Stormwater Management Site Plan Requirements

 
Section 401.
Section 402.
Section 403.
Section 404.
Section 405.
Section 406.
Section 407.
 
Plan  Requirements Plan Submission Plan Review Modification of Plans
Resubmission of Disapproved SWM Site Plans
Authorization to Construct and Term of Validity
As-Built Plans, Completion Certificate and Final Inspection
 

Article V - Operation and Maintenance

 
Section 501.
Section 502.
 
Responsibilities of Developers and Landowners
Operation and Maintenance Agreements
 

Article VI ·Fees and Expenses

Section 601.	General

Article VII ·Prohibitions

 
Section 701.
Section 702.
Section 703.
 
Prohibited Discharges and Connecti"ons Roof Drains and Sump Pumps
Alteration of SWM BMPs
 

Article  VI 11  .Enforcement  and  Penalties

 
Section 801.
Section 802.
Section 803.
Section 804.
Section 805.
Section 806.
 
Right-of-Entry Inspection Enforcement
Suspension and Revocation
Penalties Appeals
 

Article IX - References	Section 10.1., 10.

Article X-Miscellaneous

Appendix A - Operation and Maintenance Agreement
 
ARTICLE I - GENERAL PROVISIONS

Section 101.Short Title

This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the Borough of Taylor Stormwater Management Ordinance." Section  102. Statement  of  Findings
The governing body of the municipality finds that:

A.	Inadequate management of accelerated runoff of stormwater resulting from development throughout a watershed increases runoff volumes, flows and velocities, contributes to erosion and sedimentation, overtaxes the carrying capacity of streams and storm sewers, greatly increases the cost of public facilities to carry and control stormwater, undermines flood plain management and flood control efforts in downstream communities, reduces groundwater recharge, threatens public health and safety, and increases nonpoint source pollution of water resources.

B.	A comprehensive program of stormwater management (SWM), including reasonable regulation of development and activities causing accelerated runoff, is fundamental  to the public health, safety,  and welfare  and the protection of people of the Commonwealth, their resources, and the environment.

C.   Stormwater is an important water resource that provides groundwater recharge for water supplies and supports the
base flow of streams.

D. The use of green infrastructure and low impact development (LID) are intended to address the root cause of water quality impairment by using systems and practices which use or mimic natural processes to: 1) infiltrate and recharge, 2) evapotranspire, and/or 3) harvest and use precipitation near where  it falls to earth. Green infrastructure  practices and LID contribute  to the restoration or maintenance  of pre-development  hydrology.

E. Federal and state regulations require certain municipalities to implement a program of stormwater controls. These municipalities are required to obtain a permit for stormwater discharges from their separate storm sewer systems under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) program.

Section 103. Purpose

The purpose of this Ordinance is to promote health, safety, and welfare within the municipality and its watershed by minimizing the harms and maximizing the benefits described in Section 102 of this Ordinance, through provisions designed to:

A.	Meet legal water quality requirements under state law, including regulations at 25 Pa. Code 93 to protect, maintain,
reclaim, and restore the existing and designated uses of the waters of this Coinmonwealth.

B.	Preserve natural drainage systems.

C.	Manage stormwater runoff close to the source, reduce runoff volumes and mimic predevelopment hydrology.

0.   Provide procedures and performance standards for stormwater planning and management.

E.	Maintain groundwater recharge to prevent degradation of surtace and groundwater quality and to otherwise protect water resources.

F.	Prevent scour and erosion of stream banks and streambeds.

G.	Provide proper operation and maintenance of all stormwater best management practices  (BMPs)  that  are implemented within the municipality.

H.	Provide standards to meet NPDES permit requirements.
 
Section 104. Statutory Authority

The municipality is empowered to regulate land use activities that affect runoff by the authority of the Act of July 31, 1968,
P.L. 805, No. 247, The Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended, and/or the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act 167), 32 P.S. Section 680.1, et seq., as amended, The Stormwater Management Act and the Borough Code.

Section 105. Applicability

All  regulated  activities  and  all  activities  that  may  affect  stormwater   runoff,  including  land  development   and  earth disturbance activity, are subject to regulation by this Ordinance.

Section 106. Repealer

Any other ordinance provision(s) or regulation of the municipality inconsistent with any of the provisions of this Ordinance is hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only.

Section 107. Severability

In the event that a court of competent jurisdiction  declares any section or provision of this Ordinance invalid, such decision
shall not affect the validity of any of the remaining provisions of this Ordinance. Section 108. Compatibility  with Other  Requirements
Approvals  issued  and  actions  taken  under  this  Ordinance  do  not  relieve  the  applicant  of  the  responsibility  to  secure
required permits or approvals for activities regulated by any other code, law, regulation or ordinance.

Section 109. Erroneous Permit

Any permit or authorization issued or approved based on false, misleading or erroneous information provided by an applicant is void without the necessity of any proceedings for revocation. Any work undertaken or use established pursuant to such permit or other authorization is unlawful. No action may be taken by a board, agency or employee  of the Municipality purporting to validate such a violation.

Section 110. Waivers

A. If the Municipality determines that any requirement under this Ordinance cannot be achieved for a particular regulated activity, the Municipality may, after an evaluation of alternatives, approve measures other than those in this Ordinance, subject to Section 110, paragraphs B and C.

8. Waivers or modifications of the requirements of this Ordinance may be approved by the Municipality if enforcement will exact undue hardship because of peculiar conditions pertaining to the land in question, provided that the modifications will not be contrary to !he public interest and  that the purpose of "the Ordinance  is preserved. Cost or financial burden shall not be considered a hardship. Modification may be considered if an alternative standard or approach will provide equal or better achievement of the purpose of the Ordinance. A request for modifications shall be in writing and accompany the Stormwater Management Site Plan submission. The request shall provide the facts on which the request is based, the provision(s) of the Ordinance involved and the proposed modification.

C.	No waiver or modification of any regulated stormwater activity involving earth disturbance greater than or equal to one acre may be granted by the Municipality unless that action is approved in advance by the Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) or the delegated county conservation district.
 
ARTICLE II - DEFINITIONS

For the purposes of this Ordinance, certain terms and words used herein shall be interpreted as follows:

A.	Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the singular number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the singular; words of m.asculine gender include feminine gender; and words of feminine gender include masculine gender.

B.	The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other instances of like kind and character.

C.	The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory; the words "may" and "should" are permissive.

These definitions do not necessarily reflect the definitions contained in pertinent regulations or statutes, and are intended for this Ordinance only.

Agricultural Activity - Activities associated with agriculture such as agricultural cultivation, agricultural operation, and animal heavy use areas. This includes the work of producing crops including tillage, land clearing, plowing, disking, harrowing, planting, harvesting crops or pasturing and raising of livestock and installation of conservation measures. Construction of new buildings or impervious area is not considered an agricultural activity.

Applicant - A landowner, developer, or other person who has filed an application to the municipality for approval to engage in any regulated activity at a project site in the municipality.

Best Management Practice (BMP) - Activities, facilities, designs, measures, or procedures used to manage stormwater impacts from regulated activities, to meet state water quality requirements, to promote groundwater recharge, and to otherwise meet the purposes of this Ordinance. Stormwater BMPs are commonly grouped into one of two broad categories or measures: "structural" or  "non-structural." In this Ordinance, non-structural BMPs or measures refer to operational and/or behavior-related practices that attempt to minimize the contact  of pollutants with stormwater runoff, whereas structural BMPs or measures are those that consist of a physical device or practice that is installed to capture and treat stormwater runoff. Structural BMPs include, but are not limited to, a wide variety of practices and devices, from large-scale retention ponds and constructed wetlands, to small-scale underground treatment systems, infiltration facilities, filter strips, low impact design, bioretention, wet ponds, permeable paving, grassed swales, riparian or forested buffers, sand filters, detention basins, and manufactured devices. Structural stormwater BMPs are permanent appurtenances to the project site.

Conservation District -A conservation district, as defined in Section 3(c) of the Conservation District Law (3 P. S.
§ 851(c)) that has the authority under a delegation agreement executed with DEP to administer and enforce all or a portion of the regulations promulgated under 25 Pa. Code 102.

Design Storm - The magnitude and temporal distribution of precipitation from a storm event measured in probability of occurrence (e.g., a 5-year storm) and duration (e.g., 24 hours) used in the design and evaluation of stormwater management systems. Also see Return Period.

Detention Volume - The volume of runoff that is captured and released into the waters of the Commonwealth at a controlled rate.

DEP -The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.

DevelopmentSite(Site)-SeeProjectSite.

Disturbed Area -An unstabilized land area where an earth disturbance activity is occurring or has occurred.

Earth Disturbance Activity - A construction or other human activity which disturbs the surface of the land, including, but not limited to: clearing and grubbing; grading; excavations; embankments; road maintenance; building construction; and the moving, depositing, stockpiling, or storing of soil, rock, or earth materials.

Erosion -The natural process by which the surface of the land is worn away by water, wind, or chemical action.
 
Existing Condition - The dominant land cover during the 5-year period immediately preceding a proposed regulated activity.

FEMA - Federal Emergency Management Agency.

Floodplain -Any land area susceptible to inundation by water from any natural source or delineated by applicable FEMA maps and studies as being a special flood hazard area. Also includes areas that comprise Group 13 Soils, as listed in Appendix A of the Pennsylvania DEP Technical Manual for Sewage Enforcement Officers (as amended or replaced from time to time by DEP).

Floodway - The channel of the watercourse and those portions of the adjoining floodplains that are reasonably required to carry and discharge the 100-year flood. Unless otherwise specified, the boundary of the fioodway is as indicated on maps and flood insurance studies provided by FEMA. In an area where no FEMA maps or studies have defined the boundary of the 100-year fioodway, it is assumed--absent evid,ence to the contrary--that the floodway extends from the stream to 50 feet from the top of the bank of the stream.

Forest Management/Timber Operations - Planning and activities necessary for the management of forestland. These include conducting a timber inventory, preparation of forest management plans, silvlcultural treatment, cutting budgets, Jogging road design and construction, timber harvesting, site preparation, and reforestation.

Green Infrastructure - Systems and practices that use or mimic natural processes to infiltrate, evapotranspire, or reuse stormwater on the site where it is generated.

Hydrologic Soil Group (HSG) - Infiltration rates of soils vary widely and are affected by subsurface permeability as well as surface intake rates. Soils are classified into four HSGs (A, B, C, and D) according to their minimum infiltration rate, which is obtained for bare soil after prolonged wetting. The NRCS defines the four groups and provides a list of most of the soils in the United States and their group classification. The soils in the area of the development site may be identified from a soil survey report that can be obtained from local NRCS offices or conservation district offices. Soils become less pervious as the HSG varies from A to D (NRCS1'2 .

Impervious Surface (Impervious Area) - A surface that prevents the infiltration of water into the ground. Impervious surfaces (or areas) shall include, but not be limited to: roofs; additional indoor living spaces, patios, garages, storage sheds and similar structures; and any new streets or sidewalks. Decks, parking areas, and driveway areas are not counted as impervious areas if they do not prevent infiltration.

Karst - A type of topography or landscape characterized by surface depressions, sinkholes, rock pinnacles/uneven bedrock surface, underground drainage, and caves. Karst is formed on carbonate rocks, such as limestone or dolomite.

Land Development (Development) - Inclusive of any or all of the following meanings: (i) the improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts, or parcels of !and for any purpose involving (a) a group of two or more buildings or (b) the division or allocation of land or space between or among two or more existing or prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups, or other features; (ii) any subdivision of land; (iii) development in accordance with Section 503(1.1) of the PA Municipalities Planning Code.

Low Impact Development (LID) - Site design approaches and small-scale stormwater management practices that promote the use of natural systems for infiltration, evapotranspiration, and reuse of rainwater. LID can be applied to new development, urban retrofits, and revitalization projects. LID utilizes design techniques that infiltrate, filter, evaporate, and store runoff close to its source. Rather than rely on costly large-scale conveyance and treatment systems, LID addresses stormwater through a variety of small, cost-effective landscape features located on-site.

Municipality - (Municipality Name), (County Name) County, Pennsylvania. NRCS - USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (previously SCS).
Peak Discharge -The maximum rate of stormwater runoff from a specific storm event. Pervious Area -Any area not defined as impervious.
 
Project Site - The specific area of land where any regulated activities in the municipality are planned, conducted, or maintained.

Qualified Professional - Any person licensed by the Pennsylvania Department of State or otherwise qualified by law to perform the work required by this Ordinance.

Regulated Activities - Any earth disturbance activities or any activities that involve the alteration or development of land in a manner that may affect stormwater runoff.

Regulated Earth Disturbance Activity - Activity involving earth disturbance subject to regulation under 25 Pa. Code 92, 25 Pa. Code 102, or the Clean Streams Law.

Retention Volume/Removed Runoff - The volume of runoff that is captured and not released directly into the surface waters of this Commonwealth during or after a storm event.

Return Period - The  average  interval,  in years, within  which  a storm  event  of a given  magnitude  can  be expected to occur one time. For example, the 25-year return period rainfall would  be expected to occur on average once every 25 years; or  stated in another  way, the probability of a 25-year storm occurring in any one  year is 0.04 (i.e., a 4o/o chance).

Riparian Buffer-A permanent area of trees and shrubs located adjacent to streams, lakes, ponds and wetlands. Runoff-Any part of precipitation that flows over the land.
Sediment - Soils or other materials transported by surface water as a product of erosion.

State Water Quality Requirements - The regulatory requirements to protect, maintain, reclaim, and restore water quality under Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code and the Clean Streams Law.

Stormwater - Drainage runoff from the surtace of the land resulting from precipitation or snow or ice melt.

Stormwater Management Facility - Any structure, natural or man-made, that, due to its condition, design, or construction, conveys, stores, or otherwise affects stormwater runoff. Typical stormwater management facilities include, but are not limited to: detention and retention basins; open channels; storm sewers; pipes; and infiltration facilities.

Stormwater Management Site Plan - The plan  prepared by the developer or his representative indicating how stormwater runoff will be managed at the development site in accordance with this Ordinance. Stormwater Management Site Plan will be designated as SWM Site Plan throughout this Ordinance.

Subdivision - As defined in The Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No.
247.

USDA - United States Department of Agriculture.

Waters of  this  Commonwealth  - Any  and  all  rivers,  streams,  creeks,  rivulets,  impoundments,  ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes, dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs, and a!J other bodies or channels of conveyance of surface and underground water, or parts thereof, whether natural or  artificial,  within  or  on  the boundaries  of  this  Commonwealth.

Watershed - Region or area drained by a river, watercourse, or other surface water of this Commonwealth.

Wetland - Areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, including swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas.
 
ARTICLE Ill - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT STANDARDS

Section 301. General Requirements

A.	For all regulated activities, unless preparation of an SWM Site Plan is specifically exempted in Section 302:

1.	Preparation and implementation of an approved SWM Site Plan is required.

2.	No regulated activities shall commence until the municipality issues written approval of an SWM Site Plan, which
demonstrates cornp!iance with the requirements of this Ordinance.

B.	SWM Site Plans approved by the municipality, in accordance with Section 406, shall be on site throughout the duration of the regulated activity.

C.	The municipality may, after consultation with DEP, approve measures for meeting the state water quality requirements other than those in this Ordinance, provided that they meet the minimum requirements of, and do not conflict with, state law including, but not limited to, the Clean Streams Law.

D.	For all regulated earth disturbance activities, erosion and sediment control BMPs shall be designed, implemented, operated, and maintained during the regulated earth  disturbance  activities  (e.g.,  during construction) to meet the purposes and  requirements  of this  Ordinance  and to  meet  all requirements  under Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code and the Clean Streams Law. Various BMPs and their design standards are listed in the Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control Program Manual (E&S Manual\ No.  363-2134-008,  as amended and updated.

E.	Impervious areas:

1.	The measurement of impervious areas shall include all of the impervious areas in the total proposed development
even if development is to take place in stages.

2.	For development taking place in stages, the entire development plan must be used in determining conformance with this Ordinance.

3.	For projects that add impervious area to a parcel, the total impervious area on the parcel is subject to the requirements of this Ordinance; except that the volume controls in Section 303 and the peak rate controls of Section 304 do not need to be retrofitted to existing impervious areas that are not being altered by the proposed regulated activity.

F.	Stormwater flows onto adjacent property shall not be created, increased, decreased, relocated, or otherwise altered without written notification to the adjacent property owner(s). Such stormwater flows shall be  subject  to  the requirements of this Ordinance.

G.	All regulated activities shall include such measures as necessary to:

1.	Protect health, safety, and property.

2.	Meet the water quality goals of this Ordinance by implementing measures to:

a.	Minimize disturbance  to floodplains, wetlands,  and wooded  areas ..

b.	Maintain or extend riparian buffers.

c.	Avoid erosive flow conditions in natural flow pathways.

d.	Minimize thermal impacts to waters of this Commonwealth.

e.	Disconnect impervious surfaces by directing runoff to pervious areas, wherever possible.

3.	Incorporate methods  described  in the Pennsylvania  Slarmwater  Best Management  Practices  Manual  (BMP Manual'). If methods other than green infrastructure and LID methods are proposed to achieve the volume -9 -
 
and rate controls required under this Ordinance, the SWM Site Plan must include a detailed justification
demonstrating that the use of LID and green infrastructure is not practicable.

H.    The design of all facilities over karst shall include an evaluation of measures to minimize adverse effects.

I.	Infiltration BMPs should be spread out, made as shallow as practicable, and located to maximize use of natural on-site
infiltration features while still meeting the other requirements of this Ordinance.

J.		Normally dry, open top, storage facilities should completely drain both the volume control and rate control capacities over a period of time not less than 24 and not more than 72 hours from the end of the design storm.

K.	The design storm volumes to be used in the analysis of peak rates of discharge should be obtained from the latest version of the Precipitation-Frequency Atlas of the United States, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), National Weather Service, Hydrometeorological Design Studies Center, Silver Spring, Maryland.

NOAA's Atlas 145 can be accessed at: http://hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/hdsc/pfds/.

L.	For all regulated activities, SWM BMPs shall be designed, implemented, operated, and maintained to meet the purposes and requirements of this Ordinance and to meet all requirements under Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code, the Clean Streams Law, and the Storm Water Management Act.

M.	Various BMPs and their design standards are listed in the BMP Manual4 .

Section 302. Exemptions

A.		Regulated activities that result in cumulative earth disturbances less than (Enter  no more than one acre. A more restrictive area may be entered.) are exempt from the requirernents in Section 303, Section 304, and Article JV of this ordinance.
B.
C.   Agricultural  activity  is exempt  from  the  SWM  Site  Plan  preparation  requirements  of this  Ordinance  provided  the
activities are performed according to the requirements of 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102.

C.  Forest  management  and timber  operations  are  exempt  from  the  SWM  Site  Plan preparation  requirements  of this Ordinance provided the activities are performed according to the requirements of 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102.

D.   Exemptions from any provisions of this Ordinance shall not relieve the applicant from the requirements in Sections
301.D. through K.

E.    The  Municipality may deny or revoke any exemption  pursuant to this  Section  at any time for  any project that the Municipality believes may pose a threat to public health and safety or the environment.

Section 303. Volume Controls

The green infrastructure and low impact development practices provided in the BMP Manual4 shall be utilized for all regulated activities wherever possible . Water volume controls shall be implemented using the Design Storm Method in Subsection A or the Simplified Method in Subsection B below. For regulated activity areas equal or less than one acre that do not require hydrologic routing to design the stormwater facilities, this Ordinance establishes no preference for either methodology; therefore, the applicant may select either methodology on the basis of economic considerations, the intrinsic limitations on applicability of the analytical procedures associated with each methodology and other factors.

A.	The Design Storm Method (CG-1 in the BMP Manual4)  is applicable to any size of regulated activity. This method
requires detailed modeling based on site conditions.

1.	Do not increase the post-development  total runoff volume for all storms equal to or less than the 2-year 24-hour duration precipitation.
 
2.	For modeling  purposes:

a.	Existing (predevelopment)  non-forested pervious  areas  must be considered  rneadow  in good condition.

b.	(Enter a percentage no less than 20%, up to 100%.) of existing impervious area, when present, shall be
considered meadow in good condition in the model for existing conditions.

B.	The Simplified Method (CG-2 in the BMP Manual') provided below is independent of site conditions and should be used if the Design Storm Method is not followed. This method is not applicable to regulated activities greater than one acre or for projects that require design of stormwater storage facilities.  For new impervious surfaces_:

1.	Stormwater facilities shall capture at least the first two (2) inches of runoff from all new impervious surfaces.

2. At least the first one inch of runoff from new impervious surfaces shall be permanently removed from the runoff flow, i.e., it shall not be released into the surface waters of this Commonwealth. Removal options include reuse, evaporation, transpiration, and infiltration.

3.	Wherever possible, infiltration facilities should be designed to accommodate infiltration of the entire permanently removed runoff; however, in all cases at least the first 0.5 inch  of the permanently  removed  runoff should  be infiltrated.

4.	This method is exempt from the requirements of Section 304, Rate Controls. Section  304.  Rate  Controls
A.	For areas not covered by a release rate map from an approved Act 167 Stormwater Management Plan:

Post-development discharge rates shall not exceed the pre-development discharge rates for the 1-, 2-, 5-, 10-, 25-, 50-, and 100-year, 24-hour storm events. If it is shown that the peak rates of discharge indicated by the post­ development analysis are less than or equal to the  peak rates of discharge indicated by the  pre-development analysis for  1-, 2-, 5-, 10-, 25-, 50-, and 100-year, 24-hour storms, then the requirements of this section have been met. Otherwise, the applicant shall provide additional controls as necessary to satisfy the peak rate of discharge   requirement.

B.	For areas covered by a release rate map from an approved Act 167 Stormwater Management Plan:

For the 1-, 2-, 5-, 10-, 25-, 50-, and 100-year, 24-hour storm events, the post-development peak discharge rates will follow the applicable approved release rate maps. For any areas not shown on the release rate maps, the post­ development discharge rates shall not exceed the pre-development discharge rates.


Section 305. Riparian Buffers

A	In order to protect and improve water quality, a Riparian Buffer Easement shall be created and recorded as part of any
subdivision or land development that encompasses a Riparian Buffer.

B.    Except as required by Chapter 102, the Riparian Buffer Easement shall be measured to be the greater of the limit of the 100 year floodplain or a minimum of 35 feet from the top of the streambank (on each side).

C.	Minimum Management Requirement for Riparian Buffers.

1.	Existing native vegetation shall be protected and maintained within the Riparian Buffer Easement.


2.	Whenever practicable invasive vegetation shall be actively  removed and the Riparian  Buffer Easement shall be planted with native trees, shrubs and other vegetation to create a diverse native plant community appropriate to the intended ecological context of the site.

D.	The Riparian Buffer Easement shall be enforceable by the municipality and shall be recorded in the appropriate County Recorder of Deeds Office, so that it shall run with the land and shall limit the use of the property located therein. The easement shall allow for the continued private ownership  and shall count  toward  the  minimum  lot area  a  required  by Zoning,  unless otherwise  specified  in the rnunicipal Zoning  Ordinance.
 
E.	Any permitted use within the Riparian Buffer Easement shall be conducted in a manner that will maintain the extent of the existing 100-year floodplain, improve or maintain the stream stability, and  preserve  and  protect the  ecological function of the floodplain.

F.	The following conditions shall apply when public and/or private recreation  trails  are  permitted within  Riparian Buffers:

1.	Trails shall be for non-motorized use only.

2.	Trails shall  be designed to  have the  least  impact on native plant species  and other sensitive  environmental
features.

G.	Septic drainfields and sewage disposal systems shall not be permitted within the Riparian Buffer Easement and shall comply with setback requirements established under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 73.
 
ARTICLE IV - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT (SWM) SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS

Section 401. Plan Requirements

The following items shall be included in the SWM Site Plan:

A.	Appropriate sections from the municipal's Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, and other applicable local ordinances, shall be followed in preparing the SWM Site Plans. In instances where the Municipality lacks Subdivision and  Land Development regulations, the content of SWM Site Plans shall follow the county's Subdivision and Land Developrnent Ordinance.

B.	The Municipality shall not approve any  SWM  Site  Plan  that  is  deficient  in  meeting  the  requirements  of  this Ordinance. At its sole discretion and in accordance with this Article, when a SWM Site Plan is found to be deficient, the  municipality  may  either  disapprove  the  submission  and  require  a  resubmission,  or  in  the  case  of  minor deficiencies, the Municipality may accept submission of modifications.

C.	Provisions for permanent access or maintenance easements for all physical SWM BMPs, such as  ponds  and infiltration structures, as necessary to implement the Operation and Maintenance (O&M) Plan discussed in paragraph E.9 below.

D.	The following signature block for the municipality:

"(Municipal official or designee), on this date (Signature date), has reviewed and hereby certifies that the SWM Site Plan meets all design standards and criteria of the Municipal Ordinance No. (number assigned to ordinance)."

E.	The SWM Site Plan shall provide the following information:

1.	The overall stormwater management concept for the project.

2.	A determination of site conditions in accordance with the BMP Manual4 . A detailed site evaluation shall be completed for projects proposed in areas of carbonate geology or karst topography, and other environmentally sensitive areas, such as brownfie!ds.

3.	Stormwater runoff design computations and documentation as specified in this Ordinance, or as otherwise necessary to demonstrate that the maxirnum practicable measures have been taken to meet the requirements of this Ordinance, including the  recommendations  and  general  requirements  in Section 301.

4.	Expected project time schedule.

5.	A soil erosion and sediment control plan, where applicable, as prepared for and submitted  to the approval authority.

6.	The effect of the project (in terms  of  runoff volumes,  water  quality,  and peak  flows)  on surrounding properties and aquatic features and on any existing stormwater conveyance system that may be affected by the project.

7.	Plan and profile drawings of all SWM BMPs, including drainage structures, pipes, open channels, and swales.

8.	SWM Site Plan shall show the locations of existing and proposed on-lot wastewater facilities and water supply wells.

9.	The SWM Site Plan shall include an O&M Plan for all existing and proposed physical stormwater management facilities. This plan shall address long-term ownership and responsibilities for O&M as well as schedules and costs for O&M activities.
 
10.	A justification must be included in the SWM Site Plan if BMPs other than green infrastructure methods and  LID practices are proposed to achieve the volume, rate and water quality controls under this Ordinance.

Section 402. Plan Submission

Five copies of the SWM Site Plan shall be submitted as follows:

1.	(Typically two) copies to the municipality.

2.	(Typically one) copy to the municipal engineer (when applicable).

3.	(Typically one) copy to the County Conservation District.

4.	(Typically one) copy to the County Planning Commission/Office. Section 403.  Plan  Review
A.    SWM Site Plans shall be reviewed by the municipality for consistency with the provisions of this Ordinance.

B.	The Municipality shall notify the applicant in writing within 45 days whether the SWM Site Plan is approved or disapproved. If the SWM Site Plan involves a Subdivision and Land Development Plan, the notification shall occur within the time period allowed by the Municipalities Planning Code (90 days). If a longer notification period is provided by other statute, regulation, or ordinance, the applicant will be so notified by the municipality.


C.	For any SWM Site Plan that proposes to use any BMPs other than green infrastructure and LID practices to achieve the volume and rate controls required under this Ordinance, the Municipality will not approve the SWM Site Plan unless it determines that green infrastructure and LID practices are not practicable.

D.	If the Municipality disapproves the SWM Site Plan, the Municipality will state the reasons for the disapproval in writing.
The  Municipality  also  may  approve  the  SWM  Site  Plan with  conditions  and,  if so,  shall  provide  the  acceptable
conditions for approval in writing.

Section 404. Modification of Plans

A modification to a submitted SWM Site Plan that involves a change in SWM BMPs or techniques, or that involves the relocation or redesign of SWM BMPs, or that is necessary because soil or other conditions are not as stated on the SWM Site Plan as determined by the Municipality shall require a resubmission of the modified SWM Site Plan in accordance with this Article.

Section 405. Resubmission of Disapproved SWM Site Plans

A disapproved SWM Site Plan may be resubmitted, with the revisions addressing the Municipality's concerns, to  the Municipality in accordance with this Article. The applicable review  fee  must  accompany  a  resubmission  of  a disapproved SWM Site Plan.

Section 406. Authorization to Construct and Term of Validity

The Municipality's approval of an SWM Site Plan authorizes the regulated activities contained in the SWM Site Plan for a maximum term of validity  of 5 years following the date of approval. The Municipality may specify a term of validity shorter than 5 years in the approval for any specific SWM Site Plan. Terms of validity shall commence on the date the Municipality signs the approval for an SWM Site Plan. If an approved SWM Site Plan is not completed according to Section 407 within the term of validity, then the Municipality may consider the SWM Site Plan disapproved and may revoke any and all permits. SWM Site Plans that are considered disapproved by the Municipality shall be resubmitted in accordance with Section 405 of this Ordinance.
 
Section 407. As-Built Plans, Completion Certificate, and Final Inspection

A. The developer shall be responsible for providing as-built plans of all SWM BMPs included in the approved SWM Site Plan. The as-built plans and an explanation of any discrepancies with the construction plans shall be submitted to the Municipality.

B.	The as-built submission shall include a certification of completion signed by a qualified professional verifying that all permanent SWM BMPs have been constructed according to the approved  plans  and  specifications.  The latitude and longitude coordinates for all permanent SWM BMPs must also be submitted, at the central location of the BMPs. If any licensed qualified professionals contributed to the construction plans, then a licensed qualified professional must sign the completion  certificate.

C.	After receipt of the completion certification by the Municipality, the Municipality may conduct a final inspection.
 
ARTICLE V - OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE

Section 501. Responsibilities of Developers and Landowners

A. The Municipality shall make the final determination on the continuing  maintenance  responsibilities  prior  to  final approval of the SWM Site Plan. The municipality may require a dedication of such facilities as part of the requirements for approval of the SWM Site Plan. Such a requirement is not an indication that the municipality will accept the facilities. The municipality reserves the right to accept or reject the ownership and operating responsibility for  any portion of the stonnwater management controls.

B.		Facilities, areas, or structures used  as SWM BMPs shall be enumerated as permanent real estate appurtenances and recorded as deed restrictions or conservation easements that run with the land.

C.   The O&M Plan shall be recorded as a restrictive deed covenant that runs with the land.

D.   The Municipality  may take enforcement  actions against an owner for any failure to satisfy the provisions  of this
Article.

Section 502. Operation and Maintenance Agreements

A.	Prior to final approval of the SWM Site Plan, the property owner shall sign and  record  an  Operation  and Maintenance (O&M) Agreement (see Appendix A) covering all stormwater  control facilities  which  are to  be privately owned.

1.	The  owner, successor  and assigns  shall  maintain all facilities  in accordance  with the approved  maintenance
schedule in the O&M Agreement.

2.	The owner  shall  convey  to  the  Municipality  conservation  easements  to  assure  access  for  periodic  inspections by the Municipality  and maintenance,  as necessary.

3. The owner shall keep on file with the Municipality the name, address, and telephone number of the person or company responsible for maintenance activities; in the event of a change, new information shall be submitted by the owner to the Municipality within ten (10) working days of the change.

B.	The owner is responsible for operation and maintenance (O&M) of the SWM BMPs. If the owner fails to adhere to the O&M Agreement, the Municipality may perform the services required and charge the owner appropriate  fees. Nonpayment of fees may result in a lien against the property.

Section 503. Performance Guarantee

For SWM Site Plans that involve subdivision and land development, the applicant shall provide a financial guarantee to the Municipality for the timely installation and proper construction of all stormwater management controls as required by the approved SWM Site Plan and this Ordinance in accordance with the provisions of Sections 509, 510, and 511 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
 
ARTICLE VI - FEES AND EXPENSES

Section 601. General

The Municipality may include all costs incurred in the review fee charged to an applicant. The review fee may include, but not be limited to, costs for the following:
A.    Administrative/clerical processing.

B.	Review of the SWM Site Plan.

C.	Attendance at meetings.

D.	Inspections.
 
ARTICLE  VII  ·PROHIBITIONS

Section 701. Prohibited Discharges and Connections

A.	Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, that allows any non-stormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter a regulated small MS4  or to enter  the surface waters of this Commonwealth is prohibited.

B.	No person shall allow, or cause to allow, discharges into a regulated small MS4, or discharges into waters of this Commonwealth, which are not composed entirely of stormwater, except (1) as provided in paragraph C below and (2) discharges  authorized  under a state  or federal  permit.

C.	The following discharges are authorized unless they are  determined  to  be  significant  contributors  to  pollution  a regulated small MS4 or to the waters of this Commonwealth:

1.	Discharges or flows from firefighting activities.

Discharges from potable water sources including water line flushing and fire hydrant flushing, if such discharges do not contain detectable concentrations  ofTotal Residual Chlorine (TRC).

3.   Non-contaminated  irrigation water,  water  from  lawn maintenance,  landscape  drainage  and flows  from  riparian
habitats and wetlands.

4.  Diverted stream flows and springs.

5.	Non-contaminated  pumped  ground water  and water from foundation  and footing  drains and crawl space
pumps.

6.	Non-contaminated HVAC condensation and water from geothermal systems.

7.	Residential (i.e., not commercial) vehicle wash water where cleaning agents are not utilized.

8.	Non-contaminated hydrostatic test water discharges, if such discharges do not contain detectable concentrations
ofTRC.

D.	In the event that the municipality or DEP determines that any of the discharges identified  in Subsection  C significantly contribute pollutants to a regulated small MS4 or to the waters  of  this  Commonwealth,  the municipality or DEP will notify the responsible person(s) to cease the discharge.

Section 702. Roof Drains and Sump Pumps

Roof drains and sump pumps shall discharge to infiltration or vegetative BMPs wherever feasible. Section  703. Alteration  of SWM  BMPs
No person shall modify, remove, fill, landscape, or alter any SWM BMPs, facilities, areas, or structures that were installed as a requirement of this Ordinance without the written approval of the Municipality.
 
ARTICLE VIII • ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES

Section 801. Right-of-Entry

Upon presentation of proper credentials, the municipality or its designated agent may enter at reasonable times upon any property within the municipality to inspect the condition of the stormwater structures and facilities in regard to any aspect regulated by this Ordinance.

Section 802. Inspection

The landowner or the owner's designee (including the Municipality for dedicated and owned facilities) shall inspect SWM BMPs, facilities and/or structures installed under this Ordinance according to the following frequencies, at a minimum, to ensure the BMPs, facilities and/or structures continue to function as intended:

1.	Annually for the first 5 years.

2.	Once every 3 years thereafter.

3.	During or immediately after the cessation of a 10-year or greater storm.

Inspections should be conducted during or immediately following precipitation events. A written inspection report shall be created to document each inspection. The inspection report shall contain the date and time of the inspection, the individual(s) who completed the inspection, the location of the BMP, facility or structure inspected, observations on performance, and recommendations for  improving performance, if applicable. Inspection reports shall  be submitted to the Municipality within 30 days following completion of the inspection.

Section 803. Enforcement

A.	It shall be unlawful for a person to undertake any regulated activity except as provided in an approved SWM Site Plan, unless specifically exempted in Section 302.

B.	It shall be unlawful to violate Section 703 of this Ordinance.

C.	Inspections  regarding  compliance with the SWM Site  Plan are a responsibility  of the Municipality.

Section 804. Suspension and Revocation

A.	Any approval or permit issued by the Municipality pursuant to this Ordinance may be suspended or revoked for:

1.	Non-compliance  with  or  failure  to  implement  any  provision  of  the  approved  SWM  Site  Plan  or  O&M Agreement.

2.	A violation of any provision of this Ordinance or any other applicable law, ordinance, rule, or regulation relating to the Regulated Activity.

3.	The creation of any condition  or the commission  of any act  during  the  Regulated Activity which constitutes  or creates a hazard, nuisance, pollution, or endangers the life or property of others.

B.	A suspended approval may be reinstated by the Municipality when:

1.	The Municipality has inspected and approved the corrections to the violations that caused the suspension.

2.	The Municipality is satisfied that the violation has been corrected.

C.	An  approval that  has been  revoked  by the  Municipality  cannot  be reinstated. The  applicant  may apply  for  a new approval under the provisions of this Ordinance.

D.	If a violation causes no immediate danger to life, public health, or property, at its sole discretion, the Municipality may provide a limited time period for the owner to correct the violation. In these cases, the Municipality will provide the owner, or the owner's designee, with a written notice of the violation and the time
 
period allowed for the owner to correct the violation. If the owner does not correct the violation within the allowed time period, the municipality may revoke or suspend any, or all, applicable approvals and permits pertaining  to  any provision of this Ordinance.

Section 805. Penalties

A	Anyone  violating the provisions of this Ordinance shall be guilty of a summary  offense,  and upon conviction, shall be  subject  to  a  fine  of  not  more  than  $500.00  for  each  violation,  recoverable  with  costs.  Each  day  that  the violation continues shall be a separate offense and penalties shall be cumulative.

B. In addition, the municipality  may institute  injunctive,  mandamus, or any other appropriate  action  or  proceeding  at law or  in equity for the enforcement of this Ordinance. Any court of competent jurisdiction shall have the right to issue restraining orders, temporary or permanent injunctions, mandamus, or other appropriate forms of remedy or relief.

Section 806. Appeals

A	Any person aggrieved by any action of the Municipality or its designee, relevant to the provisions of this Ordinance, may appeal to the Municipality within 30 days of that action.

B.	Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Municipality, relevant to the provisions of this Ordinance, may appeal to the County Court of Common Pleas in the county where the activity has taken place within 30 days of the Municipality's  decision.
 
ARTICLE IX - REFERENCES

1.	U.S. Department of Agriculture, National Resources Conservation Service (NRCS). National Engineering Handbook. Part 630: Hydrology, 1969-2001. Originally published as the National Engineering  Handbook, Section 4: Hydrology. Available from the NRCS online at: http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/.

2.	U.S. Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service. 1986. Technical Release 55: Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds, 2nd Edition. Washington,  D.C.

3.	Pennsylvania  Department  of  Environmental  Protection.  No.  363-0300-002  (December  2006),  as  amended  and
updated. Pennsylvania Storm water Best Management Practices Manual. Harrisburg, PA.

4.	Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. No. 363-2134-008 (March 31, 2012), as amended and updated. Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control Program Manual. Harrisburg, PA.

5.	U.S. Department of Commerce, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, National Weather Service, Hydrometeorological Design Studies Center. 2004-2006. Precipitation-Frequency Atlas of the United States,
Atlas 14,	Volume 2,	Version 3.0,	Silver	Spring,	Maryland.	Internet	address: http:/fhdsc.nws.noaa.ciov/hdsc/pfds/.



ARTICLE X- MISCELLANIOUS



Section 10.1. Remaining Ordinances: All relevant ordinances, regulations, and policies of the Borough of Taylor, Pennsylvania not amended shall remain in full force and effect.
Section 10.2. This Ordinance shall be effective innnediately upon passage and approved in the manner prescribed by law.

ORDAINED AND ENACTED into an Ordinance this 13"' day of September, 2017. Borough Council of the Borough of Taylor

Borough of Taylor
 
 
ATTEgLid1kQ k
Kristi A. Evans, Secretmy
 

K'enneth F. Mickavicz, President
 

 

APPROVED by the Mayor this
 
Ic"3_fJ.. day 0f  September, 2017.
 

#d2 AL
heodore Praschak, Mayor
 
APPENDIX  A


OPERATION AND MAIN IENANCE (O&M) AGREEMENT STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (SWM BMPs)


 
THIS AGREEMENT, made and entered into this day of	, 20	, by and between   	 the "Landowner"), and	County, Pennsylvania (hereinafter "Municipality");

WITNESS ETH
 
(hereinafter
 

WHEREAS, the Landowner is the owner of certain real property as recorded by deed in the land records of
 	 County, Pennsylvania, Deed Book	at page	_ (hereinafter "Property").

WHEREAS, the Landowner is proceeding to build and develop the Property; and

WHEREAS, the SWM BMP Operation and Maintenance (O&M) Plan approved by the Municipality (hereinafter referred to as the "O&M Plan") for the property identified herein, which is attached hereto as Appendix A and made part hereof, as approved by the Municipality, provides for management of stormwater within  the  confines  of  the  Property through the use of BMPs; and

WHEREAS, the Municipality, and the Landowner, his successors and assigns, agree that the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the Municipality and the protection and maintenance of water quality require that on-site SWM BMPs be constructed and maintained on the Property; and

WHEREAS, the Municipality requires, through the implementation of the SWM Site Plan, that SWM BMPs as required by said SWM Site Plan and the Municipal Stormwater Management Ordinance be constructed and adequately operated and maintained by the Landowner, successors, and assigns.

NOW, THEREFORE,  in consideration of the foregoing promises, the mutual covenants contained herein, and the
following terms and conditions, the parties hereto agree as follows:

1.	The Landowner shall construct the BMPs in accordance with the plans and specifications  identified in the SWM Site Plan.

2.	The Landowner shall operate and maintain the BMPs as shown on the SWM Site Plan in good working order in
accordance with the specific operation and maintenance requirements noted on the approved O&M Plan.

3.	The Landowner hereby grants permission to the Municipality, its authorized agents and employees, to enter upon the property, at reasonable times and upon presentation of proper credentials, to inspect the BMPs whenever necessary. Whenever possible, the Municipality shall notify the Landowner prior to entering the property.

4.	In the event the Landowner fails to operate and maintain  the BMPs per paragraph 2, the Municipality or its representatives may enter upon the Property and take whatever action is deemed necessary to maintain said BMP(s). It is expressly understood and agreed that the Municipality is under no obligation to maintain or repair said facilities, and in no event shall this Agreement be construed to impose any such obligation on the Municipality.

5.	In the event the Municipality, pursuant to this Agreement, performs work of any nature, or expends any funds in performance of said work for labor, use of equipment, supplies, materials, and the like, the Landowner shall reimburse the Municipality for all expenses (direct and indirect) incurred within 10 days of receipt of invoice from the Municipality.                                                                                                                                        '

6.	The intent and purpose of this Agreement is to ensure the proper maintenance of the on-site BMPs by the Landowner; provided, however, that this Agreement shall not be deemed to create any additional liability of any party for damage alleged to result from or be caused by stormwater runoff.
 
7.	The Landowner, its executors, administrators, assigns, and other successors in interests, shall release the Municipality from all damages, accidents, casualties, occurrences, or claims which might arise or be asserted against said employees and representatives from the construction, presence, existence, or maintenance of the BMP(s) by the Landowner or Municipality.

8.	The  Municipality  intends  to  inspect the  BMPs  at a  minimum of once  every  three  years  to ensure  their  continued
functioning.

This Agreement shall be recorded at the Office of the Recorder of Deeds of	County, Pennsylvania,   and  shall  constitute  a  covenant   running  with  the  Property  and/or  equitable  servitude,   and  shall  be binding  on  the  Landowner,  his  administrators,  executors,  assigns,  heirs,  and  any  other  successors  in interests,  in perpetuity.

ATTEST:

WITNESS the following signatures and seals:

(SEAL)	For the Municipality:





For the Landowner:




ATTEST:

(City, Borough, Township) County of	, Pennsylvania
I,                                                                                                         , a Notary Public in and for the county and state aforesaid,
whose commission expires on the	day of	, 20	, do hereby certify that		whose	name(s) is/are signed to the foregoing Agreement bearing date of the	day	, 20	, has acknowledged the same before me in my said county and state.



 
GIVEN UNDER MY HAND THIS	day of  	
 
, 20 	
 



NOTARY PUBLIC	(SEAL)
