Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 12-27-1999 by Ord. No. 99-2]
§ 1-1. Approval, adoption and enactment of Code.
Pursuant to Section 1008(b) of the Borough Code [53 P.S. § 46008(b)], the
codification of a complete body of legislation for the Borough of Tarentum,
County of Allegheny, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as revised, codified
and consolidated into chapters, articles and sections by General Code
Publishers Corp., and consisting of Chapters 1 through 265, together with
an Appendix, are hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as a
single ordinance of the Borough of Tarentum, which shall be known and is
hereby designated as the "Code of the Borough of Tarentum," hereinafter
referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Effect of Code on previous provisions.
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as
those of ordinances in force immediately prior to the enactment of this
ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such ordinances and not as
new enactments, and the effectiveness of such provisions shall date from
the date of adoption of the prior ordinance. All such provisions are hereby
continued in full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their
adoption by the Borough Council of the Borough of Tarentum, and it is the
intention of said Borough Council that each such provision contained within
the Code is hereby reenacted and reaffirmed as it appears in said Code.
Only such provisions of former ordinances as are omitted from this Code
shall be deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-3 below, and
only changed provisions, as described in § 1-6 below, shall be deemed to be
enacted from the effective date of this Code, as provided in § 1-15 below.
§ 1-3. Repeal of ordinances not contained in Code.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature
adopted by the Borough of Tarentum and in force on the date of the
adoption of this Code and not contained in the Code are hereby repealed as
of the effective date given in § 1-15 below, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 1-4. Ordinances saved from repeal; matters not affected by repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-3 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights
and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal; provided,
however, that the repeal of ordinances pursuant to § 1-3 or the saving from
repeal of ordinances pursuant to this section shall not be construed so as to
revive any ordinance previously repealed, superseded or no longer of any
effect:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to 5-13-1996.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:3
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the borough prior to the effective date of this
ordinance or any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of
such right or liability or any cause of action acquired or existing.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision of the borough or any
penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the borough.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the borough or any lawful contract, obligation or
agreement.
F. Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or
guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and
delivery of any bond of the borough or other instruments or evidence of
the borough's indebtedness.
G. Any ordinance adopting an annual budget or establishing an annual tax
rate.
H. Any ordinance providing for the levy, imposition or collection of special
taxes, assessments or charges.
I. Any ordinance authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property or acquiring property by acceptance of deed, condemnation or
exercise of eminent domain.
J. Any ordinance annexing land to the borough.
K. Any ordinance providing for or requiring the construction or
reconstruction or opening of sidewalks, curbs and gutters.
L. Any ordinance or part of an ordinance providing for laying out, opening,
altering, widening, relocating, straightening, establishing grade,
changing name, improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-ofway,
easement, street, road, highway, sidewalk, park or other public
place or property or designating various streets as public highways.
M. Any ordinance establishing water, sewer or other special purpose
districts and designating the boundaries thereof; providing for a system
of sewers or water supply lines; or providing for the construction,
extension, dedication, acceptance or abandonment of any part of a
system of sewers or water supply lines.
N. Any ordinance providing for the making of public improvements.
§ 1-4 TARENTUM CODE § 1-4
1:4
§ 1-5. Inclusion of new legislation prior to adoption of Code.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted subsequent
to the date given in § 1-4A and/or prior to the date of adoption of this
ordinance are hereby deemed to be a part of the Code and shall, upon being
printed, be included therein. Attested copies of all such ordinances shall be
temporarily placed in the Code until printed supplements are included.
§ 1-6. Changes and revisions in previously adopted ordinances.
O. Any ordinance providing for the salaries and compensation of officers
and employees of the borough or setting the bond of any officer or
employee.
P. Any ordinance concerning changes and amendments to the Zoning
Map.
Q. Any ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension fund
for municipal employees.
R. Any ordinance or portion of an ordinance establishing a specific fee
amount for any license, permit or service obtained from the Borough of
Tarentum.
S. Ordinance No. 87-1, adopted 1-12-1987, regarding local real estate
transfer tax.
A. Nonsubstantive grammatical changes. In compiling and preparing the
ordinances of the borough for adoption and revision as part of the Code,
certain nonsubstantive grammatical and style changes were made in
one or more of said ordinances. It is the intention of the Borough
Council that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the
ordinances so changed had been previously formally amended to read
as such.
B. Substantive changes and revisions. In addition to the changes and
revisions described above, changes and revisions of a substantive
nature, as set forth in Schedule A attached hereto and made a part
hereof, are hereby made to various ordinances included in the Code.
These changes are enacted to bring provisions into conformity with the
desired policies of the Borough Council, and it is the intent of the
Borough Council that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code
as if the ordinances so changed have been previously formally amended
to read as such. All such changes and revisions shall be deemed to be in
effect as of the effective date of the Code specified in § 1-15.1
1. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-6B, the chapters, parts and sections which were
added, amended, adopted or deleted by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code
by a footnote referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I. During routine
supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be
replaced with the following history: "Amended (added, deleted) 12-27-1999 by Ord. No.
99-2." Schedule A, which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file in the
borough offices.
§ 1-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-6
1:5
§ 1-7. Interpretation of provisions.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of the Code, they shall be held
to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health,
safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where the provisions of
the Code impose greater restrictions or requirements than those of any
statute, other ordinance or regulation, the provisions of the Code shall
control. Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance or regulation
impose greater restrictions or requirements, the provisions of such statute,
other ordinance or regulation shall control.
§ 1-8. Titles and headings; editor's notes.
§ 1-9. Filing of copies of Code.
Three copies of the Code in a post-bound volume shall be filed with the
Ordinance Book in the office of the Borough Manager and shall remain
there for use and examination by the public. Upon adoption, such copies
shall be certified to by the Borough Manager, as provided by law, and such
certified copies shall remain on file in the office of the Borough Manager,
available to persons desiring to examine the same during all times while
said Code is in effect.
C. Nomenclature changes. The following changes have been made
throughout the Code:
(1) "Justice of the Peace" and "District Magistrate" are hereby
amended to read "District Justice."
(2) "Burgess" is hereby amended to read "Mayor."
(3) "Department of Environmental Resources" is hereby amended to
read "Department of Environmental Protection."
(4) "Department of Community Affairs" is hereby amended to read
"Department of Community and Economic Development."
D. All specific fee amounts have been removed from the text of the
chapters and replaced by the phrase "as set forth from time to time by
resolution of the Borough Council."
A. Chapter and article titles, headings and titles of sections and other
divisions in the Code or in supplements made to the Code are inserted
in the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
B. Editor's notes indicating sources of sections, giving other information
or referring to the statutes or to other parts of the Code are inserted in
the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
§ 1-6 TARENTUM CODE § 1-10
1:6
§ 1-10. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code,
when passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the
Borough Council to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated
into such Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and
intended to include such changes. Whenever such additions, deletions,
amendments or supplements to the Code shall be adopted, they shall
thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder, inserted in the postbound
book containing said Code as amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-11. Code books to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Borough Manager or someone authorized and
directed by him or her to keep up-to-date the certified copies of the book
containing the Code required to be filed in the office of the Borough
Manager for the use of the public. All changes in said Code and all
ordinances adopted by the Borough Council subsequent to the effective
date of this codification which the Borough Council shall adopt specifically
as part of the Code shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by
reference until such changes or new ordinances are printed as supplements
to said Code books, at which time such supplements shall be inserted
therein.
§ 1-12. Publication of notices.
The Borough Manager, pursuant to law, shall cause to be published in the
manner required a notice of the introduction and of the adoption of the
Code in a newspaper of general circulation in the borough. The enactment
and application of this ordinance, coupled with the publication of the
notices of introduction and adoption, as required by law, and the availability
of copies of the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and
considered to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for
all purposes.
§ 1-13. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, or to alter or tamper with the Code or any part or portion
thereof, in any manner whatsoever, which will cause the law of the borough
to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section of this
ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not
exceeding $600, plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment
thereof, by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days.
§ 1-14. Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance and of the Code adopted hereby are
severable, and if any clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter
or part thereof shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to
be illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, such judgment or decision shall not
§ 1-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-14
1:7
affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in
its operation and application to the clause, sentence, subsection, section,
article, chapter or part thereof rendered illegal, invalid or unconstitutional.
It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Borough Council that this
ordinance and the Code would have been adopted if such illegal, invalid
or unconstitutional clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter or
part thereof had not been included therein.
§ 1-15. Effective date.
All provisions of this ordinance and of the Code shall be in force and effect
on and after December 20, 1999.
§ 1-14 TARENTUM CODE § 1-15
1:8
Chapter 4
ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Authorities — See Ch. 8. Police Department — See Ch. 54.
§ 4-1. Administrative Code established.
An Administrative Code is hereby established for the government of the
Borough of Tarentum, County of Allegheny, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
pursuant to the laws of the commonwealth and the Borough Code.2
§ 4-2. Inclusion in Code book.
The Administrative Code, a copy of which is attached hereto and made
a part hereof,3 shall comprise Chapter 44 of the Code of Ordinances of
the Borough of Tarentum. It shall be known and referred to as the
"Administrative Code."
§ 4-3. Amendments.
Administrative changes in the Administrative Code, which cannot affect the
substantive rights of the citizens of the borough or its employees, shall be
amended by resolution of the Council of the Borough of Tarentum from time
to time.
Chapter 8
AUTHORITIES, MUNICIPAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 54.
Building construction — See Ch. 95.
Mobile homes — See Ch. 159.
Plumbing — See Ch. 185.
Sewers — See Ch. 204.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 250.
Water — See Ch. 256.
2. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 45101 et seq.
3. Editor's Note: Said Administrative Code is included at the end of the chapter.
4. Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 96-6 designated the chapter number as "1," which was
changed to "4" to fit the organizational structure of the Code book.
§ 1-15 AUTHORITIES, MUNICIPAL § 4-3
8:9

ARTICLE I
Parking Authority
[Adopted 4-9-1956 by Ord. No. 1644]
§ 8-1. Intent.
It is the desire of the Borough Council of the Borough of Tarentum in the
County of Allegheny and Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and said Council
hereby signifies its intention to organize a Parking Authority under the
Parking Authority Law of June 5, 1947, P.L. 458, as amended.5
§ 8-2. Articles of Incorporation.
In pursuance of said desire and intention, and in conformity with the terms
and provisions of said Parking Authority Law and its amendments, the
proposed Articles of Incorporation are hereby set forth in full, as follows.6
§ 8-3. Execution of documents; publication of notice.
The proposed Articles of Incorporation of said Authority shall be executed
by and on behalf of the Borough of Tarentum, by the Mayor and President
of Council of said borough, and the seal of said borough shall be thereto
affixed, attested by the Secretary of the Council of said borough and filed
with the Secretary of the commonwealth. The Solicitor is hereby authorized
and directed to cause to be published the notice of intention to file the
Articles of Incorporation with the Secretary of the Commonwealth as
required by the aforementioned Act.
5. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 341 et seq.
6. Editor's Note: Said Articles of Incorporation are on file in the borough offices.
§ 8-1 AUTHORITIES, MUNICIPAL § 8-3
8:11

ARTICLE II
Upper Allegheny Joint Sanitary Authority
[Adopted 3-7-1960 by Ord. No. 1736]
§ 8-4. Intent.
It is the desire of the governing body of this municipality and said governing
body hereby signifies its intention to organize a Joint Municipal Authority,
under the Municipality Authorities Act of May 2, 1945, P.L. 382, as
amended,7 together with the other incorporating municipalities, all of which
incorporating municipalities consist of the Borough of Brackenridge,
Borough of Tarentum, Township of East Deer and Township of Harrison, all
of Allegheny County, Pennsylvania.
§ 8-5. Articles of Incorporation.
In pursuance to said desire and intention, and in conformity with the terms
and provisions of said Municipality Authorities Act and its amendments, the
proposed Articles of Incorporation are hereby set forth in full, as follows.8
§ 8-6. Execution of documents; publication of notice; filing.
The proposed Articles of Incorporation of said Authority shall be executed
by and on behalf of this municipality by the President of Council, the seal
of said Municipality shall be thereto affixed and attested by the Secretary,
and the same shall be approved by the Mayor. The Solicitor is authorized
and directed to cause to be published the Notice of Intention to File the
Articles of Incorporation as required by the aforementioned Act, and when
said Articles of Incorporation are properly executed by the incorporating
municipalities, the same shall be filed with the Secretary of the
Commonwealth.
7. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 301 et seq.
8. Editor's Note: Said Articles of Incorporation are on file in the borough offices.
§ 8-4 AUTHORITIES, MUNICIPAL § 8-6
8:13
Chapter 17
EMERGENCY SERVICE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire protection and rescue — See Ch. 24.
Health enforcement — See Ch. 30.
Police Department — See Ch. 54.
§ 17-1. Acceptance of 911 service.
The Borough of Tarentum does hereby accept Universal Emergency Service
("911") from the Bell Telephone Company of Pennsylvania and requests
said company to arrange to route to the Emergency Answering Center
designated in Attachment A, which is hereto attached, all calls to 911 from
telephones with the area code and central office designation specified in
Attachment A, Part 2, Attachment A, Part 1, Part 2 and Part 3, as well as the
application form for emergency service, which is attached hereto and made
part of this chapter.9
§ 17-2. Authorization to execute documents.
The proper offices of the Borough of Tarentum are authorized, ordered
and directed to execute the application, contract and any other papers or
documents necessary for carrying out the purpose of this chapter.
Chapter 24
FIRE PROTECTION AND RESCUE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Pensions — See Ch. 46.
Risk management pool — See Ch. 65.
Social security — See Ch. 70.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 127.
9. Editor's Note: Attachment A and the application form for emergency service are on file in
the borough offices.
§ 8-6 TARENTUM CODE § 17-2
17:14
ARTICLE I
Workers' Compensation Coverage
[Adopted 11-16-1982 by Ord. No. 82-10]
§ 24-1. Volunteer Fire Departments or companies.
All members of Volunteer Fire Departments or volunteer fire companies of
the Borough of Tarentum, including any paid fireman who is a member of
a volunteer fire company and performs the services of a volunteer fireman
during off-duty hours, who shall be entitled to receive compensation in case
of injuries received while actively engaged as firemen; or while going to or
returning from a fire which the Fire Department or fire company attended,
including travel from and the direct return to a fireman's home, place of
business or other place where he shall have been when he received the call
or alarm; or while participating in instruction fire drills in which the Fire
Department or fire company shall have participated; or while repairing or
doing other work about or on the fire apparatus or buildings and grounds
of the Fire Department or fire company upon the authorization of the Chief
of the Fire Department or fire company or other person in charge; or while
answering any emergency calls for any purpose; or while riding upon the
fire apparatus which is owned or used by the Fire Department or fire
company; or while performing any other duties of such Fire Department
or fire company as authorized by the borough, shall be, and are hereby,
declared to be employees of the borough. Further, the Council of the
Borough of Tarentum authorizes all members of the Volunteer Fire
Departments or companies within the Borough of Tarentum to engage in
the performance of any duty authorized by the chiefs of the Tarentum Fire
Department.
§ 24-2. Volunteer ambulance corps.
All members of volunteer ambulance corps of the Borough of Tarentum shall
be, and are hereby declared to be, employees of the borough who shall
be entitled to receive compensation in the case of injuries received while
actually engaged as ambulance corpsmen; or while going to or returning
from any fire, accident or other emergency which such volunteer ambulance
corps shall attend, including travel from and direct return to a corpsman's
home, place of business or other place where he shall have been when he
received the call or alarm; or while participating in ambulance corps of
which they are members; or while repairing or doing other work about or on
the ambulance apparatus or buildings and grounds of such ambulance corps
upon the authorization of the corps President or other person in charge;
or while answering any emergency call for any purpose by the ambulance
corps of which they are members at any time; or while performing any other
duties of such ambulance corps as are authorized by the borough. Further,
the Council of the Borough of Tarentum hereby authorizes members of the
volunteer ambulance corps to engage in the performance of any duties
authorized by any officer or officers of any volunteer ambulance corps
within the Borough of Tarentum.
§ 24-1 FIRE PROTECTION AND RESCUE § 24-3
24:15
§ 24-3. Volunteer rescue and lifesaving squads.
All members of volunteer rescue and lifesaving squads of the borough shall
be, and are hereby declared to be, employees of the borough and shall
be entitled to receive compensation in the case of injuries received while
actually engaged as a rescue or lifesaving squad member attending to an
emergency to which that squad has been called or responded, including
travel from and the direct return to a squad person's home, place or
business or other place where he shall have been when he received the
call or alarm; or while participating in rescue and lifesaving drills in which
the squad is participating; or while repairing or doing other work about
or on the apparatus, buildings and grounds of such rescue and lifesaving
squad upon the authorization of the Chief or other person in charge; or
while riding in or upon the apparatus of the rescue and lifesaving squad and
at any time while performing any other duties authorized by the borough.
Further, the Council of the Borough of Tarentum hereby authorizes
members of the volunteer rescue and lifesaving squads of the borough
to engage in the performance of any duty authorized by any officer or
officers of all volunteer rescue and lifesaving squads within the Borough of
Tarentum.
§ 24-4. Authorized duties.
The Council of the Borough of Tarentum hereby authorizes members of
Volunteer Fire Departments or companies, volunteer ambulance corps and
volunteer rescue and lifesaving squads to perform the following duties, in
addition to the above-mentioned normal fire-fighting, rescue and emergency
medical duties:
A. Participation in drills, practices, training sessions and pre-fire planning
activities authorized by the Fire Chief.
B. Participation in community celebrations, ceremonial observances and
funerals for deceased fire fighters or other public figures where such
attendance is deemed appropriate and authorized, in writing, by the
Fire Chief.
C. While performing duties necessary to prepare the fire station for use as
a polling place for the primary and general elections, including like
services performed at other municipal or school district buildings for
said elections.
D. Preparation for and responsible participation in parades with the prior
approval of the Fire Department or company, ambulance corps and/or
rescue and lifesaving squad, and written notice is provided to the
borough 30 days prior to the event.
E. Any public service functions performed for the welfare of the
community as long as these activities are responsibly supervised and
are sanctioned by the Chief of the Fire Department or fire company or
any officer or officers of any volunteer ambulance corps or rescue and
§ 24-3 TARENTUM CODE § 24-4
24:16
§ 24-5. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this article to ensure that all members of Volunteer
Fire Departments or companies, volunteer ambulance corps and volunteer
rescue and lifesaving squads of the Borough of Tarentum shall be entitled
to receive compensation under the Workers' Compensation Law of
Pennsylvania10 if such person is injured while engaging in any of the abovementioned
activities.
lifesaving squads, and written notice is provided to the borough 30 days
prior to the function.
F. Any and all public safety activities undertaken by any and all Fire
Departments or companies, ambulance corps or rescue and lifesaving
squad members to render care to the injured, prevent loss of life,
provide comfort and security to victims and limit or prevent damage to
or loss of property as circumstances may dictate.
G. While rendering assistance to police officers where such aid is
specifically requested or is done without request to protect our citizens
from imminent danger.
H. Participation in fire prevention inspections, post-fire investigations,
bomb searches and evacuations.
I. While participating in public programs to promote health and safety, to
enlist new members, solicit community support or conduct fund-raising
activities, so long as the activity is specifically sanctioned by the Fire
Department or company, ambulance corps and/or rescue and lifesaving
squad, with written notice to the borough 30 days prior to the activity
or event.
J. While performing such other duties necessary for the efficient
operation of the above volunteer services as may, from time to time, be
authorized by the Council of the Borough of Tarentum.
10.Editor's Note: See 77 P.S. § 1 et seq.
§ 24-4 FIRE PROTECTION AND RESCUE § 24-5
24:17

ARTICLE II
Recognition and Status
[Adopted 8-10-1993 by Ord. No. 93-8]
§ 24-6. Purpose.11
In order to afford these volunteer and/or nonprofit companies governmental
immunity, Highland Hose, Eureka Hose, Summit Hose, and Eureka
Community Ambulance Service are hereby recognized and accorded the
status of volunteer fire companies and rescue company by the Borough of
Tarentum and shall have such status in doing any and/or all of the following
items:
A. Attendance at meetings.
B. Education and training sessions.
C. Fire-fighting and fire prevention activities.
D. Automobile accidents.
E. Hazardous waste incidents.
F. Ambulance rescue and transport.
G. Parades and other public functions.
H. Any and all fund-raising activities, such as bingo, small games of
chance, carnivals, festivals, hall rentals.
I. Any other activities authorized by the officers or by the bylaws of the
company or by the Borough of Tarentum, County of Allegheny or the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any of its agencies, such as the
Liquor Control Board.
11.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 24-6 FIRE PROTECTION AND RESCUE § 24-6
24:19
Chapter 30
HEALTH ENFORCEMENT
§ 30-1. Intent; jurisdiction of county.
It is hereby declared to be the intention of municipality that upon the
establishment of the County Department of Health of Allegheny County,
the Borough of Tarentum will cease to exercise any of the public health
functions vested in it by law and become subject to the jurisdiction of said
County Department of Health.
Chapter 35
INTERGOVERNMENTAL COOPERATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 50.
Building construction — See Ch. 95.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 111.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 127.
Mechanical standards — See Ch. 155.
Mobile homes — See Ch. 159.
Plumbing — See Ch. 185.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 190.
Sewers — See Ch. 204.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
220.
Zoning — See Ch. 265.
§ 24-6 TARENTUM CODE § 30-1
30:20
ARTICLE I
Joint Zoning and Codes Enforcement Officer
[Adopted 7-9-1990 by Ord. No. 90-1]
§ 35-1. Acceptance of grant moneys.
The Council of the Borough of Tarentum is hereby authorized to enter
into an agreement with the Department of Community and Economic
Development to accept grant moneys for the payment of a Joint Zoning
and Codes Enforcement Officer to be shared by mutual agreement by
the Borough of Tarentum and the Township of East Deer as a matter of
intergovernmental cooperation.
§ 35-1 INTERGOVERNMENTAL COOPERATION § 35-1
35:21

ARTICLE II
Agreement with Frazer Township for Police Protection and Law
Enforcement Services
[Adopted 1-17-2005 by Ord. No. 05-02]
§ 35-2. Authorization.
§ 35-3. Effect on police authority.
Pursuant to Section 1903 of the Second Class Township Code, 53 P.S.
§ 66903, as amended, the police officers of Tarentum Borough shall have
all the powers and authority conferred by law on police officers in Frazer
Township during the term of the said joint municipal agreement.
A. The Borough is hereby authorized to enter into a joint municipal
agreement with Frazer Township, in a form acceptable to the Borough
Solicitor and substantially similar to the form attached hereto and
incorporated herein at Exhibit A,12 for the provision of police protection
and law enforcement services within Frazer Township.
B. The appropriate Borough officials are hereby authorized to execute the
said joint municipal agreement with Frazer Township, and to take any
and all actions necessary to effectuate the same.
12.Editor's Note: Said Exhibit A, the agreement, is on file in the Borough's offices.
§ 35-2 INTERGOVERNMENTAL COOPERATION § 35-3
35:23
Chapter 46
PENSIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Workers' compensation — See Ch. 24, Art. I.
Social security — See Ch. 70.
Pension Plan Committees — See Ch. A272.
§ 35-3 TARENTUM CODE § 35-3
46:24
ARTICLE I
Police Pension Plan
[Adopted 7-19-2004 by Ord. No. 04-513]
§ 46-1. Adoption of plan.
The Borough of Tarentum Police Pension Plan,14 as amended and restated
effective immediately, is hereby approved and adopted in substantially the
same form as presented to the Board. Any provision of any prior ordinance
which conflicts with this ordinance shall be null and void.
§ 46-2. (Reserved)
§ 46-3. (Reserved)
13.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. I, Police Pension Plan, adopted
5-19-1958 by Ord. No. 1702, as amended.
14.Editor's Note: The full text of the plan is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 46-1 PENSIONS § 46-3
46:25

ARTICLE II
Nonuniformed Employees
[Adopted 11-19-2007 by Ord. No. 07-0915]
§ 46-4. Upgrade of benefits.
Tarentum Borough, being a member municipality of the Pennsylvania
Municipal Retirement System, hereby elects to change its member benefits
in that system as authorized by the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement
Law,16 as amended, and does hereby agree to be bound by all the
requirements and provisions of said Article and the law, as the case may be,
and to assume all obligations, financial and otherwise, placed upon member
municipalities by said amendment, as the case may be. All references
hereafter shall be based on benefits negotiated between the Board and
the municipality under the provisions of Article IV of the Pennsylvania
Municipal Retirement Law.
§ 46-5. Eligibility.
Membership in the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System shall be
mandatory for all full-time municipal employees of the Borough.
Membership for part-time employees is optional. The election by part-time
employees to join the system must be made within one year after the
employee first enters the service of the Borough. Membership for elected
officials, employees hired on a temporary or seasonal basis, and individuals
paid only on a fee basis is prohibited.
§ 46-6. Credit for prior service.
Credit for prior service for original members is granted for each year or
partial year thereof that the member was employed by the Borough from the
original date of hire or the expiration of the member's probationary period
if one so existed. Benefits provided to members in the agreement November
19, 2007, shall accrue based on all credited service granted and earned in
accordance with this section.
§ 46-7. Payments.
Payment for any obligation established by the adoption of this article and
the agreement between the Board and Tarentum Borough shall be made
by the Borough in accordance with the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement
Law and Act 205 of 1984, the Municipal Pension Plan Funding Standard and
Recovery Act.17
15.Editor's Note: This ordinance repealed former Art. II, Nonuniformed employees, adopted
3-7-2001 by Ord. No. 01-4.
16.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 881.101 et seq.
17.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 881.101 et seq. and 53 P.S. § 895.101 et seq., respectively.
§ 46-4 PENSIONS § 46-8
46:27
§ 46-8. Acceptance of benefits.
As part of this article, the Borough agrees that the system shall provide
the benefits set forth in the agreement between the Board and Tarentum
Borough, dated November 19, 2007. The passage and adoption of this
article by Tarentum Borough is an official acceptance of said agreement and
the financial obligations resulting from the administration of said benefit
package. Tarentum Borough hereby assumes all liability for any
unfundedness created or which may be created due to the acceptance of the
benefit structure outlined in the above-referenced agreement.
§ 46-9. Repealer.
Tarentum Borough intends this article to be the complete authorization
of the Borough's municipal pension plan and it shall become effective
and specifically repeal Ordinance Number 04-01 either immediately or
on January 1, 2008, which is the effective date of the agreement dated
November 19, 2007, between the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement
System and Tarentum Borough, whichever is later.
§ 46-10. Filing of copies, effective date.
A duly certified copy of this article and the referenced agreement shall
be filed with the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. Membership for the municipal employees
of Tarentum Borough in the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System
shall be effective the first day of July 1966, with the revised plan structure
reflected in the agreement dated November 19, 2007, effective the first day
of January 2008.
§ 46-8 TARENTUM CODE § 46-10
46:28
Chapter 50
PLANNING COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
220.
Zoning — See Ch. 265.
§ 50-1. Creation of Department; establishment and composition of
Commission.
In order to avail itself of the powers conferred by the Act of Assembly, the
Borough of Tarentum hereby creates the Department of Borough Planning
and establishes a Borough Planning Commission consisting of five citizens
of the Borough of Tarentum.
§ 50-2. Original members.
The names of the members of said Commission hereby appointed are:
§ 50-3. Powers and duties.
A. Edward Grine for one year.
B. John McKibben for two years.
C. Ralph Brewer for three years.
D. Frank Painter for four years.
E. John Kapusta for five years.
A. The Borough Planning Commission shall have all the powers and be
subject to all the duties under the Acts of Assembly applicable thereto.
B. The Commission hereby established shall act as the Zoning Commission
of the Borough of Tarentum and shall recommend boundaries of the
original zoning districts and appropriate regulations to be enforced
therein and shall make a preliminary report after holding public
hearing before submitting a final report to Council.
C. Insofar as the duties of said Commission apply as Zoning Commission,
the Council shall not hold any hearings on such matters or take any
action until it has received the final report and recommendations of the
Zoning Commission.
D. See also § 265-4E for additional responsibilities.18
18.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 46-10 PLANNING COMMISSION § 50-3
50:29
Chapter 54
POLICE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Pension — See Ch. 46, Art. I. Social security — See Ch. 70.
§ 50-3 TARENTUM CODE § 50-3
54:30
ARTICLE I
Establishment
[The Police Department was established in the Borough of
Tarentum by resolution on July 26, 1877.]
POLICE DEPARTMENT § 50-3
54:31

ARTICLE II
Chief of Police
[Adopted 4-9-1907 by Ord. No. 358]
§ 54-1. Position authorized.
The employment of a Chief of Police is hereby authorized and directed.19
19.Editor's Note: Original Section 2, which set the compensation of the Chief of Police at $75
per month, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 54-1 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 54-1
54:33

ARTICLE III
T.N.T. Task Force
[Adopted 5-11-1992 by Ord. No. 92-2]
§ 54-2. Intent.
The Borough of Tarentum has evidenced its intent to participate in the
T. N. T. Task Force activities designed to combat the illegal possession
and trafficking of narcotics and other illegal or controlled drugs within its
municipal boundaries as well as within the boundaries of other near or
adjacent communities through cooperation with the Pennsylvania Office of
Attorney General and other signatory municipalities.
§ 54-3. Adoption of agreement.
The Borough of Tarentum hereby adopts the agreement which provides a
framework for intergovernmental police cooperation with various signatory
municipalities under the terms of which police officers of each such
municipality shall be and are granted the authority to officially act as
police officers in any other signatory municipality subject to the terms and
conditions of the agreement, a copy of which is attached hereto, made a
part hereof and marked Exhibit A.20
§ 54-4. Duration of agreement.
The duration of the agreement shall be indefinite, subject to termination as
provided in the agreement.
§ 54-5. Purposes and objectives.
The purposes and objective of the agreement are to foster increased
cooperation among the various signatory municipalities, to improve drug
law enforcement throughout the signatory municipalities and to enhance
the skill and professionalism of police officers from each of the signatory
municipalities by, among other things, conferring authority upon police
officers to exercise official duties in other municipalities thereby reducing
the law enforcement problems relating to jurisdiction, territory or boundary
issues.
§ 54-6. Expenses.
Each municipality shall be responsible for all expenses incurred by reason
of action taken by its police officers pursuant to this agreement with the
assistance of funds supplied by the Pennsylvania Office of Attorney General.
§ 54-7. Organizational structure.
The organizational structure necessary to implement the agreement, to the
extent that it is not set forth in the agreement itself, shall be covered
20.Editor's Note: Said agreement is on file in the borough offices.
§ 54-2 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 54-7
54:35
by directives, procedures and guidance from the Pennsylvania Office of
Attorney General and other area Police Departments from municipalities
which are signatories to said agreement.
§ 54-8. Disposal of property.
All property, real or personal, which may be acquired, managed, licensed or
disposed of pursuant to this agreement shall be in accordance with both the
terms of the agreement as well as the directives, procedures and guidance
of the Pennsylvania Office of Attorney General.
§ 54-9. Employees.
The municipality shall retain responsibility for the management, direction
and control of its employees with assistance, financial or otherwise, from
the Pennsylvania Office of Attorney General.
§ 54-10. Contracts.
The entity created by this article shall be empowered to enter into contracts
for policies of group life insurance and employee benefits, including social
security, for its employees.
§ 54-7 TARENTUM CODE § 54-10
54:36
Chapter 61
RECREATION BOARD
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 177.
§ 61-1. Creation.
The Council of the Borough of Tarentum does hereby create a Recreation
Board under the provision of Section 2708 and following of the Borough
Code of February 1, 1966,21 which Board shall possess all the powers and be
subject to all the responsibilities under the provision of said Borough Code.
§ 61-2. Membership.
Such Board shall consist of nine persons to be appointed by the Council of
the Borough of Tarentum.22
§ 61-3. Terms.
§ 61-4. Officers.
Members of the Recreation Board shall organize and elect their own
Chairman and Secretary and shall select all other necessary officers to
serve for a period of one year and may employ such persons as may be
needed as authorized by Council of the Borough of Tarentum.
§ 61-5. Rules and regulations.
Said Board shall have the power to adopt rules and regulations for the
conduct of such business within its jurisdiction.
A. The terms of two members of said Board shall be for one year.
B. The terms of two members of said Board shall be for two years.
C. The terms of two members of said Board shall be for three years.
D. The terms of two members of said Board shall be for four years.
E. The term of one member of said Board shall be for five years.
F. Thereafter, all appointments shall be made for five-year terms.
21.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 45101 et seq.
22.Editor's Note: Original Sections 3 and 4, regarding school board and ward representation,
which immediately followed this section, were deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 54-10 RECREATION BOARD § 61-5
61:37
Chapter 65
RISK MANAGEMENT POOL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Workers' compensation — See Ch. 24, Art. I. Social security — See Ch. 70.
§ 65-1. Authorization to execute documents.
The proper municipal officers are hereby authorized to execute and deliver
the following documents: the Municipal Risk Management Workmen's
Compensation Pooled Trust Agreement (hereafter the "agreement") and the
Participant Application, which documents are attached hereto and made a
part hereof23 and which may be inspected by any interested citizen at the
office of the municipal secretary.
§ 65-2. Duration of agreement.
The duration of the term of the agreement is four years from the date of
admission to the Trust as a Participant.
§ 65-3. Purpose and objectives.
The purpose and objectives of the agreement are set forth in Article V of the
agreement.
§ 65-4. Powers and scope of authority.
The powers and scope of authority delegated are set forth in Article II,
Article V, Article VI, Article VII and Article IX of the agreement.
§ 65-5. Appropriation of funds.
The funds for meeting the obligations of the political subdivision under the
agreement shall be appropriated from the general funds of the political
subdivision.
§ 65-6. Organizational structure.
The organizational structure necessary to implement the agreement
consists of the Trust, trustees, service agents and fiscal agents created by
the agreement.
§ 65-7. Use of property.
Property acquired for purposes of the Trust shall be acquired, managed and
disposed of under the terms of the attached Trust Agreement.24
23.Editor's Note: Said documents are on file in the borough offices.
§ 61-5 TARENTUM CODE § 65-8
65:38
§ 65-8. Contracts.
The Trust shall be empowered to enter into contracts for policies of group
insurance and employee benefits, including social security for its
employees.
Chapter 70
SOCIAL SECURITY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Pensions — See Ch. 46. Risk management pool — See Ch. 65.
§ 70-1. Plan and agreement.25
The President and Secretary of the Borough and the Mayor thereof be
and they are hereby authorized and directed to execute and deliver to the
State Agency a plan and agreement as required under Section 6 of said
Enabling Act, and the Social Security Act, to extend coverage to employees
and officers of the Borough of Tarentum and do any and all necessary things
to effectuate coverage of said employees and officers under Old Age and
Survivors Insurance System.
§ 70-2. System of payroll deduction.
The Borough Manager is hereby authorized and directed to establish a
system of payroll deductions to be matched by payments by the Borough
of Tarentum and paid into the contribution fund of the Social Security
Act through the office of the State Agency and to make such charges of
this tax to the fund from which wage or salary payments are issued to
employees of the borough. Such payments shall be made in accordance with
the provisions of the law and such regulations as may be promulgated by
the State Agency and the Federal Security Administrator. Any payments
that may become delinquent shall bear interest at the rate of 1/2 of 1% per
month until such payments are made.
§ 70-3. Appropriation.
An appropriation is hereby made from the general funds of the Borough of
Tarentum in an amount necessary to pay into the contribution fund provided
24.Editor's Note: Said agreement is on file in the borough offices.
25.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 1938, adopted 10-4-1968, provided as follows: "That the
proper officers of the Borough are authorized, ordered and directed to execute a new plan
and agreement form so that the Borough's coverage of public employees will conform to
the 1967 amendments to the Social Security Act, said agreement being attached hereto
and made a part of this Ordinance, which plan and agreement is on file in the secretary's
office of the Borough of Tarentum Lock Street, Tarentum, Pennsylvania."
§ 65-8 SOCIAL SECURITY § 70-3
70:39
in Section 4 of the Enabling Act26 and in accordance with the plan and
agreement herein referred to.
§ 70-4. Authorization to participate; commencement date.
The President and Secretary of the borough are hereby authorized and
directed, and authority is given to the Mayor thereof, to enter into an
agreement with the State Agency in accordance with Act No. 49127 above
referred to and paragraph 218 of the Social Security Act; said plan and
agreement shall provide that the participation of the Borough of Tarentum
shall commence as of January 1, 1951.
Chapter 75
TREE STEWARDSHIP COMMITTEE
§ 75-1. Creation; membership; remuneration; responsibilities.
A. A Tree Stewardship Committee is hereby created.
B. The Committee shall consist of at least one Borough resident who is a
certified tree tender or who has a degree in forestry, or is an arborist or
the like, as approved by the Borough Manager.
C. There shall be no more than three stewards who shall serve at will of
the Manager.
D. The Committee shall not receive any remuneration or have the
authority to spend Borough funds.
E. The Committee's responsibilities include, but are not limited to, the
following:
(1) Identify areas where the planting, pruning, treating and removal of
shade trees is recommended and report same to the Borough
Manager for action.
(2) Identify any tree or trees which may be in violation of Article V of
Chapter 216 of the Code of the Borough of Tarentum and report
same to the Code Enforcement Officer and Borough Manager for
action.
26.Editor's Note: See now 53 P.S. § 881.107.
27.Editor's Note: See now 53 P.S. § 881.101 et seq.
§ 70-3 TARENTUM CODE § 75-1
70:40
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 80
ALARMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire protection and rescue — See Ch. 24.
Police Department — See Ch. 54.
Building construction — See Ch. 95.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 111.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 127.
§ 75-1 ALARMS § 75-1
80:41

ARTICLE I
False Alarms
[Adopted 1-8-1996 by Ord. No. 96-1]
§ 80-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
POLICE, FIRE AND BURGLAR ALARM SYSTEMS — Includes alarms
commonly referred to as "burglar alarms" and "holdup alarms."
§ 80-2. False alarms declared a public nuisance.
The use of police, fire and burglar alarm systems, whether audible or
direct line type of alarms, are expressly permitted, subject to the following
conditions:
A. Direct line radio or other electronic police, fire or burglar alarm
systems shall be installed by competent workmen so that such devices
shall not emit false alarms.
B. Any alarm system that produces false alarms shall constitute a public
nuisance if such system activates more than one false alarm in any
thirty-day period or two false alarms in any ninety-day period or three
false alarms in any one-hundred-eighty-day period or four false alarms
in any three-hundred-sixty-five-day period.
C. Any police officer or fireman who responds to a false alarm shall report
the same to the Chief of Police, who shall monitor and maintain records
concerning such false alarms.
D. When any alarm system constitutes a public nuisance as set forth
hereunder, the Chief of Police shall notify the owner of the system that
it has activated more false alarms than is permissible hereunder and
that any future false alarms shall result in the prosecution for violation
of this article.
E. Notice as required by this article shall be given by the Chief of Police by
mailing a copy by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by
personal service of such notice by handing a copy of the same to the
owner or tenant of the subject property or to an adult representative
thereof. If service is made in person, the Chief of Police or his or her
designee shall file a proof of service which shall be under oath and
which shall designate the person upon whom service was made.
F. For the purpose of this article, the owner of real estate or tenant of real
estate on which an alarm system is placed and used shall be considered,
both or severally, the person responsible for its proper maintenance and
use.
§ 80-1 ALARMS § 80-2
80:43
§ 80-3. Unlawful to use alarm declared a public nuisance.
No owner of property or persons in charge of real property or tenant shall
use or permit to be used any police, fire or burglar alarm system that has
previously been declared a public nuisance as provided herein. If any false
alarms are given by such system following the date of the receipt of notice
as set forth herein, the false alarm shall be unlawful and shall constitute a
violation of this article.
§ 80-4. Outdoor audible alarms.
All outdoor audible alarms that are activated falsely shall be subject to the
same conditions applicable to direct line radio or other electronic calls that
result in false alarms.
§ 80-5. Correction of deficiencies.
Following notice by the Chief of Police that a police, fire or burglar alarm
system constitutes a public nuisance, the owner of such system may file an
affidavit with the Chief of Police indicating under oath that the false alarms
previously caused by such system were caused by a known mechanical or
other defect within the system, not to include improper use. Such owner
may verify and shall include a statement by competent workmen or
repairmen in the field that such system was defective and such deficiency
has been corrected. Upon the filing of such affidavit with appropriate
exhibits, the false alarm history concerning the premises shall be
considered void and of no legal effect.
§ 80-6. Negligent use.
Where false alarms have originated from negligent use or a combination of
negligent use and a defective system, in order to terminate the finding that
the system is a public nuisance, an owner shall comply with the provisions
of § 80-5 and, in addition, file an affidavit explaining the steps that have
been taken to correct the negligent use which has resulted in false alarms.
Upon acceptance of such affidavits by the Chief of Police, the declaration
of the alarm system as a public nuisance shall be considered void and
of no legal effect. Subject, nevertheless, that should such a system be
declared a public nuisance as provided in § 80-2, within a period of one year
following reinstatement under this section or § 80-2, use of such system
shall terminate for a period of one year before this section shall be used to
reinstate service.
G. In addition to any penalty provided hereunder, upon notifying the owner
that the police, fire or burglar alarm system constitutes a public
nuisance, the Chief of Police shall also notify the telephone answering
service of the system, the Tarentum Borough police dispatch and any
other agency handling the system that the system has been declared a
public nuisance and that the system should be disconnected and/or its
signal ignored.
§ 80-2 TARENTUM CODE § 80-7
80:44
§ 80-7. Permission to install.
Any permission to install a police, fire or burglar alarm system granted
by the Chief of Police shall be predicated upon the specific condition that
should such system prove to constitute a public nuisance as defined
hereunder, then the alarm system shall be terminated also as provided
herein.
§ 80-8. Violations and penalties.28
Whoever violates any of the provisions of this article shall, in a summary
proceeding before the District Justice in which the violation occurred, be
required to pay a fine not exceeding $600 for each false alarm received
after notice is provided as prescribed in § 80-3. In addition, each false alarm
received after notice as provided shall constitute a separate offense, and
upon a second offense, the fine shall be no more than $600. For any third
and successive offense occurring within one year, the fine shall be no more
than $600. Any other violations of this article shall result in the payment
of a fine not exceeding $600, together with cost of suit. In any case where
the Chief of Police has declared an alarm system to be a public nuisance,
the Borough Solicitor may bring legal proceedings in equity or otherwise
to prohibit the continued use of such system and to collect any and all
damages on behalf of the borough resulting from the use of such system,
including all costs and attorney fees.
28.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 80-7 ALARMS § 80-8
80:45
Chapter 84
AMUSEMENT DEVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 265, § 265-34F.
§ 84-1. Purpose; construal of provisions.
This chapter is an exercise of the police powers of the Borough of Tarentum
for the protection of the public welfare, peace, safety and morals of the
people of said borough, and all of the provisions hereof shall be liberally
construed for the accomplishment of these purposes.
§ 84-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the
following meanings respectively designated for each:
APPLICATION — A formal verified written request, under oath or
affirmation or supported by a verified statement of facts, for a license for
the privilege as herein authorized by law.
PERSON — Includes natural persons, firms, unincorporated associations,
partnerships and corporations of all classifications and for whatever
purpose organized or incorporated.
§ 84-3. License required.
On and after the effective date of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for
any persons to have at any time in its or their possession within the
Borough of Tarentum, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania, without first having
procured a license therefor as hereinafter provided, any pinball machine
or mechanically or electrically operated device, machine or apparatus
whatsoever for the playing of games and amusement, which machines,
devices or apparatus are made available for play or operation by means of
the insertion therein of a coin, metal disc, slug or any token whatsoever or
are made available for play or operation upon the payment of any money,
coin, metal disc, slug, token or consideration whatsoever.
§ 84-4. Application; fees.
Every applicant for a license under the provisions of this chapter shall
file with the Secretary of the Borough, Borough Building, Tarentum,
Pennsylvania, a written application in such form and containing such
information as the Council of said borough shall from time to time require.
Every such application shall be accompanied by a filing fee as set forth
from time to time by resolution of the Borough Council, and the prescribed
license fee as hereinafter specified, and shall set forth:
§ 80-8 TARENTUM CODE § 84-4
84:46
§ 84-5. Issuance of license.
No license shall be granted until a period of seven days shall have elapsed
from the date of the filing of said application as herein provided, and no
license shall be issued hereunder to any person unless:
§ 84-6. Grant or rejection of license.
After consideration of the application and investigation of the averrments in
support thereof, a license may be granted as herein provided. Should said
application for such license be rejected, the license fee deposited with the
application shall be returned to said applicant.
§ 84-7. Inspection.
All machines, apparatus and devices as herein described for which an
application for license has been filed and all such machines, apparatus
and devices licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall at all times
be accessible and available for examination and inspection by the proper
officers of said borough, and if it is determined by the Council of said
borough, after investigation and report thereon, that any such machine,
A. The legal names of the applicant and of the owner of the premises
where said machines, as defined in § 84-3 hereof, are to be installed and
used, their resident addresses by street and number, and if a
partnership or firm, of each separate partner or member of said firm,
and if a corporation, of each individual officer thereof.
B. The name, residence and occupation of the real owner of said machines.
C. That no applicant has been convicted of a violation of this chapter or of
any law or regulation of the United States of America or of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania pertaining to gambling or wagering or
of any felony whatsoever.
D. That each and every applicant is a citizen of the United States of
America.
E. The name of the manufacturer of each machine, device or apparatus,
the serial number thereof and a description of the particular type of
game which may be played upon said machine and such other
additional description which may aid in the identification of said
machine.
A. In case of individuals, he or she is a citizen of the United States of
America.
B. In case of groups or unincorporated associations of individuals, a
majority thereof are citizens of the United States of America.
C. In case of corporations, a majority of the stockholders are citizens of the
United States of America.
§ 84-4 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 84-7
84:47
apparatus or device is not in working order or that the same is being
operated or used in violation of law, the license issued therefor may be
suspended or revoked.
§ 84-8. Gambling devices.
Nothing in this chapter shall in any way be construed to authorize, license
or permit any gambling devices whatsoever, or any mechanism that has
been judicially determined to be a gambling device, or in any way contrary
to law, or that may be contrary to any future laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
§ 84-9. Annual fee. [Amended 2-26-1945 by Ord. No. 1403]
No license shall issue until an annual fee therefor shall have been paid to
the Secretary of the Borough in the sum as set forth from time to time by
resolution of the Borough Council for each and every machine or device
so installed and available for use under the terms of this chapter, which
amount paid as aforesaid shall be a license fee until December 31 of each
year. Should any such machine or device be installed on or after July 1 of
any year or application therefor be made on or after said date, then the
license fee for the remainder of the particular year shall be the sum as
set forth from time to time by resolution of the Borough Council; provided,
however, that licenses for such machines may be transferred to other or
new machines at the same or different location if and only if application
for such transfer is made at least five days prior to the date at which
such transfer shall take place and upon payment of a transfer fee as set
forth from time to time by resolution of the Borough Council for each such
machine.
§ 84-10. Display of disc or plate.
Upon payment of the license fee provided for by this chapter and the
approval of the application for said license by the Council of said borough,
the Secretary of the Borough shall issue a suitable disc or plate setting forth
the number of the license for each machine or device so licensed, which disc
or plate shall be attached and fastened to the respective machine or device
so that said license disc or plate may be clearly observable and readable.
§ 84-11. Violations and penalties.29
Any person or persons operating such machine without first obtaining
the license herein provided for or violating any of the provisions of this
chapter or who shall interfere with, hinder or obstruct any inspection or
examination authorized by this chapter and who, upon summary conviction
thereof, shall be found guilty of said violation or violations shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600 with costs for each and
every offense and, in default of the same, shall undergo imprisonment of
29.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 84-7 TARENTUM CODE § 84-11
84:48
not more than 30 days in the Allegheny County workhouse. Each and every
day that any machine, device or apparatus, as defined in this chapter, shall
be operated and used in violation thereof shall constitute a separate and
distinct offense under this chapter and shall be subject to separate and
distinct penalties thereunder.
Chapter 88
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 177. Zoning — See Ch. 265.
§ 84-11 ANIMALS § 84-11
88:49

ARTICLE I
Regulation of the Ownership or Control of Dogs and Cats
[Adopted 4-18-2005 by Ord. No. 05-0430]
§ 88-1. Registration of dogs required.
Any person who owns or is in control of any dog must register the dog at
the Borough's municipal offices, on the Borough's form, at no charge.
§ 88-2. Restriction on number of dogs and cats.
No person may own or be in control of more than a total of four cats and
dogs.
§ 88-3. Running at large prohibited.
No dog, cat or other domesticated animal or any nondomesticated animal
shall be suffered or permitted to run at large upon public streets or
highways unless controlled by a leash no longer then five feet in length
which would restrain the animal by the owner or person in control.
§ 88-4. Containment or control required.
Every person who owns or is in control of any cat or dog must, by either
fence, chain, cable or the like, secure the animal on his property so that the
animal cannot violate § 88-3.
§ 88-5. Property destruction or damage.
No person shall allow any dog, cat or other domesticated animal or any
nondomesticated animal owned by him or under his control to defile, befoul,
corrupt or otherwise desecrate any sidewalk, walkway or the property of
another or to destroy or damage or enter upon the property of another.
§ 88-6. Noise.
No person shall allow any dog, cat or other domesticated animal or any
nondomesticated animal confined on that person's premises to make any
loud or harsh noise or disturbance which interferes with or deprives the
peace, quiet, rest or sleep of any person within the Borough.
§ 88-7. Bites.
Any person who owns or is in control of a dog or cat that bites another
animal or human shall be prosecuted under the Pennsylvania Dog Law, 3
P.S. § 459-101 et seq., as well as appropriate sections of this article.
30.Editor's Note: This ordinance superseded former Art. I, Running at Large, adopted
7-13-1992 by Ord. No. 92-5, as amended.
§ 88-1 ANIMALS § 88-8
88:51
§ 88-8. Separate offense.
Each day's violation of any of the provisions of this article shall constitute a
separate offense.
§ 88-9. Enforcement.
This article may be enforced by either the Borough's appointed Dog Law
Enforcement Officer, the Borough's Code Enforcement Officer or the
Borough's Police Department.
§ 88-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of the sections of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay fines according to the following
schedule:
§ 88-11. Repealer.
Any ordinance or part of any ordinance conflicting with this article is hereby
repealed insofar as the same affects this article.
A. Fifty dollars and all costs of prosecution for the first offense, and in
default of payment of such fine and costs of more than 45 days after
conviction, to imprisonment of not more than three days in the
Allegheny County Jail.
B. One hundred dollars and all costs of prosecution for the second offense,
and in default of payment of such fine and costs of more than 45 days
after conviction, to imprisonment of not more than five days in the
Allegheny County Jail.
C. Five hundred dollars and all costs of prosecution for the third offense,
and in default of payment of such fine and costs of more than 45 days
after conviction, to imprisonment of not more than 30 days in the
Allegheny County Jail.
§ 88-8 TARENTUM CODE § 88-11
88:52
Chapter 92
BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 95.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 190.
Solid waste — See Ch. 210.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 216.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
220.
Trees — See Ch. 239.
Zoning — See Ch. 265.
§ 88-11 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 88-11
92:53

ARTICLE I
General Regulations
§ 92-1. Definitions and interpretations.
§ 92-2. Enforcement.
A. Words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have ascribed to
them their ordinary meaning and understanding, except in those
instances where they are accorded a different meaning by the
provisions of the Borough Code, 53 P.S. § 46201 et seq., or where the
context clearly indicated a different meaning. The singular shall include
the plural, and the masculine shall include the feminine.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SIDEWALK — Shall be used in its broader sense. A sidewalk is a
pathway, whether paved or unpaved and whether on a landowner's
property or on the borough property, between the roadway and the
property owner's line.
A. In addition to the Borough Police, the Council shall have the power to
appoint, as it may, from time to time, such an individual or individuals
as Code Enforcement Officer(s) as it shall deem proper for the
investigation and reporting of suspected violations of any of the
provisions of this chapter, and may vest such individual with such
authority as the Council may, from time to time, deem necessary and
proper to the exercise of the responsibilities imposed hereunder.
B. Upon finding any violation enumerated, defined or otherwise governed
in any fashion whatsoever by this chapter, Code Enforcement Officer(s)
shall have the power to direct the owner, occupier or other such person
in possession of either public or private grounds to remove the
offending condition or to take whatever alternative measures the Code
Enforcement Officer shall deem necessary to achieve compliance with
the provisions of this chapter, in default of which Council may cause the
same to be done, and may collect the costs thereof, together with a
penalty of Ten Percent of such costs, in the manner provided by law for
the collection of municipal claims, or by action of assumpsit, or may
seek relief by bill in equity against the landowners.
C. In the event any costs, penalties or other claims accruing to the benefit
of Council under the provisions of this chapter are not timely remitted
to the Council by the person or persons responsible therefor, the
Council may impose a lien securing such amounts against any and all
property of the person or persons responsible for such remittance.
D. None of the provisions of this chapter shall, in any way, be construed to
confine, restrict, constrain or otherwise limit any recourse which might
otherwise be available to the Council for the enforcement, protection or
§ 92-1 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 92-2
92:55
preservation of any of its rights, duties and obligations, as defined by
this chapter or other applicable laws or decisions of court.
§ 92-2 TARENTUM CODE § 92-2
92:56
ARTICLE II
Prohibitions
§ 92-3. Maintenance requirements.
Except as otherwise provided by applicable law, ordinance or rule of court,
the following regulations shall be strictly enforced:
§ 92-4. Other violations.
All other uses or conditions of premises, public or private, otherwise made
illegal by ordinance, law or rule of court are hereby expressly made subject
to the provisions of this chapter and are thereby made subject to the
enforcement, proscriptions and penalties provided hereunder.
A. The owner shall keep weeds and grasses in his lawn or unpaved area at
a height of six inches or less.
B. Shrubs, bushes, trees, ornamental grasses or other vegetation are not
to violate the clear site triangle as defined by the Borough Zoning
Ordinance.31
C. No vegetation shall be permitted to overhang the sidewalk along the
public street as to obstruct pedestrian traffic.
D. No vegetation of any kind shall be permitted to grow on, in or between
any paved, bricked or cemented sidewalk.
E. Vegetation on unpaved sidewalks shall be cut to a height of two inches.
F. No obstructions are to be permitted that would impede or obstruct
pedestrian traffic.
31.Editor's Note: See Ch. 265, Zoning.
§ 92-3 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 92-4
92:57

ARTICLE III
Interpretation
§ 92-5. Severability.
The provisions of this chapter shall be severable, and if any of its provisions
shall be held to be unconstitutional or illegal, such decision shall not affect
the validity of any of the remaining provisions of this chapter. It is hereby
declared a legislative intent that this chapter would have been adopted had
such unconstitutional or illegal provision not been included herein.
§ 92-6. Provisions to be continuation of existing regulations.
The provisions of this chapter, so far as they are not expressly or necessarily
in conflict with those of ordinances and regulations in force immediately
prior to the enactment of this chapter, are intended as a continuation of
such ordinances and regulations, and are to be read as nearly as possible
as consistent with the same. The provisions of this chapter shall not affect
any act on, or liability incurred, nor shall they affect any suit or prosecution
pending, or to be instituted, to enforce any right or penalty or to punish any
offense under the authority of any ordinance or regulation preceding the
enactment of this chapter.
§ 92-5 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 92-6
92:59

ARTICLE IV
Penalties
§ 92-7. Violations and penalties.
Upon discovery of any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter,
the appropriate enforcement officials so designated by Council as provided
herein, or any police officer, zoning officer or other duly authorized law
enforcement officer of the Borough of Tarentum, shall cause to be issued
upon the owner, occupier or other such person or persons in possession of
premises subject to the provisions of this chapter, a notice directing such
person or persons to remove the offending condition or to take whatever
alternative measures which the Council shall deem necessary to achieve
compliance with the provisions of this chapter within 10 days of the date
of receipt of such notice, in default of which, at the expiration of the Ten
days provided therein, a citation shall be issued subjecting such person
or persons, upon the judgment of any alderman, justice of the peace or
police magistrate of the Borough of Tarentum determining such violation,
to pay a fine of not less than $50 nor greater than $500, and costs for each
offense, and, in default of payment thereof, to imprisonment for a period
not exceeding Thirty days. The penalties so provided hereunder shall be in
addition to any other penalty or penalties, or other recourse whatsoever,
otherwise provided to the Council by any other provisions of this chapter.
§ 92-8. Notice of violation; continuing violations.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall give timely warning to any landowner
that the landowner is in violation of this chapter. Once the time frame has
lapsed after due notice by the Code Enforcement Officer, each day that the
sidewalks and lawns are permitted to be in violation of this chapter shall
count as a separate violation and subject to a separate fine and costs.
§ 92-7 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 92-8
92:61
Chapter 95
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Municipal Authorities — See Ch. 8.
Joint Zoning and Codes Enforcement
Officer — See Ch. 35, Art. I.
Planning Commission — See Ch. 50.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 111.
Energy conservation — See Ch. 115.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 127.
Mechanical standards — See Ch. 155.
Mobile homes — See Ch. 159.
Plumbing — See Ch. 185.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 190.
Sewers — See Ch. 204.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
220.
Water — See Ch. 256.
Zoning — See Ch. 265.
§ 92-8 TARENTUM CODE § 92-8
92:62
ARTICLE I
One- and Two-Family Dwellings
[Adopted 4-7-1980 by Ord. No. 80-15]
§ 95-1. Adoption of standards.32
The Council of the Borough of Tarentum does hereby adopt by reference the
International One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code, 1998, as the One- and
Two-Family Dwelling Code for the Borough of Tarentum, as though the same
were more fully set forth in this article, applicable to all one-family and twofamily
dwellings within the Borough of Tarentum.
§ 95-2. Amendments.
Any reference within the code to a municipality shall be the "Borough of
Tarentum"; any reference to a county shall be the "County of Allegheny";
and any reference to the state shall be the "Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania."
§ 95-3. Permit fees.
Any permit required to be issued shall not be issued until a permit fee as set
forth from time to time by resolution of the Borough Council is paid.
§ 95-4. Violations and penalties.33
Any person violating any section of this article shall, upon summary
conviction before the District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $1,000 and the costs of the proceeding for each violation, said fine
to accrue to the benefit of the Borough of Tarentum. Each day that the
violation exists shall be a separate violation. If any person so fined shall
be in default of payment of such fine and costs, he shall be sentenced to
imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 30 days; provided, further,
that such fine or imprisonment shall be in addition to any fee imposed by
this article.
32.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
33.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 95-1 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 95-4
92:63

ARTICLE II
Building Code
[Adopted 9-8-1980 by Ord. No. 80-28; amended in its entirety at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 95-5. Adoption of Building Code.
§ 95-6. Additions, insertions and changes.
The BOCA National Building Code 1999 is amended and revised as follows:
A. A certain document, one copy of which is on file in the Borough of
Tarentum offices, being marked and designated as the "BOCA National
Building Code, Fourteenth Edition, 1999," as published by the Building
Officials and Code Administrators International, Inc., be and is hereby
adopted as the Building Code of the Borough of Tarentum, County of
Allegheny, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, for the control of buildings
and structures as herein provided, and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said BOCA National
Building Code are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof
as if fully set out in this article, with the additions, insertions, deletions
and changes, if any, prescribed in § 95-6 of this article.
B. Building official. The Code Enforcement Officer shall perform the duties
enumerated and shall have charge of all matters pertaining to the
strength and safety of buildings and building materials.
A. In Section 101.1, the words "Borough of Tarentum" shall be inserted
where the words "[Name of Jurisdiction]" appear.
B. Section 105.7 shall be revised to read as follows:
105.7 Official records. An official record shall be kept of all business
and activities of the Office of the Code Enforcement Officer and all
such records shall be open to the public for inspection (during business
hours), except that no individual, owner, operator, occupant or other
person shall be subject to the unwarranted invasion of privacy and
except that all evidence of information obtained in the course of any
inspection shall be considered privileged information and shall be
kept confidential. Such evidence or information shall not be disclosed
except as may be necessary in the judgment of the Code Enforcement
Officer for the proper and effective administration and enforcement of
the provisions of this article and shall not otherwise be made public
without the consent of the owner, occupant, operator or other person
in charge of the unit, structure or premises inspected.
C. Section 108.1 shall be revised to read as follows:
§ 95-5 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 95-6
92:65
108.1 Action on application. The Code Enforcement Officer shall
examine or cause to be examined all applications for permits and
amendments thereto. If the application or the plans do not conform to
the requirements of all pertinent laws, he shall reject such application
in writing, stating the reason therefor. If he is satisfied that the
proposed work conforms to the requirements of this code and all laws
and ordinances applicable thereto, he shall issue a permit therefor as
soon as practicable. Such action regarding the issuance or rejection of
the permit, however, shall be taken within 90 days in accordance with
Act 170 of 1976.34
D. Section 112.3.1 shall be revised to read as follows:
112.3.1 Fee schedule. A fee for each plan examination, building
permit and inspection shall be paid in accordance with the schedule of
fees adopted from time to time by resolution of the Borough Council.
E. Section 116.4 shall be revised to read as follows:
116.4 Violations and penalties. Any person who shall violate any
provision of this code or who shall fail to comply with any of the
requirements thereof or who shall erect, construct, alter or repair a
building or structure in violation of an approved plan or directive of the
Office of Code Enforcement or of a permit or certificate issued under
the provisions of this code shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed
$1,000, plus costs, and in default of payment of such fine and costs to
imprisonment not to exceed 30 days.
F. Section 117.2 shall be revised to read as follows:
117.2 Unlawful continuance. Any person who shall continue any
work in or about the structure after having been served with a stopwork
order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to
remove a violation or unsafe conditions, shall be liable to the penalties
set forth in Section 116.4 of this code.
G. The first paragraph of Section 3408.2, Applicability, shall be revised to
read as follows:
Structures existing prior to the effective date of this article, in which
there is work involving additions, alterations or changes of occupancy,
shall be made to conform to the requirements of this section or the
provisions of Sections 3403.0 through 3407.0.
34.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4104.
§ 95-6 TARENTUM CODE § 95-6
92:66
ARTICLE III
Floodplain Management
[Adopted 8-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-7; amended 9-15-2014 by Ord.
No. 14-03]
§ 95-7. Statutory authorization.
The Legislature of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania has, by the passage
of the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act of 1978,35 delegated the
responsibility to local governmental units to adopt floodplain management
regulations to promote public health, safety, and the general welfare of its
citizenry. Therefore, the Council of the Borough of Tarentum does hereby
order as follows.
§ 95-8. Intent.
The intent of this chapter is to:
§ 95-9. Applicability.
§ 95-10. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter supersedes any other conflicting provisions which may be
in effect in identified floodplain areas. However, any other ordinance
provisions shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that those
provisions are more restrictive. If there is any conflict between any of the
provisions of this chapter, the more restrictive shall apply.
A. Promote the general health, welfare, and safety of the community.
B. Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in order
to prevent or minimize flood damage in the future.
C. Minimize danger to public health by protecting water supply and
natural drainage.
D. Reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its governmental
units, and its residents, by preventing excessive development in areas
subject to flooding.
E. Comply with federal and state floodplain management requirements.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, business or corporation
to undertake, or cause to be undertaken, any construction or
development anywhere within the Borough of Tarentum unless a permit
has been obtained from the Floodplain Administrator.
B. A permit shall not be required for minor repairs to existing buildings or
structures.
35.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 95-7 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 95-11
92:67
§ 95-11. Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this
chapter shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such a decision
shall not affect the remaining portions of the chapter, which shall remain in
full force and effect, and for this purpose the provisions of this chapter are
hereby declared to be severable.
§ 95-12. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
§ 95-13. Designation of the Floodplain Administrator.
§ 95-14. Permits required.
A permit shall be required before any construction or development is
undertaken within any area of the Borough of Tarentum.
§ 95-15. Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator.
A. The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this chapter
is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on
accepted engineering methods of study. Larger floods may occur or
flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such as
ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This chapter does not
imply that areas outside any identified floodplain areas or that land uses
permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood
damages.
B. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Borough of
Tarentum or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that
result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision
lawfully made thereunder.
A. The Zoning Officer is hereby appointed to administer and enforce this
chapter and is referred to herein as the Floodplain Administrator. The
Floodplain Administrator may: (A) fulfill the duties and responsibilities
set forth in these regulations, (B) delegate duties and responsibilities
set forth in these regulations to qualified technical personnel, plan
examiners, inspectors, and other employees, or (C) enter into a written
agreement or written contract with another agency or private sector
entity to administer specific provisions of these regulations.
Administration of any part of these regulations by another entity shall
not relieve the community of its responsibilities pursuant to the
participation requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program as
set forth in the Code of Federal Regulations at 44 C.F.R. Section 59.22.
B. In the absence of a designated Floodplain Administrator, the Floodplain
Administrator duties are to be fulfilled by the President of Council.
A. The Floodplain Administrator shall issue a permit only after it has been
determined that the proposed work to be undertaken will be in
§ 95-11 TARENTUM CODE § 95-15
92:68
conformance with the requirements of this and all other applicable
codes and ordinances.
B. Prior to the issuance of any permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall
review the application for the permit to determine if all other necessary
government permits required by state and federal laws have been
obtained, such as those required by the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities
Act36 (Act 1966-537, as amended); the Pennsylvania Dam Safety and
Encroachments Act37 (Act 1978-325, as amended); the Pennsylvania
Clean Streams Act38 (Act 1937-394, as amended); and the U.S. Clean
Water Act, Section 404, 33, U.S.C. 1344. No permit shall be issued until
this determination has been made.
C. During the construction period, the Floodplain Administrator or other
authorized official shall inspect the premises to determine that the work
is progressing in compliance with the information provided on the
permit application and with all applicable municipal laws and
ordinances. He/she shall make as many inspections during and upon
completion of the work as are necessary.
D. In the discharge of his/her duties, the Floodplain Administrator shall
have the authority to enter any building, structure, premises or
development in the identified floodplain area, upon presentation of
proper credentials, at any reasonable hour to enforce the provisions of
this chapter.
E. In the event the Floodplain Administrator discovers that the work does
not comply with the permit application or any applicable laws and
ordinances, or that there has been a false statement or
misrepresentation by any applicant, the Floodplain Administrator shall
revoke the permit and report such fact to the Council for whatever
action it considers necessary.
F. The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain in perpetuity all records
associated with the requirements of this chapter including, but not
limited to, finished construction elevation data, permitting, inspection
and enforcement.
G. The Floodplain Administrator is the official responsible for submitting a
biennial report to FEMA concerning community participation in the
National Flood Insurance Program.
H. The responsibility, authority and means to implement the commitments
of the Floodplain Administrator can be delegated from the person
identified. However, the ultimate responsibility lies with the person
identified in the floodplain ordinance as the floodplain administrator/
manager.
36.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
37.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 693.1 et seq.
38.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 95-15 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 95-15
92:69
§ 95-16. Application procedures and requirements.
I. The Floodplain Administrator shall consider the requirements of the 34
PA Code and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC or latest revisions thereof.
A. Application for such a permit shall be made, in writing, to the
Floodplain Administrator on forms supplied by the Borough of
Tarentum. Such application shall contain the following:
(1) Name and address of applicant.
(2) Name and address of owner of land on which proposed
construction is to occur.
(3) Name and address of contractor.
(4) Site location including address.
(5) Listing of other permits required.
(6) Brief description of proposed work and estimated cost, including a
breakout of flood-related cost and the market value of the building
before the flood damage occurred where appropriate.
(7) A plan of the site showing the exact size and location of the
proposed construction as well as any existing buildings or
structures.
B. If any proposed construction or development is located entirely or
partially within any identified floodplain area, applicants for permits
shall provide all the necessary information in sufficient detail and
clarity to enable the Floodplain Administrator to determine that:
(1) All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage and conform with the requirements of this and all other
applicable codes and ordinances;
(2) All utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage;
(3) Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards;
(4) Structures will be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement;
(5) Building materials are flood-resistant;
(6) Appropriate practices that minimize flood damage have been used;
and
§ 95-15 TARENTUM CODE § 95-16
92:70
(7) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities have been designed and
located to prevent water entry or accumulation.
C. Applicants shall file the following minimum information plus any other
pertinent information as may be required by the Floodplain
Administrator to make the above determination:
(1) A completed permit application form.
(2) A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one
inch being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
(a) North arrow, scale, and date;
(b) Topographic contour lines, if available;
(c) The location of all existing and proposed buildings, structures,
and other improvements, including the location of any existing
or proposed subdivision and development;
(d) The location of all existing streets, drives, and other access
ways; and
(e) The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
identified floodplain areas, and, if available, information
pertaining to the floodway, and the flow of water including
direction and velocities.
(3) Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other
improvements, drawn at suitable scale showing the following:
(a) The proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed building
based upon North American Vertical Datum of 1988;
(b) The elevation of the base flood;
(c) Supplemental information as may be necessary under 34 PA
Code, the 2009 IBC or the 2009 IRC.
(4) The following data and documentation:
(a) Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures and corresponding elevations.
(b) If available, information concerning flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors associated
with a base flood; and floodway area (See § 95-24A) when
combined with all other existing and anticipated development,
will not increase the base flood elevation at any point.
(c) A document, certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect, which states that the proposed construction or
development has been adequately designed to withstand the
§ 95-16 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 95-16
92:71
§ 95-17. Review of application by others.
A copy of all plans and applications for any proposed construction or
development in any identified floodplain area to be considered for approval
may be submitted by the Floodplain Administrator to any other appropriate
agencies and/or individuals (e.g. planning commission, municipal engineer,
etc.) for review and comment.
§ 95-18. Changes.
After the issuance of a permit by the Floodplain Administrator, no changes
of any kind shall be made to the application, permit or any of the plans,
specifications or other documents submitted with the application without
the written consent or approval of the Floodplain Administrator. Requests
for any such change shall be in writing, and shall be submitted by the
applicant to Floodplain Administrator for consideration.
pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces associated with
the base flood.
[1] Such statement shall include a description of the type and
extent of flood proofing measures which have been
incorporated into the design of the structure and/or the
development.
(d) Detailed information needed to determine compliance with
§ 95-30F, Storage, and § 95-31, Development which may
endanger human life, including:
[1] The amount, location and purpose of any materials or
substances referred to in §§ 95-30F and 95-31 which are
intended to be used, produced, stored or otherwise
maintained on site.
[2] A description of the safeguards incorporated into the
design of the proposed structure to prevent leaks or spills
of the dangerous materials or substances listed in § 95-31
during a base flood.
(e) The appropriate component of the Department of
Environmental Protection's "Planning Module for Land
Development."
(f) Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting
the requirements of the Department of Environmental
Protection, to implement and maintain erosion and
sedimentation control.
D. Applications for permits shall be accompanied by a fee, payable to the
municipality based upon the estimated cost of the proposed
construction as determined by the Floodplain Administrator.
§ 95-16 TARENTUM CODE § 95-19
92:72
§ 95-19. Placards.
In addition to the permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall issue a placard
which shall be displayed on the premises during the time construction is in
progress. This placard shall show the number of the permit, the date of its
issuance, and be signed by the Floodplain Administrator.
§ 95-20. Start of construction.
§ 95-21. Enforcement.
A. Work on the proposed construction or development shall begin within
180 days after the date of issuance of the development permit. Work
shall also be completed within 12 months after the date of issuance of
the permit or the permit shall expire unless a time extension is granted,
in writing, by the Floodplain Administrator. The issuance of
development permit does not refer to the zoning approval.
B. The actual start of construction means either the first placement of
permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of
slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or
any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a
manufacture home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor
does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it
include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the
erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied
as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial
improvement, the actual start of construction means the first, alteration
of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether
or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
C. Time extensions shall be granted only if a written request is submitted
by the applicant, who sets forth sufficient and reasonable cause for the
Floodplain Administrator to approve such a request and the original
permit is compliant with the ordinance and FIRM/FIS in effect at the
time the extension is granted.
A. Notices.
(1) Whenever the Floodplain Administrator or other authorized
municipal representative determines that there are reasonable
grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any provisions
of this chapter, or of any regulations adopted pursuant thereto, the
Floodplain Administrator shall give notice of such alleged violation
as hereinafter provided. Such notice shall:
(a) Be in writing;
(b) Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance;
§ 95-19 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 95-21
92:73
§ 95-22. Appeals.
(c) Allow a reasonable time not to exceed a period of 30 days for
the performance of any act it requires;
(d) Be served upon the property owner or his agent as the case
may require; provided, however, that such notice or order shall
be deemed to have been properly served upon such owner or
agent when a copy thereof has been served with such notice by
any other method authorized or required by the laws of this
state;
(e) Contain an outline of remedial actions which, if taken, will
effect compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
B. Penalties.
(1) Any person who fails to comply with any or all of the requirements
or provisions of this chapter or who fails or refuses to comply with
any notice, order of direction of the Floodplain Administrator or
any other authorized employee of the municipality shall be guilty of
a summary offense and upon conviction shall pay a fine to Borough
of Tarentum, of not less than $25 nor more than $600 plus costs of
prosecution. In addition to the above penalties all other actions are
hereby reserved including an action in equity for the proper
enforcement of this chapter. The imposition of a fine or penalty for
any violation of, or noncompliance with this chapter shall not
excuse the violation or noncompliance or permit it to continue. All
such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations
and noncompliance within a reasonable time. Any development
initiated or any structure or building constructed, reconstructed,
enlarged, altered, or relocated, in noncompliance with this chapter
may be declared by the Council to be a public nuisance and
abatable as such.
A. Any person aggrieved by any action or decision of the Floodplain
Administrator concerning the administration of the provisions of this
chapter, may appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board. Such appeal must be
filed, in writing, within 30 days after the decision, determination or
action of the Floodplain Administrator.
B. Upon receipt of such appeal the Zoning Hearing Board shall consider
the appeal in accordance with the Municipal Planning Code and any
other local ordinance.
C. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Zoning Hearing Board may
seek relief therefrom by appeal to court, as provided by the laws of this
State including the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act.39
39.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 95-21 TARENTUM CODE § 95-23
92:74
§ 95-23. Identification.
§ 95-24. Description and special requirements of identified
floodplain areas.
A. The identified floodplain area shall be:
(1) Any areas of Borough of Tarentum, classified as Special Flood
Hazard Areas (SFHAs) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and the
accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) dated
September 26, 2014 and issued by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) or the most recent revision thereof,
including all digital data developed as part of the Flood Insurance
Study, and
(2) Any community identified flood hazard areas.
B. The above referenced FIS and FIRMs, and any subsequent revisions
and amendments are hereby adopted by Borough of Tarentum and
declared to be a part of this chapter.
A. The identified floodplain area shall consist of the following specific
areas:
(1) The floodway area shall be those areas identified in the FIS and the
FIRM as floodway and which represent the channel of a
watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in
order to discharge the base flood without increasing the water
surface elevation by more than one foot at any point. This term
shall also include floodway areas which have been identified in
other available studies or sources of information for those special
flood hazard areas where no floodway has been identified in the FIS
and FIRM.
(a) Within any floodway area, no encroachments, including fill,
new construction, substantial improvements, or other
development shall be permitted unless it has been
demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
performed in accordance with standard engineering practice
that the proposed encroachment would not result in any
increase in flood levels within the community during the
occurrence of the base flood discharge.
(b) Within any floodway area, no new construction or development
shall be allowed, unless the appropriate permit is obtained
from the Department of Environmental Protection Regional
Office.
(2) The AE Area/District shall be those areas identified as an AE Zone
on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA for which base
flood elevations have been provided.
§ 95-23 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 95-24
92:75
§ 95-25. Changes in identification of area.
The identified floodplain area may be revised or modified by the Council
where studies or information provided by a qualified agency or person
documents the need for such revision. However, prior to any such change
to the special flood hazard area, approval must be obtained from FEMA.
Additionally, as soon as practicable, but not later than six months after the
date such information becomes available, a community shall notify FEMA
of the changes to the special flood hazard area by submitting technical
or scientific data. See § 95-28B for situations where FEMA notification is
required.
§ 95-26. Boundary disputes.
Should a dispute concerning any identified floodplain boundary arise, an
initial determination shall be made by the Borough of Tarentum and any
party aggrieved by this decision or determination may appeal to the
Council. The burden of proof shall be on the appellant.
(a) The AE Area adjacent to the floodway shall be those areas
identified as an AE Zone on the FIRM included in the FIS
prepared by FEMA for which base flood elevations have been
provided and a floodway has been delineated.
(3) The A Area/District shall be those areas identified as an A Zone on
the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA and for which no
base flood elevations have been provided. For these areas,
elevation and floodway information from other federal, state, or
other acceptable sources shall be used when available. Where
other acceptable information is not available, the base flood
elevation shall be determined by using the elevation of a point on
the boundary of the identified floodplain area which is nearest the
construction site.
B. In lieu of the above, the municipality may require the applicant to
determine the elevation with hydrologic and hydraulic engineering
techniques. Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only
by professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications, who
shall certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently
accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc.,
shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical
review by the municipality.
C. Community identified flood hazard areas shall be those areas where
Borough of Tarentum has identified local flood hazard or ponding areas,
as delineated and adopted on a "local flood hazard map" using best
available topographic data and locally derived information such as flood
of record, historic high water marks, soils or approximate study
methodologies.
§ 95-24 TARENTUM CODE § 95-27
92:76
§ 95-27. Jurisdictional boundary changes.
Prior to development occurring in areas where annexation or other
corporate boundary changes are proposed or have occurred, the community
shall review flood hazard data affecting the lands subject to boundary
changes. The community shall adopt and enforce floodplain regulations in
areas subject to annexation or corporate boundary changes which meet or
exceed those in 44 CFR 60.3.
§ 95-28. General.
A. Alteration or relocation of watercourse.
(1) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse until all adjacent municipalities which
may be affected by such action have been notified by the
municipality, and until all required permits or approvals have first
been obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection
Regional Office.
(2) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse unless it can be shown that the activity
will not reduce or impede the flood carrying capacity of the
watercourse in any way.
(3) In addition, FEMA and the Pennsylvania Department of Community
and Economic Development, shall be notified prior to any alteration
or relocation of any watercourse.
B. When a community proposes to permit the following encroachments:
(1) any development that causes a rise in the base flood elevations
within the floodway; or (2) any development occurring in Zones A1-30
and Zone AE without a designated floodway, which will cause a rise of
more than one foot in the base flood elevation; or (3) alteration or
relocation of a stream (including but not limited to installing culverts
and bridges), the applicant shall (as per 44 CFR Part 65.12):
(1) Apply to FEMA for conditional approval of such action prior to
permitting the encroachments to occur.
(2) Upon receipt of the Administrator's conditional approval of map
change and prior to approving the proposed encroachments, a
community shall provide evidence to FEMA of the adoption of
floodplain management ordinances incorporating the increased
base flood elevations and/or revised floodway reflecting the postproject
condition.
(3) Upon completion of the proposed encroachments, a community
shall provide as-built certifications. FEMA will initiate a final map
revision upon receipt of such certifications in accordance with 44
CFR Part 67.
§ 95-27 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 95-28
92:77
§ 95-29. Elevation and floodproofing requirements.
C. Any new construction, development, uses or activities allowed within
any identified floodplain area shall be undertaken in strict compliance
with the provisions contained in this chapter and any other applicable
codes, ordinances and regulations.
A. Residential structures.
(1) In AE, A1-30, and AH Zones, any new construction or substantial
improvement shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated up to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation.
(2) In A Zones, where there are no base flood elevations specified on
the FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall
have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated up to, or above,
the regulatory flood elevation determined in accordance with
§ 95-24A(3).
(3) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in the
2009 International Residential Code (IRC) or the most recent
revisions thereof and ASCE 24 and 34 PA Code (Chapters 401-405
as amended) shall be utilized, where they are more restrictive.
B. Nonresidential structures.
(1) In AE, A1-30 and AH Zones, any new construction or substantial
improvement of a non-residential structure shall have the lowest
floor (including basement) elevated up to, or above, the regulatory
flood elevation, or be designed and constructed so that the space
enclosed below the regulatory flood elevation:
(a) Is floodproofed so that the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water; and
(b) Has structural components with the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
(2) In A Zones, where no base flood elevations are specified on the
FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall have
the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or completely
floodproofed up to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation
determined in accordance with § 95-24A(3).
(3) Any non-residential structure, or part thereof, made watertight
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be floodproofed in
accordance with the W1 or W2 space classification standards
contained in the publication entitled "Flood-Proofing Regulations"
published by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (June 1972, as
amended March 1992) or with some other equivalent standard. All
plans and specifications for such floodproofing shall be
§ 95-28 TARENTUM CODE § 95-29
92:78
accompanied by a statement certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect which states that the proposed design and
methods of construction are in conformance with the above
referenced standards.
(4) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in the
2009 International Residential Code (IRC) or the most recent
revisions thereof and ASCE 24 and 34 PA Code (Chapters 401-405
as amended) shall be utilized, where they are more restrictive.
C. Space below the lowest floor.
(1) Basements are prohibited.
(2) Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor (excluding basements)
which will be used solely for the parking of a vehicle, building
access, or incidental storage in an area other than a basement,
shall be designed and constructed to allow for the automatic entry
and exit of floodwaters for the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic
forces on exterior walls. The term "fully enclosed space" also
includes crawl spaces.
(3) Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect, or meet or exceed
the following minimum criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
D. Historic structures. Historic structures undergoing repair or
rehabilitation that would constitute a substantial improvement as
defined in this chapter, must comply with all ordinance requirements
that do not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic
structure. Documentation that a specific ordinance requirement will
cause removal of the structure from the National Register of Historic
Places or the State Inventory of Historic places must be obtained from
the Secretary of the Interior or the State Historic Preservation Officer.
Any exemption from ordinance requirements will be the minimum
necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure.
E. Accessory structures. Structures accessory to a principal building need
not be elevated or floodproofed to remain dry, but shall comply, at a
minimum, with the following requirements:
§ 95-29 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 95-29
92:79
§ 95-30. Design and construction standards.
The following minimum standards shall apply for all construction and
development proposed within any identified floodplain area:
(1) The structure shall not be designed or used for human habitation,
but shall be limited to the parking of vehicles, or to the storage of
tools, material, and equipment related to the principal use or
activity.
(2) Floor area shall not exceed 200 square feet.
(3) The structure will have a low damage potential.
(4) The structure will be located on the site so as to cause the least
obstruction to the flow of floodwaters.
(5) Power lines, wiring, and outlets will be elevated to the regulatory
flood elevation.
(6) Permanently affixed utility equipment and appliances such as
furnaces, heaters, washers, dryers, etc. are prohibited.
(7) Sanitary facilities are prohibited.
(8) The structure shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, and lateral movement and shall be designed to
automatically provide for the entry and exit of floodwater for the
purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces on the walls. Designs for
meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect, or meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc. or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
A. Fill.
(1) If fill is used, it shall:
(a) Extend laterally at least 15 feet beyond the building line from
all points;
(b) Consist of soil or small rock materials only Sanitary landfills
shall not be permitted;
§ 95-29 TARENTUM CODE § 95-30
92:80
(c) Be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and
resistance to erosion, scouring, or settling;
(d) Be no steeper than one vertical foot to two horizontal feet
unless substantiated data justifying steeper slopes are
submitted to, and approved by the Floodplain Administrator;
and
(e) Be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect
adjacent properties.
B. Drainage facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to
convey the flow of stormwater runoff in a safe and efficient manner. The
system shall ensure proper drainage along streets, and provide positive
drainage away from buildings. The system shall also be designed to
prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent properties.
C. Water and sanitary sewer facilities and systems.
(1) All new or replacement water supply and sanitary sewer facilities
and systems shall be located, designed and constructed to minimize
or eliminate flood damages and the infiltration of floodwaters.
(2) Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to prevent
the discharge of untreated sewage into floodwaters.
(3) No part of any on-site waste disposal system shall be located within
any identified floodplain area except in strict compliance with all
state and local regulations for such systems. If any such system is
permitted, it shall be located so as to avoid impairment to it, or
contamination from it, during a flood.
(4) The design and construction provisions of the UCC and FEMA No.
348, "Protecting Building Utilities From Flood Damages" and "The
International Private Sewage Disposal Code" shall be utilized.
D. Other utilities. All other utilities such as gas lines, electrical and
telephone systems shall be located, elevated (where possible) and
constructed to minimize the chance of impairment during a flood.
E. Streets. The finished elevation of all new streets shall be no more than
one foot below the regulatory flood elevation.
F. Storage. All materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or in
times of flooding, could be injurious to human, animal, or plant life, and
not listed in § 95-31, Development which may endanger human life,
shall be stored at or above the regulatory flood elevation or
floodproofed to the maximum extent possible.
G. Placement of buildings and structures. All buildings and structures
shall be designed, located, and constructed so as to offer the minimum
obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to have a
minimum effect upon the flow and height of floodwater.
§ 95-30 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 95-30
92:81
H. Anchoring.
(1) All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance
with accepted engineering practices to prevent flotation, collapse,
or lateral movement.
(2) All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks, and other similar objects or
components located below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
securely anchored or affixed to prevent flotation.
I. Floors, walls and ceilings.
(1) Wood flooring used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be installed to accommodate a lateral expansion of the flooring,
perpendicular to the flooring grain without causing structural
damage to the building.
(2) Plywood used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of
a "marine" or "water-resistant" variety.
(3) Walls and ceilings at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be designed and constructed of materials that are "water-resistant"
and will withstand inundation.
(4) Windows, doors, and other components at or below the regulatory
flood elevation shall be made of metal or other "water-resistant"
material.
J. Paints and adhesives.
(1) Paints and other finishes used at or below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be of "marine" or "water-resistant" quality.
(2) Adhesives used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
of a "marine" or "water-resistant" variety.
(3) All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) used at or
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be finished with a
"marine" or "water-resistant" paint or other finishing material.
K. Electrical components.
(1) Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three feet above the
base flood elevation.
(2) Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be
dropped from above.
L. Equipment. Water heaters, furnaces, air conditioning and ventilating
units, and other electrical, mechanical or utility equipment or
apparatus shall not be located below the regulatory flood elevation.
M. Fuel supply systems. All gas and oil supply systems shall be designed to
prevent the infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharges
§ 95-30 TARENTUM CODE § 95-30
92:82
§ 95-31. Development which may endanger human life.
Within any identified floodplain area, any structure of the kind described
in Subsection A below, shall be prohibited. If a variance is obtained in
accordance with the criteria in §§ 95-38 through 39, then the following
provisions apply:
from the system into floodwaters. Additional provisions shall be made
for the drainage of these systems in the event that floodwater
infiltration occurs.
N. Uniform Construction Code coordination. The standards and
specifications contained 34 PA Code (Chapters 401-405), as amended
and not limited to the following provisions shall apply to the above and
other sections and subsections of this chapter, to the extent that they
are more restrictive and supplement the requirements of this chapter.
(1) International Building Code (IBC) 2009 or the latest edition
thereof: Secs. 801, 1202, 1403, 1603, 1605, 1612, 3402, and
Appendix G.
(2) International Residential Building Code (IRC) 2009 or the latest
edition thereof: Secs. R104, R105, R109, R322, Appendix E, and
Appendix J.
A. In accordance with the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act,40
and the regulations adopted by the Department of Community and
Economic Development as required by the Act, any new or substantially
improved structure which: (1) will be used for the production or storage
of any of the following dangerous materials or substances; or (2) will be
used for any activity requiring the maintenance of a supply of more than
550 gallons, or other comparable volume, of any of the following
dangerous materials or substances on the premises; or (3) will involve
the production, storage, or use of any amount of radioactive
substances; shall be subject to the provisions of this section, in addition
to all other applicable provisions. The following list of materials and
substances are considered dangerous to human life:
(1) Acetone.
(2) Ammonia.
(3) Benzene.
(4) Calcium carbide.
(5) Carbon disulfide.
(6) Celluloid.
(7) Chlorine.
40.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 95-30 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 95-31
92:83
(8) Hydrochloric acid.
(9) Hydrocyanic acid.
(10) Magnesium.
(11) Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen.
(12) Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.).
(13) Phosphorus.
(14) Potassium.
(15) Sodium.
(16) Sulphur and sulphur products.
(17) Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides, and rodenticides).
(18)Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not
otherwise regulated.
B. Within any identified floodplain area, any new or substantially improved
structure of the kind described in Subsection A above, shall be
prohibited within the area measured 50 feet landward from the top-ofbank
of any watercourse.
C. Within any floodway area, any structure of the kind described in
Subsection A above, shall be prohibited. Where permitted within any
identified floodplain area, any new or substantially improved residential
structure of the kind described in Subsection A above, shall be elevated
to remain completely dry up to at least 1 1/2 feet above base flood
elevation and built in accordance with §§ 95-28 through 95-30.
D. Where permitted within any identified floodplain area, any new or
substantially improved nonresidential structure of the kind described in
Subsection A above, shall be built in accordance with §§ 95-27 through
30 including:
(1) Elevated, or designed and constructed to remain completely dry up
to at least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation; and
(2) Designed to prevent pollution from the structure or activity during
the course of a base flood.
E. Any such structure, or part thereof, that will be built below the
regulatory flood elevation shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the standards for completely dry floodproofing
contained in the publication "Flood-Proofing Regulations (U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers, June 1972 as amended March 1992), or with some
other equivalent watertight standard.
§ 95-31 TARENTUM CODE § 95-32
92:84
§ 95-32. Special requirements for subdivisions and development.
All subdivision proposals and development proposals containing at least 50
lots or at least five acres, whichever is the lesser, in identified floodplain
areas where base flood elevation data are not available, shall be supported
by hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses that determine base flood
elevations and floodway information. The analyses shall be prepared by
a licensed professional engineer in a format required by FEMA for a
conditional letter of map revision and letter of map revision. Submittal
requirements and processing fees shall be the responsibility of the
applicant.
§ 95-33. Special requirements for manufactured homes.
Within any identified floodplain area, manufactured homes shall be
prohibited. If a variance is obtained in accordance with the criteria in
§§ 95-38 and 95-39, then the following provisions apply:
§ 95-34. Special requirements for recreational vehicles.
Recreational vehicles in Zones A, A1-30, AH and AE must either:
A. Within any identified floodplain area, manufactured homes shall be
prohibited within the area measured 50 feet landward from the top-ofbank
of any watercourse.
B. Where permitted within any identified floodplain area, all manufactured
homes, and any improvements thereto, shall be:
(1) Placed on a permanent foundation;
(2) Elevated so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at
least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation;
(3) Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement; and
(4) Have all ductwork and utilities including HVAC/heat pump elevated
to the regulatory flood elevation.
C. Installation of manufactured homes shall be done in accordance with
the manufacturers' installation instructions as provided by the
manufacturer. Where the applicant cannot provide the above
information, the requirements of Appendix E of the 2009 "International
Residential Building Code" or the "U.S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development's Permanent Foundations for Manufactured
Housing," 1984 Edition, draft or latest revision thereto and 34 PA Code
Chapter 401-405 shall apply.
D. Consideration shall be given to the installation requirements of the
2009 IBC, and the 2009 IRC or the most recent revisions thereto and 34
PA Code, as amended where appropriate and/or applicable to units
where the manufacturers' standards for anchoring cannot be provided
or were not established for the proposed unit(s) installation.
§ 95-32 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 95-34
92:85
§ 95-35. General.
In accordance with the administrative regulations promulgated by the
Department of Community and Economic Development to implement the
Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act,41 the following activities shall
be prohibited within any identified floodplain area:
§ 95-36. Existing structures.
The provisions of this chapter do not require any changes or improvements
to be made to lawfully existing structures. However, when an improvement
is made to any existing structure, the provisions of § 95-37 shall apply.
§ 95-37. Improvements.
The following provisions shall apply whenever any improvement is made to
an existing structure located within any identified floodplain area:
A. Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; and
B. Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; and
C. Be removed from the floodplain when a flood warning is issued.
A. The commencement of any of the following activities; or the
construction, enlargement, or expansion of any structure used, or
intended to be used, for any of the following activities:
(1) Hospitals.
(2) Nursing homes.
(3) Jails or prisons.
B. The commencement of, or any construction of, a new manufactured
home park or manufactured home subdivision, or substantial
improvement to an existing manufactured home park or manufactured
home subdivision.
A. No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed
within any floodway area/district that would cause any increase in BFE.
B. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure to an extent or amount of 50% or more of
its market value, shall constitute a substantial improvement and shall
be undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this
chapter.
C. The above activity shall also address the requirements of the 34 PA
Code, as amended and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC.
41.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 95-34 TARENTUM CODE § 95-37
92:86
§ 95-38. General.
If compliance with any of the requirements of this chapter would result in
an exceptional hardship to a prospective builder, developer or landowner,
the Borough of Tarentum may, upon request, grant relief from the strict
application of the requirements.
§ 95-39. Variance procedures and conditions.
Requests for variances shall be considered by the Borough of Tarentum in
accordance with the procedures contained in § 95-22 and the following:
D. Within any floodway area/district § 95-24A(1), no new construction or
development shall be allowed, unless the appropriate permit is
obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection Regional
Office.
E. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of less than 50% of
its market value, shall be elevated and/or floodproofed to the greatest
extent possible.
A. No variance shall be granted for any construction, development, use, or
activity within any floodway area/district that would cause any increase
in the BFE.
B. Except for a possible modification of the regulatory flood elevation
requirement involved, no variance shall be granted for any of the other
requirements pertaining specifically to Development which may
endanger human life (§ 95-31).
C. No variance shall be granted for Prohibited Activities (§ 95-35).
D. If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification necessary
to provide relief.
E. In granting any variance, the Borough of Tarentum shall attach
whatever reasonable conditions and safeguards it considers necessary
in order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare, and to achieve
the objectives of this chapter.
F. Whenever a variance is granted, the Borough of Tarentum shall notify
the applicant in writing that:
(1) The granting of the variance may result in increased premium rates
for flood insurance.
(2) Such variances may increase the risks to life and property.
G. In reviewing any request for a variance, the Borough of Tarentum shall
consider, at a minimum, the following:
(1) That there is good and sufficient cause.
§ 95-37 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 95-39
92:87
§ 95-40. General.
Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give this chapter its' most reasonable
application.
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE — A use or structure on the same
lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the
principal use or structure.
BASE FLOOD — A flood which has a 1% chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year (also called the "100-year flood" or 1% annual
chance flood).
BASE FLOOD DISCHARGE — The volume of water resulting from a base
flood as it passes a given location within a given time, usually expressed in
cubic feet per second (cfs).
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The elevation shown on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for Zones AE, AH, A1-30 that indicates the
water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a 1% or greater
chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor below ground level
on all sides.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a permanent structure
having walls and a roof. Included shall be all manufactured homes and
trailers to be used for human habitation.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to the construction, reconstruction,
renovation, repair, expansion, or alteration of buildings or other structures;
(2) That failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant.
(3) That the granting of the variance will:
(a) Neither result in an unacceptable or prohibited increase in
flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or
extraordinary public expense;
(b) Nor create nuisances, cause fraud on, or victimize the public,
or conflict with any other applicable state or local ordinances
and regulations.
H. A complete record of all variance requests and related actions shall be
maintained by the Borough of Tarentum. In addition, a report of all
variances granted during the year shall be included in the annual report
to the FEMA.
Notwithstanding any of the above, however, all structures shall be
designed and constructed so as to have the capability of resisting the
1% annual chance flood.
§ 95-39 TARENTUM CODE § 95-40
92:88
the placement of manufactured homes; streets, and other paving; utilities;
filling, grading and excavation; mining; dredging; drilling operations;
storage of equipment or materials; and the subdivision of land.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to
be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR
SUBDIVISION — The preparation of additional sites by the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FLOOD — A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which the
Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas
of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report provided by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency that includes flood profiles, the
Flood Insurance Rate Map, the flood boundary and floodway map, and the
water surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOODPLAIN AREA — A relatively flat or low land area which is subject to
partial or complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream, river or
watercourse; and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation
of surface waters from any source.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one
foot.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURES — Any structure that is:
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
A.
§ 95-40 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 95-40
92:89
IDENTIFIED FLOODPLAIN AREA — This term is an umbrella term that
includes all of the areas within which the community has selected to enforce
floodplain regulations. It will always include the area identified as the
special flood hazard area on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps and Flood
Insurance Study, but may include additional areas identified by the
community. See §§ 95-22 and 95-23 for the specifics on what areas the
community has included in the identified floodplain area.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished, flood resistant partially enclosed area,
used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, and incidental storage,
in an area other than a basement area is not considered the lowest floor of
a building, provided that such space is not designed and built so that the
structure is in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements
of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis, and is designed for use
with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required
utilities. The term includes park trailers, travel trailers, recreational and
other similar vehicles which are placed on a site for more than 180
consecutive days.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.
MINOR REPAIR — The replacement of existing work with equivalent
materials for the purpose of its routine maintenance and upkeep, but not
including the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the
removal or cutting of any structural beam or bearing support, or the
removal or change of any required means of egress, or rearrangement of
parts of a structure affecting the exitway requirements; nor shall minor
repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of any
standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, oil, waste, vent,
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states which
have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
D.
§ 95-40 TARENTUM CODE § 95-40
92:90
or similar piping, electric wiring, mechanical or other work affecting public
health or general safety.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after September 26, 2014 and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures. Any construction started after August 14,
1995 and before September 26, 2014, is subject to the ordinance in effect
at the time the permit was issued, provided the start of construction was
within 180 days of permit issuance.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads)
is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management
regulations adopted by a community.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation, firm, trust, estate, municipality, governmental unit, public
utility or any other legal entity whatsoever, which is recognized by law as
the subject of rights and duties.
POST-FIRM STRUCTURE — A structure for which construction or
substantial improvement occurred after December 31, 1974 or on or after
the community's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated January 16,
1981, whichever is later, and, as such, would be required to be compliant
with the regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program.
PRE-FIRM STRUCTURE — A structure for which construction or substantial
improvement occurred on or before December 31, 1974 or before the
community's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated January 16,
1981, whichever is later, and, as such, would not be required to be
compliant with the regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The base flood elevation (BFE) or
estimated flood height as determined using simplified methods plus a
freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA) — An area in the floodplain
subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is shown
on the FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, or AH.
A. Built on a single chassis;
Not more than 400 square feet, measured at the largest horizontal
projections;
B.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck;
C.
Not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living
quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
D.
§ 95-40 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 95-40
92:91
START OF CONSTRUCTION — Includes substantial improvement and other
proposed new development and means the date the permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180
days after the date of the permit and shall be completed within 12 months
after the date of issuance of the permit unless a time extension is granted,
in writing, by the Floodplain Administrator. The actual start means either
the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such
as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement
of a manufacture home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does
it include the installation of streets and walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection
of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property
of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the
actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured
home.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of
land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions
of land including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs,
or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development: Provided,
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage from any cause sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% or more of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, of which the cost equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the "start
of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which
have incurred "substantial damage" regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include any project for
improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local
health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by
the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary
to assure safe living conditions.
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE (UCC) — The statewide building code
adopted by The Pennsylvania General Assembly in 1999 applicable to new
§ 95-40 TARENTUM CODE § 95-40
92:92
construction in all municipalities whether administered by the municipality,
a third party or the Department of Labor and Industry. Applicable to
residential and commercial buildings, The Code adopted The International
Residential Code (IRC) and the International Building Code (IBC), by
reference, as the construction standard applicable with the state floodplain
construction. For coordination purposes, references to the above are made
specifically to various sections of the IRC and the IBC.
VARIANCE — A grant of relief by a community from the terms of a
floodplain management regulation.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR
§ 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be
in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
§ 95-41. Adoption.
This chapter shall be effective on September 26, 2014 and shall remain
in force until modified, amended or rescinded by Borough of Tarentum,
Allegheny County, Pennsylvania.
§ 95-40 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 95-41
92:93
Chapter 97
CLAIMS AND LIENS, MUNICIPAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Taxation — See Ch. 225.
§ 95-41 TARENTUM CODE § 95-41
97:94
ARTICLE I
Attorney Fees
[Adopted 3-19-2007 by Ord. No. 07-05]
§ 97-1. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Tax, Tax Claim, Tax Lien, Municipal Claim
and Municipal Lien Attorney Fees and servicing Charges, Expenses, and
Fees Ordinance."
§ 97-2. Expenses approved.
§ 97-3. Attorney fees approved.
A. Title search. In any enforcement proceeding, the actual cost of a title
search in an amount not to exceed $250 shall constitute a reasonable
expense for each title search necessary for the initiation of each
proceeding and compliance with Pa.R.C.P 3129. The sum not to exceed
$50 shall constitute a reasonable expense for each bringdown or update
of the title search in connection with entry of judgment, issuance of
execution, listing for sale, or other action.
B. Actual out-of-pocket expenses in connection with any enforcement
action, such as for postage, non-Sheriff's service of process,
investigation of the whereabouts of interested parties and other
necessary expenses as part of each claim recovered.
A. Flat fee matters. The following schedule of attorney fees is hereby
adopted and approved as reasonable attorney fees pursuant to Act 1
and Act 20 for all matters described, which fees shall be awarded to the
municipality, its agents, counsel or assigns in each action initiated
pursuant to the Act for the collection of unpaid claims. The property
owner's obligation to pay the full amount of the flat fee for each phase
of each action shall accrue upon the amount of each flat fee for each
prior phase of the proceeding shall carry over and be due on a
cumulative basis together with the flat fee for each subsequent phase.
(1) Preparation and service of Writ of Scire Facias. The sum of $450
shall constitute reasonable attorney fees for the initiation of each
proceeding and shall include preparation and filing of the Praecipe
for Writ of Scire Facias, Sheriff's direction for service, Notice
pursuant to Pa.R.C.P. § 237.1 and the preparation and filing of the
Praecipe to Settle and Discontinue the proceeding. The above does
not include:
(a) Federal tax liens, judgments and mortgages. Where there are
federal tax liens, federal judgments, federal mortgages or
other record federal interests, the sum of $200 shall constitute
reasonable attorney fees for all matters necessary to properly
notify and serve the United States with all required additional
notice and the presentation of related motions to court.
§ 97-1 CLAIMS AND LIENS, MUNICIPAL § 97-3
97:95
(b) Alternative service of legal pleading. In the event that a special
order of court is necessary to serve original process or any
other pleading, notice, court order or other document, the
following amounts shall constitute reasonable attorney fees as
follows:
[1] Investigation of defendant(s) whereabouts and
preparation of affidavit of diligent search: $100.
[2] Preparation and presentation of motion for alternative
service, and delivery of the order of court, along with
appropriate directions to the Sheriff for service: $200.
(2) Entry of judgment. The sum of $225 shall constitute reasonable
attorney fees in connection with entry of judgment which shall
include preparation and filing of the Praecipe to Enter Judgment,
Notices of Judgment, Affidavit of Nonmilitary Status, and the
Praecipe to Satisfy Judgment.
(3) Writ of Execution; Sheriff's sale of property.
(a) The sum of $700 shall constitute reasonable attorney fees, for
preparation of all documents necessary for each execution
upon any judgment pursuant to the Act. This sum shall include
the preparation and filing of the Praecipe of Writ of Execution,
all Sheriff's documents, preparation and Writ of Execution, and
attendance at one Sheriff's sale.
(b) Postponements. The sum of $100 shall constitute reasonable
attorney fees for each continuance of Sheriff's sale at the
request of the defendant.
(4) Sale pursuant to Section 31 of the Act, 53 P.S. § 7281. The sum of
$700 shall constitute reasonable attorney fees for the sale of
property pursuant to Section 31 of the Act, 53 P.S. § 7281 including
preparation of necessary documents, service, court appearances,
attendance at sale and preparation of proposed schedule of
distribution of the proceeds realized from such sale.
(5) Sale pursuant to Section 31.1 of the Act, 53 P.S. § 7282. The sum of
$500 shall constitute reasonable attorney fees for a sale of property
pursuant to Section 31.1 of the Act, 53 P.S. § 7282, including the
preparation of necessary documents, service, court appearances,
and the preparation of proposed Sheriff's Schedule of Distribution.
(6) Installment payment agreement. The sum of $150 shall constitute
reasonable attorney fees for the preparation of each written
installment payment agreement.
(7) Motions. The sum of $200 shall constitute reasonable attorney fees
for the preparation, filing, and presentation of motions, other than
for alternative service, which shall include, but is not limited to,
§ 97-3 TARENTUM CODE § 97-3
97:96
§ 97-4. Procedure.
motions to reassess damages, motions to amend caption, motions
to continue the Sheriff's sale.
B. Hourly rate matters.
(1) The following schedule of Attorney fees is hereby adopted and
approved as reasonable attorney fees pursuant to Act 1 and Act 20,
which fees shall be awarded to the municipality, its agents, counsel
or assigns as compensation in all contested matters, and in all
other matters not specifically referenced in Subsection A above,
undertaken in connection with the collection of claims:
(a) Senior attorneys (practicing law for 10 years or more): $185
per hour.
(b) Junior attorneys (practicing law for less than 10 years): $160
per hour.
(c) Paralegal: $100 per hour.
(d) Law clerks: $65 per hour.
Each of the above is as recorded and charged in units of 1/10
of an hour for all time devoted to enforcement and collection
of the Borough's claims. Counsel, whether duly employed or
duly appointed by the Borough, its agents or assigns, shall
not deviate from this fee schedule absent subsequent
ordinance amending the same. Hourly rate matters include,
but are not limited to, any matters where any defense,
objection, motion, petition or appearance is entered in any
phase of any proceeding by or on behalf of any defendant or
other interested party.
A. Required notice. The notice required by the Act, as amended, 53 P.S.
§ 7106, shall be provided in accordance therewith and shall be
incorporated into an appropriate delinquency notice or notices sent by
the Borough, its agent, counsel or assigns.
B. Fees to be accrued and claims to be filed. Fees shall accrue for all
efforts in collection after the 30th day after the notice, or after the 10th
day of any required second notice under the Act, as amended, 53 P.S.
§ 7106, on all accounts referred to counsel for enforcement. Fees
accumulated as a result of enforced collection shall be certified by duly
appointed counsel for the Borough authorized to pursue collection of
claims pursuant to the Act, or by counsel for the Borough's agents or
assigns and, if not collected in due course with the debt as by voluntary
payment, shall be included in any claims filed on behalf of the Borough
or by its agents or assigns in the course of enforcement including any
claims originally filed with the Prothonotary, any claims filed with the
§ 97-3 CLAIMS AND LIENS, MUNICIPAL § 97-4
97:97
§ 97-5. Servicing charges, expenses and fees approved.
Sheriff or in any other claims filed or statements provided where
attorney fees are due.
C. The amount of fees determined as set forth above shall be added to and
become part of the claim or claims in each proceeding as provided by
the Act and as provided herein.
A. The following schedule of Borough charges, expenses and fees
(hereinafter collectively referred to as "servicing fees") is hereby
approved and adopted by the Borough pursuant to Sections 1, 2, and 3
of the Act of May 16, 1923, as amended, 52 P.S. §§ 7101, 7103, and
7106, which amounts are the direct result of each person's or
property's failure to pay claims promptly. The servicing fees
established, assessed, and collected hereunder shall be in addition to
the record costs, § 97-3 attorney fees and § 97-2 expenses associated
with legal proceedings initiated by or on behalf of the Borough to
collect its claims.
B. Servicing of a claim or claims may result in voluntary payment without
the initiation of enforcement proceedings. It is the intent of this § 97-5
to pass the cost of servicing on to the delinquent person or property as
part of each claim. The recovery of servicing fees established herein
shall not be contingent upon the initiation of enforcement proceedings.
However, such servicing fees are due even where enforcement
proceedings are initiated. The purpose of this section is to pass the cost
and expense associated with delinquent collection on to the delinquent
person or property and to make the Borough whole on all claims
collected.
C. Schedule. The following schedule of fees shall constitute reasonable
and appropriate servicing fees for each indicated service. The servicing
fee shall be added to and become part of the Borough's claims, together
with the face, penalties, interest, costs and attorney fees and shall be
payable in full before the discharge or satisfaction of any claim. The
schedule of fees is separate and distinct from any amounts imposed by
the Sheriff, Prothonotary, court or any other public office in connection
with the collection of the Borough's claims.
(1) Assignments: $5 per claim.
(2) Filing tax liens: $5 per claim.
(3) Satisfactions: $5 per claim.
(4) Tax claim revivals (i.e., S&A): $10 per claim.
(5) Municipal claim revivals: $15 per claim.
(6) Municipal claim/short title examinations: $15 per claim.
(7) Docket service fees: $1.75 per item.
§ 97-4 TARENTUM CODE § 97-5
97:98
§ 97-6. Effective date; retroactivity.
§ 97-7. Assignment.
The Borough assigns the provisions of this article to any assignee of its
claims unless the assignment limits the assignee's ability to collect such
amounts. The Borough and its duly authorized agents and their counsel
shall retain all rights to charge reasonable attorney fees, charges, expenses,
and fees in accordance with the provisions of this article in actions under
the Act and for servicing any claims retained by the Borough.
(8) Sheriff sale claim certificates: $50 per case.
(9) Claim certifications: $10 per year.
(10) Postage: actual cost.
(11) Servicing, including staffing, computers, office space, telephones,
equipment and materials:
(a) Five percent of gross collections: $100.01 and over.
(b) Ten percent of gross collections: $100.01 and under.
A. This article shall take on the date of enactment set forth below and with
respect to attorney fees pursuant to §§ 97-3 and 97-4 shall apply to all
taxes, tax claims, tax liens, Borough claims, Borough liens, Writs of
Scire Facias, judgments, or executions filed on or after December 19,
1990, or as otherwise provided by law.
B. In no event shall the Borough's right to charge and collect reasonable
attorney fees pursuant to §§ 97-3 and 97-4 of this article be impaired by
the fact that any claim may also include an attorney commission of 5%
for claims filed prior to December 19, 1990. Any attorney fees assessed
and collected under this article or any prior ordinances pursuant to Act
142 shall be in addition to any five-percent commission previously
included in any claim or judgment thereon.
C. Attorney fees and expenses incurred in pending enforcement
proceedings prior to the effective date of this article, pursuant to a prior
ordinance adopted under Act 1, but not collected, shall remain due and
owing in accordance therewith, and shall be incorporated in any future
statement, claim, pleading, judgment, or execution. Attorney fees and
expenses in any pending or new action incurred after the effective date
of this article shall be incurred, charged, and collected in accordance
with the schedules and procedures set forth in this article.
D. The charges, expenses and fees set forth in § 97-5 of this article relate
to all unpaid claims in favor of the Borough, its agents and assigns, and
shall be retroactive to the date of each claim.
42.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 7106.
§ 97-5 CLAIMS AND LIENS, MUNICIPAL § 97-7
97:99
Chapter 99
CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 95.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 111.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 127.
Mechanical standards — See Ch. 155.
Plumbing — See Ch. 185.
§ 99-1. Election to administer and enforce.
The Borough of Tarentum hereby elects to administer and enforce the
provisions of the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, Act 45 of 1999,
35 P.S. §§ 7210.101 to 7210.1103, as amended from time to time, and its
regulations.
§ 99-2. Adoption of standards.
The Uniform Construction Code, Contained in 34 Pa. Code, Chapters 401
to 405, as amended from time to time, is hereby adopted and incorporated
herein by reference as the municipal building code of the Borough of
Tarentum.
§ 99-3. Administration and enforcement.
Administration and enforcement of the Code within the Borough of
Tarentum shall be undertaken in any of the following ways as determined
by the governing body of this Borough of Tarentum from time to time by
resolution:
A. By the designation of an employee of the Borough of Tarentum to serve
as the municipal code official to act on behalf of the Borough of
Tarentum;
B. By the retention of one or more construction code officials or thirdparty
agencies to act on behalf of the Borough of Tarentum;
C. By agreement with one or more other municipalities for the joint
administration and enforcement of this Act through an intermunicipal
agreement;
D. By entering into a contract with another municipality for the
administration and enforcement of this Act on behalf of the Borough of
Tarentum;
E. By entering into an agreement with the Pennsylvania Department of
Labor and Industry for plan review, inspections and enforcement of
§ 97-7 TARENTUM CODE § 99-3
99:100
§ 99-4. Board of Appeals.
A Board of Appeals shall be established by resolution of Council of the
Borough of Tarentum in conformity with the requirements of the relevant
provisions of the code, as amended from time to time, and for the purposes
set forth therein. If at any time enforcement and administration is
undertaken jointly with one or more other municipalities, said Board of
Appeals shall be established by joint action of the participating
municipalities.
§ 99-5. Effect on prior ordinances.
§ 99-6. Fees.
Fees assessable by the Borough of Tarentum for the administration and
enforcement undertaken pursuant to this chapter and the code shall be
established by Council of the Borough of Tarentum by resolution from time
to time.
Chapter 102
CURFEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 54.
§ 102-1. Imposition of curfew.
The Council of the Borough of Tarentum hereby enacts and imposes a
curfew within the Borough of Tarentum.
structures other than one- family or two-family dwelling units and
utility and miscellaneous use structures.
A. All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which were
adopted by this municipality on or before July 1, 1999, and which equal
or exceed the requirements of the code shall continue in full force and
effect until such time as such provisions fail to equal or exceed the
minimum requirements of the code, as amended from time to time.
B. All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which are in
effect as of the effective date of this chapter and whose requirements
are less than the minimum requirements of the code are hereby
amended to conform with the comparable provisions of the code.
C. All relevant ordinances, regulations and policies of the Borough of
Tarentum not governed by the code shall remain in full force and effect.
§ 99-3 CURFEW § 102-2
102:101
§ 102-2. Regulated activities.
The specifics of the curfew are as follows:
§ 102-3. Exceptions.
A minor shall not be in violation of this chapter if said minor is en route
to or returning from a place of employment or is acting under emergency
circumstances.
§ 102-4. Custody of violators.
Any minor in violation of § 102-2 of this chapter shall be taken into custody
by the borough police and detained pending notification of his or her parent,
guardian or person having the legal custody of such minor.
§ 102-5. Determination of age.
The borough police officers are hereby empowered, when taking such
minors into custody, to use their discretion in determining age, and in those
instances where positive identification and proof of age are not furnished,
the officer's judgment shall prevail.
§ 102-6. Violations and penalties.
Any parent, guardian or person having the legal custody of a minor who
violates § 102-2 of this chapter shall be issued a warning for a first offense,
shall be fined $100 for a second offense and shall be fined $300 and be
imprisoned for not more than 10 days for each offense after the second
offense.
Chapter 109
ELECTRIC SERVICE
§ 109-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and cited as the "Tarentum Borough Electric
Service Ordinance."
A. No minor under the age of 16 years shall be or remain in or upon any
street, alley, park or public place after 10:00 p.m., unless such person is
accompanied by any parent, guardian or other person having the legal
custody of such minor or unless such minor complies with one of the
exceptions hereinafter outlined in § 102-3.
B. No person of age 16 years or 17 years shall be or remain in or upon any
street, alley, park or public place after 12:00 midnight, unless such
minor is accompanied by any parent, guardian or other person having
the legal custody of such minor or unless such minor complies with one
of the exceptions hereinafter outlined in § 102-3.
§ 102-2 TARENTUM CODE § 109-2
102:102
§ 109-2. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. Where terms
are not defined, such terms shall have ordinarily accepted meanings such
as the context implies.
AUXILIARY SERVICE — Electric service that is not interconnected to
service supplied by the Electric Department, which supplements the
Electric Department service where arrangements are made so that either
one or both sources can be utilized in whole or in part.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Tarentum, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania.
CONTRACT FOR SERVICE — The provision of electrical service by the
Borough of Tarentum and the acceptance of that service by any customer
shall constitute an agreement between the Borough and the customer to be
bound by the laws, rules and regulations of the Borough which regulate the
provision of electric service.
CUSTOMER — Any person, partnership, corporation or government agency
receiving electric service from the Borough.
DWELLING UNIT — A building or portion thereof arranged or designed
for occupancy by not more than one family and having separate cooking,
sleeping and sanitary facilities.
ELECTRIC DEPARTMENT — The employees, agents, and representatives of
the Borough authorized by the Borough Council to provide electrical service
to any customer and to otherwise administer or enforce the provisions of
this chapter.
ELECTRIC DISTRIBUTION LINE — An overhead or underground electric
line, supplying either primary or secondary voltage, located on a roadway
or right-of-way acquired by the Electric Department and used or is usable
as part of the Electric Department's general electric supply system.
ELECTRIC SERVICE — Alternating current supply at 60 hertz delivered
at the Electric Department's standard voltages, as defined by the Electric
Department from time to time, in such quantities sufficient to supply the
customer's maximum requirements, based upon the customer's advice to
the Electric Department, whether or not the customer makes any use of the
service.
ELECTRICAL CODE — The National Electrical Code, as amended from time
to time or other such code, as adopted by the Council of the Borough.
NONRESIDENTIAL SERVICE — Electric service for any general use
purpose other than residential service.
PERSON — Any natural person, firm, association, government agency,
partnership or corporation.
§ 109-2 CURFEW § 109-2
102:103
POINT OF DELIVERY — The single point at which the Electric Department's
service line terminates and the customer's electric facilities for receiving
service begins.
PURCHASE POWER ADJUSTMENT — A charge per kWh, as set by
resolution, and applied to all kWh billed to customers.
RESIDENTIAL SERVICE — That electric service supplied to an individual
dwelling unit, including a single-family dwelling, mobile home, or an
individually metered apartment, where there is not more than 3,000 watts
connected load associated with a commercial activity served as part of the
dwelling unit.
SERVICE LINE — That electrical supply line that connects the Electric
Department's distribution facilities to the customer's point of delivery.
SPECIAL FACILITIES — Any lines or other electrical equipment, the cost of
which shall be paid for by the customer, as determined by the Borough.
STANDBY SERVICE — Service which can be used for reserve in case of
an emergency, breakdown, or failure of the customer's regular source of
supply.
§ 109-3. Requirements for the furnishing of electric service.
Compliance with all provisions of this chapter shall be the initial
requirements for the furnishing of electric service.
§ 109-4. Contract for services.
The use of electric service supplied by the Borough shall be deemed a
request by the customer (including the owner of the property, the tenant
or lessee of the premises) for electric service and an acceptance by the
customer of all rules, regulations, rate schedules, terms, conditions and
provisions of this chapter.
§ 109-5. Service not transferable.
Electric service is not transferable. In every instance, the new occupant(s)
of a property shall make application for service at the Borough office in the
form required.
§ 109-6. Failure to comply.
Failure of any customer to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be deemed a breach of conditions precedent to the furnishing of
electric service and the Borough, upon notice, may discontinue said service
and remove any and all Borough property from the premises of the
customer in default.
§ 109-2 TARENTUM CODE § 109-7
102:104
§ 109-7. Liability of owner of leased premises.
Pursuant to the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the owner of a
property shall be liable along with the tenant for the payment for electric
service supplied to the leased premises on the property and for all damages
arising out of the lessee's misuse of electric service and/or equipment.
§ 109-8. Special requirements agreements.
Each applicant for electric service involving special facilities or equipment
shall be required to complete and execute an agreement identifying all
special requirements of applicant's installation or use of electricity, and
shall agree to comply with the conditions of service and such other
requirements as may be deemed by the Electric Department to be
reasonably necessary for safe and efficient electric service.
§ 109-9. Borough's right to reject an application.
The Borough reserves the right to reject any application for service for any
reason, including, but not limited to those instances where such service is
not available under a standard rate schedule or where such service would
otherwise require excessive service or installation costs or where such
service may adversely affect the level of service to other customers.
§ 109-10. Electric service characteristics.
Electric service supplied by the Borough Electric Department is 60 hertz,
alternating current, delivered at the following nominal voltages:
§ 109-11. Available service.
Prior to the purchase of service or the installation of any electrical
equipment, the customer is responsible to secure from the Electric
Department, a written confirmation of the type of electrical service
available to the customer.
§ 109-12. Service installation.
A. Single-phase: 120/240; 120/208.
B. Three-phase: 120/240; 120/208Y; 277/480Y.
C. Primary three-phase: 4,000; 12,000.
A. All electric service facilities of the customer shall be installed and
maintained in accordance with the National Electrical Code adopted by
the Borough.
B. The Borough will not connect electric service or facilities to a structure
or building (or major alteration of a structure or building) which has
new wiring unless a certificate of occupancy is issued for the building or
structure by the Borough Code Enforcement Officer and a certificate of
§ 109-7 CURFEW § 109-12
102:105
§ 109-13. Service supply.
The Borough does not guarantee that it will provide a continuous supply
of electric energy but will employ its best efforts to supply electric energy
in such a manner as to maintain voltage and frequency within reasonable
limits. The Borough shall not be liable for any damage, direct or
consequential, which the customer may sustain by reason of either the
failure of supply or variation in voltage characteristics or phase reversal.
§ 109-14. Right-of-way and easement.
Prior to any installation of electric service by the Borough, the property
owner shall provide, at no expense to the Borough, suitable easements and/
or rights-of-way for all said installations. In addition, all such easements and
rights-of-way shall be suitably improved to accommodate the installation.
Improvements shall include, but are not limited to, rough grading, ground
line clearing of trees, brush or any other obstructions as may be identified
by the Electric Department.
§ 109-15. Borough personnel access to customer premises.
The Electric Department, through its officers, employees or authorized
agents shall have the right of access to any customer's premises at all
reasonable hours for the purpose of reading, inspecting, testing, repairing
or removing its meters or other property, and to inspect and determine the
connected service load. No person shall interfere in any manner with any
such officer, employee, or authorized agent while in the performance of his
duties or exercising his authority under this chapter.
§ 109-16. New service.
The installation of any new service or service provided to new construction
will not be provided unless and until advance payment of a fee for all costs
is made by the customer to the Borough. Such costs shall include but are
not limited to installation, including the cost of transformer(s), removal
of materials, labor, and metering equipment. Fees for said costs shall be
established from time to time by resolution of Borough Council.
§ 109-17. Use of electric service.
Electric service is provided solely through the Borough's electric meters or
other metering devices to the customer for use by the customer on customer
owned or rented/leased premises. No customer may resell any electric
approval is issued by a fire underwriter's association qualified and
authorized to do business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
C. No person or organization shall occupy any dwelling or building within
the Borough unless electric service is furnished in accordance with the
Borough's standard requirements for electric service and an authorized
fire underwriter's approval is obtained.
§ 109-12 TARENTUM CODE § 109-17
102:106
service provided by the Borough or install any unauthorized metering
system.
§ 109-18. Change of service.
The Electric Department's facilities have a defined capacity at the customer
location. No additions to the customer's installation shall be made unless
a written application has been made to the Borough and the Borough has
approved all proposed changes or additions to service. The customer shall
be responsible for all damages to Borough facilities and equipment which
result from a violation of this section.
§ 109-19. Standby service.
The rate schedules contained herein are based on the customer purchasing
all electric energy requirements from the Borough. If the customer requires
standby service, the customer should notify the Borough in writing of his
standby service requirements and the Borough will subsequently provide to
the customer, monthly charges for such service.
§ 109-20. Billing period.
All bills for electric service will be rendered on a monthly basis or, at the
Borough's option, at other regular intervals. The Borough may prorate bills
for shorter periods, at its option.
§ 109-21. Late payment charge.
A late payment charge of 5% of the unpaid balance will be added to any
bill not paid in full by the due date. The due date is approximately 15 days
from the date the bill is rendered and will be listed on the bill. If after
the next regular bill is rendered the aforesaid balance and penalty charge
shall remain unpaid, on the 25th day an additional charge of 1% of the
unpaid balance shall be added each month until paid in full. Subsequent
bills and late charges shall be calculated separately. All payments made by
the customer shall be applied first, to the outstanding balance, if any.
§ 109-22. Returned check charge.
A charge of $35 will be added to the account of any customer when a check
is returned to the Borough by the financial institution due to insufficient
funds.
§ 109-23. Standby service.
The Borough reserves the right to require a security deposit from all
customers as a security of payment, in the amount equal to the estimated
bill for service for any single billing period plus one month. At the request
of the customer, such deposit may be returned to the customer at the
expiration of at least a two-year satisfactory payment history without
interest.
§ 109-17 CURFEW § 109-24
102:107
§ 109-24. Security deposit; temporary service.
A security deposit shall be required for all temporary service provided by
the Borough. All connection and reconnection costs will be paid in advance
by the customer. Security deposit fees shall be established from time to time
by resolution of Borough Council. The balance of any security deposit (less
any outstanding charges and fees) held by the borough shall be returned
to a customer upon the discontinuation of the temporary service without
interest.
§ 109-25. Disputed bill.
Any bill disputed by the customer shall be paid in full by the customer and
the customer shall provide to the Borough written documentation as to why
the bill is being challenged. The Borough agrees to promptly investigate the
dispute and issue a report to the customer detailing the findings.
§ 109-26. Reasons for disconnection.
§ 109-27. Procedure for disconnection.
A. Written request by the customer to the Borough.
B. Failure to make payments on any bill for electric service within 45 days
of the date the bill was rendered.
C. Failure to pay any required security deposit within 45 days of the date
of demand for said payment.
D. Any customer installation determined by the Electric Department to be
dangerous and/or defective.
E. Any customer installation determined by the Electric Department which
has been tampered with, altered or in any way caused electric energy to
be improperly diverted from meter registration.
F. Any customer violation of any provision of this chapter.
A. Except in case of an emergency, the following procedures for
disconnection shall be followed. When payment for electric service is
not received by the Borough by or on the due date, a delinquent notice
shall be mailed to the customer which states the total amount in arrears
including late charges and the date by which the arrearage must be
paid or service will be terminated.
B. Except in the case of emergency disconnections, the Electric
Department will not disconnect electric service for nonpayment on
Friday, Saturday or Sunday or on officially declared holidays.
C. If service is to be terminated due to nonpayment of the electric bill by
the owner of a property that is subject to the provisions of the Utility
Service Tenant Rights Act43 (Act 299 of 1978), the Borough will follow
the procedures set forth in that Act.
§ 109-24 TARENTUM CODE § 109-28
102:108
§ 109-28. Exceptions to disconnection.
Such exceptions shall include when a customer demonstrates a current
inability to pay an outstanding bill in full and (1) pays a reasonable portion
of the outstanding bill; (2) agrees to pay all future bills by the due date;
and (3) agrees to pay a portion of the outstanding arrearage with interest.
Further, the Electric Department will not disconnect a customer when
the Borough is in receipt of a certification from a Pennsylvania licensed
physician that a seriously ill or disabled person resides at the premises
receiving electric service. This exception is for only a thirty-day period and
can only be used once every six months.
§ 109-29. Reasons for disconnection without notice.
§ 109-30. Customer disconnection responsibility.
Disconnection does not relieve the customer of any liability for services
provided by the Borough.
§ 109-31. Reconnection of service.
Electric service will not be reconnected until all account balances have
been settled. The property owner, whether the account is in the name of
the property owner, tenant or lessee, is liable for the account balance. The
Borough reserves the right to place a municipal lien upon the real property
upon which the demand for payment has been made.
A. Willful misuse of the service.
B. Dangerous or hazardous electric wiring or equipment.
C. Meter tampering.
D. Electrical current diversion.
E. Emergency repairs or maintenance of Borough facilities.
F. Any power shortage or interruption of the Borough's source of power by
its supplier.
G. The vacating of a premises by a customer who is delinquent in payment
of his account.
H. An unauthorized electrical connection.
I. Customer equipment which is adversely affecting another customers'
service.
J. Any emergency request for disconnection by Fire Department or other
emergency personnel.
K. Electric Department's right to disconnect.
43.Editor's Note: See 68 P.S. § 399.1 et seq.
§ 109-28 CURFEW § 109-32
102:109
§ 109-32. Reconnection fee.
No electric service shall be reconnected until a reconnection fee has been
paid. The reconnection fee shall be established from time to time by
resolution of the Borough Council.
§ 109-33. Meters, transformers and other equipment.
The Electric Department shall furnish, own and maintain one meter or a
unified set of meters and metering equipment for each electric service. The
Electric Department will determine the location and placement of the meter
on the customer's building or structure. It is the customer's responsibility
to provide, at customer expense, suitable space for the installation and
use of the Department's meter and transforming equipment. The customer
shall permit properly identified Borough personnel to remove, inspect and
alter such equipment. Any Borough-owned equipment damaged, destroyed,
altered or otherwise prevented from properly registering the energy
supplied to the customer due to the act, failure to act or negligence of the
customer or his representative, will result in customer's responsibility for
all necessary repairs, equipment replacement and the reasonable costs of
investigation needed to determine the amount of energy not registered and
an estimate of the energy not registered.
§ 109-34. Meter reading intervals for customers without demand
meters.
Meters shall be read at regular intervals of approximately 30 days. Bills
will be rendered on a monthly basis. If the Borough is not able to ascertain
a monthly reading, the customers' electric use may be estimated for an
interim bill and the necessary adjustment will be made upon actual reading
of the meter.
§ 109-35. Meter reading intervals for customers with demand
meters.
All customers with a demand meter shall have their meter read at regular
intervals of approximately 30 days. If the Borough is not able to ascertain a
monthly reading, the customer's use may be estimated, and the demand kW
shall be based on the customer's history. Any adjustment in the bill will be
made on the next meter reading.
§ 109-36. Service location.
The customer shall request from the Electric Department the electric
service location prior to commencing any electrical installation work.
§ 109-37. Point of delivery.
The point of delivery for electrical service is that point at which the service
connection of the Borough terminates and the customer's wiring and
installation begins.
§ 109-32 TARENTUM CODE § 109-38
102:110
§ 109-38. Customer wiring.
§ 109-39. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, or clause of this chapter is held, for any
reason, to be invalid, such decision or decisions shall not affect the validity
of the remaining portions of this chapter.
§ 109-40. Capacity of facilities.
The Electric Department facilities installed for the customer are in
accordance with information provided by the customer. Any facility
damaged because of incorrect information and/or customer electrical load
increases not reported to the Borough will be the responsibility of the
customer.
§ 109-41. Single-phase service.
The Electric Department reserves the right to restrict the types of load
connected to a single-phase service and may require loads deemed
objectionable be removed from the system.
§ 109-42. Meter testing.
The Department shall not be required to test its polyphase meters more
than once within an eight-year period or its single-phase meters more
than once within a thirty-year period. The Customer may request a meter
be tested only upon payment of a fee established by Borough Council
resolution. The fee shall be retained by the Department whenever the
accuracy of the meter is determined to be within the limits of plus or minus
2%. Whenever the accuracy of the meter is determined to be outside the
A. All wiring shall be installed and maintained in accordance with the
current version of the National Electrical Code. Compliance with the
Code should result in an installation essentially free from hazard but
not necessarily efficient, convenient, or adequate for good service or
future expansion of electrical use.
B. In buildings where wiring is new or where a major alteration of wiring
or equipment has taken place, the Electric Department shall not furnish
service until the Borough has received a certificate of approval issued
by a fire underwriters inspector or other Borough-approved electrical
inspector.
C. The Borough is not responsible for any injury or damage which may
result from defects in customer wiring or devices upon connection of
the customer's wires to the Borough's system.
D. All equipment provided by the Borough shall remain the exclusive
property of the Borough. Any facilities installed by the Electric
Department not provided in a standard installation, shall be paid for by
the customer for whom the facilities are installed.
§ 109-38 CURFEW § 109-42
102:111
limits of plus or minus 2%, the Department shall repair the meter, refund
the fee, and adjust the customer's account accordingly.
§ 109-43. Distribution line extension.
The Department may, at its discretion, construct, own and maintain all
distribution line extensions up to 100 feet along a public street. All other
costs in excess will be the responsibility of the customer. Customer shall
make a nonrefundable payment for the estimated costs for the line
extension.
§ 109-44. Service line extension.
The Department will extend overhead service lines on public or private
property for a distance of not more than a nominal 100 feet at no cost to
the customer. Any customer who requires a service line in excess of 100
feet shall make a nonrefundable payment of the estimated costs for the
line in excess of 100 feet and pay any excess costs after completion of the
installation.
§ 109-45. Undergrounding of facilities.
At the request of the customer, the Department may determine the
practicality and costs of providing underground service to the customer.
If the Department agrees to install such service, the customer shall, prior
to any installation, pay to the Department all costs in excess of the costs
which would be incurred for normal overhead service. The customer will
be required to provide the necessary trenching and backfilling for such
underground service.
§ 109-46. Pole removal or relocation.
The costs of any pole removal or relocation made at the request of the
customer is the cost responsibility of that customer. Payment for such
relocation/removal shall be paid prior to any work performed.
§ 109-47. Load emergency.
A load emergency shall exist whenever the demands for power on all or
on a portion of the Borough's electric system exceed or threaten to exceed
system capacity, or whenever system instability could result in expected
or actual system overloads. In such an event, the Department shall take
such reasonable steps under the circumstances to control the load upon the
system. Such measures may include but are not limited to the reduction or
interruption of electrical service to one or more customers.
§ 109-48. Agreements.
No promises, agreements or representations by any Borough employee,
agent or representative shall be binding on the Borough unless expressly
§ 109-42 TARENTUM CODE § 109-48
102:112
authorized by this chapter or incorporated in a written contract for electric
service.
§ 109-49. Schedules, procedures and manuals.
The following list of schedules, procedures and manuals are approved as a
result of this chapter and may be revised, from time to time by resolution of
the Borough Council.
§ 109-50. Residential services rate schedule (RS).
A. The schedule of service fees.
B. Employees' customer service and procedures manual.
C. Service, equipment and wiring rules.
A. This rate schedule is for single-phase residential service when supplied
in accordance with the use provisions as set forth below.
(1) Minimum charge. Each account shall be assessed a minimum
monthly charge of $10.
(2) Monthly rate. All kWh for RS service shall be billed at $0.12 per
kWh.
B. Use provisions. This rate schedule is for 60 hertz, single-phase, 120/240
volt service and is applicable to the following:
(1) Single-family dwelling units and its appurtenances.
(2) Single-family dwelling units in a multiunit building.
(3) A family of persons, no more than eight, who unite to establish a
common dwelling place.
(4) Temporary dwelling units with installed cooking facilities.
(5) Volunteer fire company facilities.
(6) Senior citizens' centers.
C. This rate schedule does not apply to:
(1) Residential service that includes more than 3,000 watts of
connected load for nonresidential service.
(2) Any service deemed to be professional or commercial by the
Electric Department.
(3) Welding equipment, electric furnaces or motors greater than one
horsepower.
(4) Electric water heaters with a connected load that exceeds 5,500
watts.
§ 109-48 CURFEW § 109-50
102:113
§ 109-51. General service rate schedule (GS).
§ 109-52. General power rate schedule (GP).
(5) Central heating furnaces with switched loads in excess of 10,000
watts.
D. Payment. The above monthly rate applies if bills are paid within 20 days
after billed. A late payment charge of 5% will apply if the bill is not paid
within 20 days. Contract period is for not less than one year.
A. This rate schedule is for any use not included under the RS rate
schedule. Three-phase service is only available from an existing threephase
distribution line unless the new installation facilities are paid for
by the customer. Service is provided in accordance with the use
provisions as set forth below.
(1) Minimum charge. Each account shall be assessed a minimum
monthly charge of $15.
(2) Monthly rate. All kWh for GS service shall be billed at the following:
(a) One to 300 kWh shall be billed at $0.165 per kWh.
(b) 300 to 1,000 kWh shall be billed at $0.107 per kWh.
(c) 1,000+ kWh shall be billed at $0.102 per kWh.
(3) All demand kW in excess of 5 kW billed at $5 per kW.
B. Billing kW. Measurement of load, when necessary for billing purposes,
shall be determined monthly from the highest registration of a fifteenminute-
block-interval-type meter rounded to the nearest kW.
C. Use provisions. This rate schedule is for 60 hertz, single- or threephase,
120/240 volt service and is applicable to the following:
(1) All customer installations, original and additions, shall be inspected
and approved by an Electric Department approved inspector before
connection to the Borough's electric system.
(2) No more than 20 kW of electric space heating may be switched at
any one time.
D. Payment. The above monthly rate applies if bills are paid within 20 days
after billed. A late payment charge of 5% will apply if the bill is not paid
in 20 days. Contract period is not less than one year.
A. This rate schedule is available for electrical loads over 100 kW. Electric
service is for three-phase, 60 hertz electricity for general power service
supplied to the customer at 240 volts and higher.
B. Minimum charge. Each account shall be assessed a minimum monthly
charge of $30.
§ 109-50 TARENTUM CODE § 109-52
102:114
§ 109-53. Purchase power adjustment.
A purchase power adjustment will be applied to all kWh charges billed
under all customer rates as amended from time to time by resolution.
§ 109-54. Street lighting service rate schedule.
C. Monthly rate. All kWh for GP service shall be billed at $0.0986 per kWh.
D. All monthly demand shall be billed at $3.50 per kW.
E. Voltage rate. Service supplied at 1,000 volts or greater shall be billed
$0.0020 per kW.
F. Billing kW. The monthly minimum charge shall be $3.50 per kW for all
kW of customer's current monthly demand. Monthly measurement of
load shall be determined from the highest registration of a fifteenminute-
block-interval-type meter rounded to the nearest kW.
G. Use provisions. This rate schedule is for 60 hertz, three-phase, 240 volt
or higher service and is applicable to the following:
(1) All customer installations, original and additions, shall be inspected
and approved by an Electric Department-approved inspector
before connection to the Borough's electric system.
(2) No more than 20 kW of electric space heating may be switched at
any one time.
H. Payment. The above monthly rate applies if bills are paid within 20 days
after billed. A late payment charge of 5% will apply if the bill is not paid
in 20 days. Contract period is for not less than one year.
A. Availability of street lighting service. This service is available for
lighting of roadways, bridges and highway interconnections, and
private parking lots or other private areas as approved by the Electric
Department. Mercury vapor lighting is restricted and is not available to
new locations.
B. Monthly rate.
Mercury vapor
8150 Lumens — 175 watts $12 each 74 kWh per month
11,500 Lumens — 250
watts
$17 each 103 kWh per month
21,500 Lumens — 400
watts
$21 each 162 kWh per month
Sodium vapor
9,500 Lumens — 100 watts $13 each 51 kWh per month
§ 109-52 CURFEW § 109-54
102:115
§ 109-55. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 111
ELECTRICAL STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Municipal Authorities — See Ch. 8.
Joint Zoning and Codes Enforcement
Officer — See Ch. 35, Art. I.
Building construction — See Ch. 95.
Energy conservation — See Ch. 115.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 127.
Mechanical standards — See Ch. 155.
Mobile homes — See Ch. 159.
22,000 Lumens — 200
watts
$18.50 each 86 kWh per month
50,000 Lumens — 400
watts
$27.50 each 167 kWh per month
C. Payment. The above monthly rate applies if bills are paid within 20 days
after billed (30 days for governmental accounts). A late payment charge
of 5% will apply if the bill is not paid in 20 days. Contract period is for
not less than five years.
A. Any person who violates, or permits the violation, of any provision of
this chapter shall, upon conviction in a summary proceeding, be subject
to a fine of $1,000, and costs of the prosecution for each offense, or
imprisonment not to exceed 30 days, or both fine and imprisonment.
B. Any fines collected as a result of a violation of any provision of this
chapter shall be placed in the general fund of Tarentum Borough.
§ 109-54 TARENTUM CODE § 109-55
102:116
ARTICLE I
Electrical Code; Aggregation of Demand Response
[Adopted 9-8-1980 by Ord. No. 80-29]
§ 111-1. Adoption of standards. [Amended 12-27-1999 by Ord. No.
99-2]
There is hereby adopted in its entirety by the Borough that certain
document known as the "National Electrical Code, NEC 1999 Edition,"
a copy of which is on file in the Borough offices, save and except such
provisions as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended.
§ 111-2. Applicability.
The provisions set forth in this article shall take effect in accordance with
the Borough Code of Pennsylvania.44
§ 111-3. Administration and enforcement.
A. Administration and enforcement. Except where stated otherwise in this
article, the administration and enforcement of the National Electrical
Code herein referred to shall be carried out in accordance with the
provisions of Building Code Ordinance No. 80-2845 and the BOCA
National Building Code referred to therein.
B. Electrical permit for electrical work. The Code Enforcement Officer
shall require that all applicants for permits for electrical work shall
furnish proof that an application for inspection of the proposed
electrical wiring or electrical apparatus has been made to an
organization (hereinafter referred to as the "approved electrical
organization") with the payment of all inspection fees and charges of
such organization being borne by the applicant.
C. Electrical certificate of approval. All applicants shall, within 30 days of
the completion of the building, structure or premises, obtain an
Electrical Certificate of Approval from the Office of Code Enforcement.
Said certificate shall be issued upon receipt by the Code Enforcement
Officer of proof that the approved electrical organization has made an
inspection of the applicant's building, structure or premises and that
the electrical wiring conforms with the applicable provisions of the
National Electrical Code. Whenever the inspection of the approved
electrical organization shows that the provisions of the National
Electrical Code have not been complied with, said organization shall so
inform the Code Enforcement Officer. The Code Enforcement Officer
shall then notify the applicant of the steps which must be taken to
achieve compliance with the National Electrical Code before an
Electrical Certificate of Approval can be issued. Failure to comply shall
44.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 45101 et seq.
45.Editor's Note: See Ch. 95, Building Construction, Art. II, Building Code.
§ 111-1 CURFEW § 111-3
102:117
§ 111-4. Modifications made in National Electrical Code. [Amended
12-27-1999 by Ord. No. 99-2]
The following sections are hereby added to the National Electrical Code:
§ 111-5. Prohibition and/or restriction of aggregation of retail
customer demand response. [Added 2-16-2009 by Ord. No. 09-0246]
be sufficient reason for notification of the electric utility company to
disconnect or refuse to connect electrical power to the premises.
D. Inspection of existing electrical wiring and apparatus. In order to
provide safety against existing hazards or defective electrical wiring
and apparatus, the Code Enforcement Officer and/or his authorized
representative, including the approved electrical organization referred
to above, shall, when requested by proper authority or when public
interest so requires, cause inspections to be made of any premises in
the municipality to ensure that the existing electrical wiring and
apparatus is not defective or unsafe. The Code Enforcement Officer
shall notify the owner of the premises of any unsafe or defective
conditions which are found and shall require discontinuance or
correction of such conditions in accordance with the National Electrical
Code.
E. Exemptions. This article shall not apply to the following work:
(1) Minor repair work such as repairing or replacing fuses, switches,
receptacles, lamps or lighting fixture parts.
(2) The connection of portable electrical appliances to previously
approved permanent receptacles.
A. Appeals. All matters concerning electrical appeals should be heard by
the Board of Appeals as referred to in Section 121.0 of the BOCA
National Building Code.
B. Fee Schedule. All fees for electrical permits shall be paid in accordance
with § 95-6D, Subsection 112.3.1, of the BOCA National Building Code.
C. Violation Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who or which shall
violate any provisions of this code shall, upon summary conviction
thereof, be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000 and/or
imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days, or both, at the direction
of the court. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has
been served, in accordance with the terms and provisions hereof, shall
be deemed a separate offense.
A. The Borough of Tarentum or its authorized designee is the sole entity
permitted to bid demand response on behalf of retail customers served
by the Borough of Tarentum's power system directly into any
46.Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former § 111-5 as § 111-8.
§ 111-3 TARENTUM CODE § 111-5
102:118
§ 111-6. Ancillary services provided by demand response resources.
[Added 2-16-2009 by Ord. No. 09-02]
§ 111-7. Violations and penalties. [Added 2-16-2009 by Ord. No.
09-02]
Commission-approved independent system operator's or regional
transmission organization's organized electric markets.
B. Retail customers served by the Borough of Tarentum's power system
wishing to bid their demand response into a Commission-approved
independent system operator's or regional transmission organization's
organized electric markets may do so by participating in the program
established by the Borough of Tarentum or its authorized designee.
Retail customers are not permitted to participate in the demand
response program of any other entity without the express prior
authorization of the Borough of Tarentum.
A. The Borough of Tarentum or its authorized designee is the sole entity
permitted to bid demand response on behalf of retail customers served
by the Borough of Tarentum's power system directly into any
Commission-approved independent system operator organization
organized markets for energy imbalance, spinning reserves,
supplemental reserves, reactive power and voltage control, or
regulation and frequency response ancillary services (or its functional
equivalent in the Commission-approved independent system operator's
or regional transmission organization's tariff).
B. Retail customers served by the Borough of Tarentum's power system
wishing to bid their demand response into a Commission-approved
independent system operator's or regional transmission organization's
organized markets for energy imbalance, spinning reserves,
supplemental reserves, reactive power and voltage control, or
regulation and frequency response ancillary services (or its functional
equivalent in the Commission-approved independent system operator's
or regional transmission organization's tariff) may do so by
participating in the program established by the Borough of Tarentum or
its authorized designee. Retail customers are not permitted to
participate in the demand response program of any other entity without
the express prior authorization of the Borough of Tarentum.
A. Any person, firm, partnership, or corporation who or which shall violate
any provision of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced
to pay a fine of not more than $600, plus the costs of prosecution, and in
default of payment thereof, shall be imprisoned for a term not to exceed
30 days. Every day that a violation of this article continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
B. Injunctive relief. When any person, firm, partnership, or corporation
has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, the
Borough may petition the Court of Common Pleas of Allegheny County
§ 111-5 CURFEW § 111-7
102:119
§ 111-8. Short title.
This article, together with the National Electrical Code adopted herein,
shall be known and may be cited as the "Electrical Code of the Borough of
Tarentum."
through the Borough's Attorney for the issuance of a preliminary or
permanent injunction, or both, as appropriate, which restrains or
compels the specific performance of the provisions of this article. The
Borough may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal
and/or equitable relief. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar
against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a person
in violation of the provisions of this article.
C. Remedies nonexclusive. The remedies provided for in this section are
not exclusive. The Borough may take any, all or any combination of
these actions against any person, firm, partnership, or corporation that
has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article.
§ 111-7 TARENTUM CODE § 111-8
102:120
ARTICLE II
Electric Department Rules and Regulations; Rates
[Adopted 9-20-2010 by Ord. No. 10-0347]
§ 111-9. Rule 1: Definitions and interpretations.
Unless otherwise provided herein, the singular shall include the plural and
the masculine shall include the feminine and the neuter. For purposes of this
article, the following terms and phrases shall have the meaning set forth as
follows:
AUXILIARY SERVICE — Electric service that is not interconnected to
service supplied by the Electric Department, which supplements the
Electric Department service where arrangements are made so that either
one or both sources can be utilized in whole or in part.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Tarentum, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania.
CONTRACT FOR SERVICE — The provision of electrical service by the
Borough of Tarentum and the acceptance of that service by any customer
shall constitute an agreement between the Borough and the customer to be
bound by the laws, rules and regulations of the Borough which regulate the
provision of electric service.
CUSTOMER — Any person, partnership, corporation or government agency
receiving electric service from the Borough.
DWELLING UNIT — A building or portion thereof arranged or designed
for occupancy by not more than one family and having separate cooking,
sleeping and sanitary facilities.
ELECTRICAL CODE — The National Electrical Code, as amended from time
to time or other such Code, as adopted by the Council of the Borough.
ELECTRIC DEPARTMENT — The employees, agents, and representatives of
the Borough authorized by the Borough Council to provide electrical service
to any customer and to otherwise enforce the provisions of this article.
ELECTRIC DISTRIBUTION LINE — An overhead or underground electric
line, supplying either primary or secondary voltage, located on a roadway
or right-of-way acquired by the Electric Department and used or is usable
as part of the Electric Department's general electric supply system.
ELECTRIC SERVICE — Alternating current supply at 60 hertz delivered
at the Electric Department's standard voltages, as defined by the Electric
Department from time to time, in such quantities sufficient to supply the
customer's maximum requirements, based upon the customer's advise to
the Electric Department, whether or not the customer makes any use of the
service.
NONRESIDENTIAL SERVICE — Electric service for any general use
purpose other than residential service.
47.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also superseded former Art. II, Electric Department,
adopted 3-11-1996 by Ord. No. 96-3.
§ 111-9 CURFEW § 111-9
102:121
PERSON — Any natural person, firm, association, government agency,
partnership or corporation.
POINT OF DELIVERY — The single point at which the Electric Department's
service line terminates and the customer's electric facilities for receiving
service begins.
PURCHASE POWER ADJUSTMENT — A charge per KWH, as set by
resolution, and applied to all KWH billed to customers.
RESIDENTIAL SERVICE — That electric service supplied to an individual
dwelling unit, including a single-family dwelling, mobile home, or an
individually metered apartment, where there is not more than 3,000 watts
connected load associated with a commercial activity served as part of the
dwelling unit.
SERVICE LINE — That electrical supply line that connects the Electric
Department's distribution facilities to the customer's point of delivery.
SPECIAL FACILITIES — Any lines or other electrical equipment, the cost of
which shall be paid for by the customer, as determined by the Borough.
STANDBY SERVICE — Service which can be used for reserve in case of
an emergency, breakdown, or failure of the customer's regular source of
supply.
§ 111-10. Rule 2: Conditions of service.
A. Requirements for the furnishing of electric service. Compliance with all
provisions of this article shall be the initial requirements for the
furnishing of electric service.
B. Contract for services. The use of electric service supplied by the
Borough shall be deemed a request by the customer (including the
owner of the property and the tenant or lessee of the premises) for
electric service and an acceptance by the customer of all rules,
regulations, rate schedules, terms, conditions and provisions of this
article.
C. Service is not transferable. Electric service is not transferable. In every
instance, the new occupant or occupants of a property shall make
application for service at the Borough office in the form required.
D. Failure to comply. Failure of any customer to comply with any of the
provisions of this article shall be deemed a breach of conditions
precedent to the furnishing of electric service and the Borough, upon
notice, may discontinue said service and remove any and all Borough
property from the premises of the customer in default.
E. Liability of owner of leased premises. Pursuant to the Laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the owner of a property shall be liable
along with the tenant for the payment for electric service supplied to
the leased premises on the property and for all damages arising out of
the lessee's misuse of electric service and/or equipment.
§ 111-9 TARENTUM CODE § 111-11
102:122
§ 111-11. Rule 3: Service application.
§ 111-12. Rule 4: Description of service.
A. Special requirements agreements. Each applicant for electric service
involving special facilities or equipment shall be required to complete
and execute an agreement identifying all special requirements of the
applicant's installation or use of electricity, and agreeing to comply with
the conditions of service and such other requirements as may be
deemed by the Electric Department to be reasonably necessary for safe
and efficient electric service.
B. Borough's right to reject an application. The Borough reserves the right
to reject any application for service for any reason, including, but not
limited to those instances where such service is not available under a
standard rate schedule or where such service would otherwise require
excessive service or installation costs or where such service may
adversely affect the level of service to other customers.
A. Electric service characteristics. Electric service supplied by the
Borough Electric Department is 60 hertz, alternating current, delivered
at the following nominal voltages:
(1) Single phase: 120/240; 120/208.
(2) Three phase: 120/240; 120/208Y; 277/480Y.
(3) Primary three phase: 4,000; 12,000.
B. Available service. Prior to the purchase of service or the installation of
any electrical equipment, the customer is responsible to secure from
the Electric Department a written confirmation of the type of electrical
service available to the customer.
C. Service installation. All electric service facilities of the customer shall
be installed and maintained in accordance with the National Electrical
Code adopted by the Borough.
(1) The Borough will not connect electric service or facilities to a
structure or building (or major alteration of a structure or building)
which has new wiring unless a certificate of occupancy is issued for
the building or structure by the Borough Code Enforcement Officer
and a certificate of approval is issued by a fire underwriter's
association qualified and authorized to do business in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(2) No person or organization shall occupy any dwelling or building
within the Borough unless electric service is furnished in
accordance with the Borough's standard requirements for electric
service and an authorized fire underwriter's approval is obtained.
D. Service supply. The Borough does not guarantee that it will provide a
continuous supply of electric energy but will employ its best efforts to
§ 111-11 CURFEW § 111-12
102:123
supply electric energy in such a manner as to maintain voltage and
frequency within reasonable limits. The Borough shall not be liable
for any damage, direct or consequential, which the customer may
sustain by reason of either the failure of supply or variation in voltage
characteristics or phase reversal.
E. Right-of-way and easement. Prior to any installation of electric service
by the Borough, the property owner shall provide, at no expense to the
Borough, suitable easements and/or rights-of-way for all said
installations. In addition, all such easements and rights-of-way shall be
suitably improved to accommodate the installation. Improvements shall
include, but are not limited to, rough grading, ground line clearing of
trees, brush or any other obstructions as may be identified by the
Electric Department.
F. Borough personnel access to customer premises. The Electric
Department, through its officers, employees or authorized agents shall
have the right of access to any customer's premises at all reasonable
hours for the purpose of reading, inspecting, testing, repairing or
removing its meters or other property, and to inspect and determine the
connected service load. No person shall interfere in any manner with
any such officer, employee, or authorized agent while in the
performance of his duties or exercising his authority under this article.
G. New service. The installation of any new service or service provided to
new construction will not be provided unless and until advance
payment of a fee for all costs is made by the customer to the Borough.
Borough costs shall include but are not limited to installation, including
the cost of transformer(s), removal of materials, labor, and metering
equipment. Fees for said costs shall be established from time to time by
resolution of Borough Council.
H. Use of electric service. Electric service is provided solely through the
Borough's electric meters or other metering devices to the customer for
use by the customer on customer-owned or rented/leased premises. No
customer may resell any electric service provided by the Borough or
install any unauthorized metering system.
I. Change of service. The Electric Department's facilities have a definite
capacity at the customer location. No additions to the customer's
installation shall be made unless a written application has been made to
the Borough and the Borough has approved all proposed changes or
additions to service. The customer shall be responsible for all damages
to Borough facilities and equipment which result from a violation of this
section.
J. Standby service. The rate schedules contained herein are based on the
customer purchasing all electric energy requirements from the
Borough. If the customer requires standby service, the customer should
notify the Borough in writing of his standby service requirements and
§ 111-12 TARENTUM CODE § 111-12
102:124
§ 111-13. Rule 5: Billing and payment for electric service.
§ 111-14. Rule 6: Disconnection and reconnection of electric
service.
the Borough will subsequently provide to the customer monthly charges
for such service.
A. Billing period. All bills for electric service will be rendered on a monthly
basis or, at the Borough's option, at other regular intervals. The
Borough may prorate bills for shorter periods, at its option.
B. Late payment charge. A late payment charge as set from time to time by
resolution of the Borough will be added to any bill not paid in full by the
due date. The due date is approximately 15 days from the date the bill is
rendered and will be listed on the bill. If after the next regular bill is
rendered the aforesaid balance and penalty charge shall remain unpaid,
on the 25th day an additional charge as set from time to time by
resolution of the Borough shall be added each month until paid in full.
Subsequent bills and late charges shall be calculated separately. All
payments made by the customer shall be applied first to the
outstanding balance, if any.
C. Returned check charge. A charge as set from time to time by resolution
of the Borough will be added to the account of any customer when a
check is returned to the Borough by the financial institution due to
insufficient funds.
D. Security deposit. The Borough reserves the right to require a security
deposit from all customers as a security of payment, in the amount
equal to the estimated bill for service for any single billing period plus
one month. At the request of the customer, such deposit may be
returned to the customer at the expiration of at least a two-year
satisfactory payment history without interest.
E. Security deposit temporary service. A security deposit shall be required
for all temporary service provided by the Borough. All connection and
reconnection costs will be paid in advance by the customer. Security
deposit fees shall be established from time to time by resolution of
Borough Council. The balance of any security deposit (less any
outstanding charges and fees) held by the Borough shall be returned to
a customer upon the discontinuation of the temporary service without
interest.
F. Disputed bill. Any bill disputed by the customer shall be paid in full by
the customer, and the customer shall provide to the Borough written
documentation as to why the bill is being challenged. The Borough
agrees to promptly investigate the dispute and issue a report to the
customer detailing the findings.
A. Reasons for disconnection.
§ 111-12 CURFEW § 111-14
102:125
(1) Written request by the customer to the Borough.
(2) Failure to make payments on any bill for electric service within 45
days of the date the bill was rendered.
(3) Failure to pay any required security deposit within 45 days of the
date of demand for said payment.
(4) Any customer installation determined by the Electric Department
to be dangerous and/or defective.
(5) Any customer installation determined by the Electric Department
which has been tampered with, altered or in any way caused
electric energy to be improperly diverted from meter registration.
(6) Any customer violation of any provision of this article.
B. Procedure for disconnection. Except in case of an emergency, the
following procedures for disconnection will be followed.
(1) When payment for electric service is not received by the Borough
by or on the due date, a delinquent notice shall be mailed to the
customer which states:
(a) The total amount in arrears, including late charges.
(b) The date by which the arrearage must be paid or service will be
terminated.
(2) Except in the case of emergency disconnections, the Electric
Department will not disconnect electric service for nonpayment on
Friday, Saturday or Sunday or on officially declared holidays.
(3) If service is to be terminated due to nonpayment of the electric bill
by the owner of a property that is subject to the provisions of the
Utility Service Tenant Rights Act (Act 299 of 1978), the Borough
will follow the procedures set forth in that Act.48
C. Exceptions to disconnection.
(1) Such exception shall include when a customer demonstrates a
current inability to pay an outstanding bill in full and:
(a) Pays a reasonable portion of the outstanding bill;
(b) Agrees to pay all future bills by the due date; and;
(c) Agrees to pay a portion of the outstanding arrearage with
interest.
(2) Further, the Electric Department will not disconnect a customer
when the Borough is in receipt of a certification from a
Pennsylvania-licensed physician that a seriously ill or disabled
48.Editor's Note: See 68 P.S. § 399.1 et seq.
§ 111-14 TARENTUM CODE § 111-14
102:126
§ 111-15. Rule 7: Meters and meter reading.
person resides at the premises receiving electric service. This
exception is for only a thirty-day period and can only be used once
every six months.
D. Disconnection without notice includes any of the following:
(1) Willful misuse of the service.
(2) Dangerous or hazardous electric wiring or equipment.
(3) Meter tampering.
(4) Electrical current diversion.
(5) Emergency repairs or maintenance of Borough facilities.
(6) Any power shortage or interruption of the Borough's source of
power by its supplier.
(7) The vacating of a premise by a customer who is delinquent in
payment of his account.
(8) An unauthorized electrical connection.
(9) Customer equipment which is adversely affecting other customers'
service.
(10) Any emergency request for disconnection by Fire Department or
other Emergency Personnel.
(11) Electric Departments right to disconnect.
E. Customer disconnection responsibility. Disconnection does not relieve
the customer of any liability for services provided by the Borough.
F. Reconnection of service. Electric service will not be reconnected until
all account balances have been settled. The property owner, whether
the account is in the name of the property owner, tenant or lessee, is
liable for the account balance. The Borough reserves the right to place
a municipal lien upon the real property upon which the demand for
payment has been made.
G. Reconnection fee. No electric service shall be reconnected until a
reconnection fee has been paid. The reconnection fee shall be
established from time to time by resolution of the Borough Council.
A. Meters, transformers and other equipment. The Electric Department
shall furnish, own and maintain one meter or a unified set of meters and
metering equipment for each electric service. The Electric Department
will determine the location and placement of the meter on the
customer's building or structure. It is the customer's responsibility to
provide, at customer expense, suitable space for the installation and
§ 111-14 CURFEW § 111-15
102:127
§ 111-16. Rule 8: Customer facilities.
use of the Department's meter and transforming equipment. The
customer shall permit properly identified Borough personnel to remove,
inspect and alter such equipment. Any Borough-owned equipment
damaged, destroyed, altered or otherwise prevented from properly
registering the energy supplied to the customer, due to the act, failure
to act or negligence of the customer or his representative, will result
in the customer's responsibility for all necessary repairs, equipment
replacement and the reasonable costs of investigation needed to
determine the amount of energy not registered and an estimate of the
energy not registered.
B. Meter-reading intervals for customers without demand meters. Meters
shall be read at regular intervals of approximately 60 days. Since bills
will be rendered on a monthly basis, the customer's electric use will be
estimated for the interim billing month and the necessary adjustment
will be made upon actual reading of the meter.
C. Meter-reading intervals for customers with demand meters. All
customers with a demand meter will have their meter/s read on a
monthly basis, approximately 30 days. If such scheduled meter reading
cannot be obtained, the customer's use will be estimated and the
demand kW shall be based on the customer's history. Any adjustment in
the bill will be made on the next meter reading.
A. Service location. The customer shall request from the Electric
Department the electric service location prior to commencing any
electrical installation work.
B. Point of delivery. The point of delivery for electrical service is that point
at which the service connection of the Borough terminates and the
customer's wiring and installation begins.
C. Customer wiring.
(1) All wiring shall be installed and maintained in accordance with the
current version of the National Electrical Code. Compliance with
the Code should result in an installation essentially free from
hazard but not necessarily efficient, convenient, or adequate for
good service or future expansion of electrical use.
(2) In buildings where wiring is new or where a major alteration of
wiring or equipment has taken place, the Electric Department shall
not furnish service until the Borough has received a certificate of
approval issued by a Fire Underwriters Inspector or other Boroughapproved
electrical inspector.
(3) The Borough is not responsible for any injury or damage which may
result from defects in customer wiring or devices upon connection
of the customer's wires to the Borough's system.
§ 111-15 TARENTUM CODE § 111-16
102:128
§ 111-17. Rule 9: Borough facilities.
(4) All equipment provided by the Borough shall remain the exclusive
property of the Borough. Any facilities installed by the Electric
Department not provided in a standard installation shall be paid for
by the customer for whom the facilities are installed.
A. Capacity of facilities. The Electric Department facilities installed for the
customer are in accordance with information provided by the customer.
Any facility damaged because of incorrect information and/or customer
electrical load increases not reported to the Borough will be the
responsibility of the customer.
B. Single-phase Service. The Electric Department reserves the right to
restrict the types of load connected to a single-phase service and may
require loads deemed objectionable be removed from the system.
C. Meter testing. The Department shall not be required to test its
polyphase meters more than once within an eight-year period or its
single-phase meters more than once within a thirty-year period. The
customer may request a meter be tested only upon payment of a fee
established by Borough Council resolution. The fee shall be retained by
the Department whenever the accuracy of the meter is determined to
be within the limits of plus or minus 2%. Whenever the accuracy of the
meter is determined to be outside the limits of plus-or-minus 2%, the
Department shall repair the meter, refund the fee, and adjust the
customer's account accordingly.
D. Distribution line extension. The Department may, at its discretion,
construct, own and maintain all distribution line extensions up to 100
feet along a public street. All other costs in excess will be the
responsibility of the customer. The customer shall make a
nonrefundable payment for the estimated costs for the line extension.
E. Service line extension. The Department will extend overhead service
lines on public or private property for a distance of not more than a
nominal 100 feet at no cost to the customer. Any customer who requires
a service line in excess of 100 feet shall make a nonrefundable payment
of the estimated costs for the line in excess of 100 feet.
F. Undergrounding of facilities. At the request of the customer, the
Department may determine the practicality and costs of providing
underground service to the customer. If the Department agrees to
install such service, the customer shall, prior to any installation, pay to
the Department all costs in excess of the costs which would be incurred
for normal overhead service. The customer will be required to provide
the necessary trenching and backfilling for such underground service.
G. Pole removal or relocation. The costs of any pole removal or relocation
made at the request of the customer is the cost responsibility of that
§ 111-16 CURFEW § 111-17
102:129
§ 111-18. Rule 10: Emergency load control.
A load emergency shall exist whenever the demands for power on all or
on a portion of the Borough's electric system exceed or threaten to exceed
system capacity, or whenever system instability could result in expected
or actual system overloads. In such an event, the Department shall take
such reasonable steps under the circumstances to control the load upon the
system. Such measures may include but are not limited to the reduction or
interruption of electrical service to one or more customers.
§ 111-19. Rule 11: Limits of service agreement.
Agreements: No promises, agreements or representations by any Borough
employee, agent or representative shall be binding on the Borough unless
expressly authorized by this article or incorporated in a written contract for
electric service.
§ 111-20. Rule 12: Miscellaneous provisions.
The following list of schedules, procedures and manuals are approved as a
result of this article and may be revised, from time to time by resolution of
the Borough Council.49
§ 111-21. Rates for electric service.
customer. Payment for such relocation/removal shall be paid prior to
any work performed.
A. The Schedule of Service Fees.
B. Employees' Customer Service and Procedures Manual.
C. Service, Equipment and Wiring Rules.
A. Residential Services Rate Schedule (RS).
(1) Application of Rate Schedule for Residential Service. This Rate
Schedule is for single-phase residential service when supplied in
accordance with the use provisions as set forth below.
(2) Monthly rate (effective April 1, 2008).
(a) The monthly customer charge shall be $5. All KWH billed at
$11.34 per KWH.
(b) Minimum charge. The monthly minimum charge shall be $5.
(3) Use provisions. This Rate Schedule is for 60 hertz, single phase,
120/240 volt service and is applicable to the following:
49.Editor's Note: These materials are on file in the Borough offices. See also § 111-21, Rates
for electric service.
§ 111-17 TARENTUM CODE § 111-21
102:130
(a) Single-family dwelling units and its appurtenances.
(b) Single-family dwelling units in a multiunit building.
(c) A family of persons, no more than eight, who unite to establish
a common dwelling place.
(d) Temporary dwelling units with installed cooking facilities.
(e) Volunteer fire company facilities.
(f) Senior citizens' centers.
(4) This Rate Schedule does not apply to:
(a) Residential service that includes more than 3,000 watts of
connected load for nonresidential service.
(b) Any service deemed to be professional or commercial by the
Electric Department.
(c) Welding equipment, electric furnaces or motors greater than
one horsepower.
(d) Electric water heaters with a connected load that exceeds
5,500 watts.
(e) Central heating furnaces with switched loads in excess of
10,000 watts.
(5) Payment. The above monthly rate applies if bills are paid within 20
days after billed. A late payment charge of 5% will apply if the bill is
not paid within 20 days.
(6) The contract period is for not less than one year.
B. General Service Rate Schedule (GS).
(1) Application of Rate Schedule for General Service. This Rate
Schedule is for any use not included under the RS Rate Schedule.
Three-phase service is only available from an existing three-phase
distribution line unless the new installation facilities are paid for by
the customer. Service is provided in accordance with the use
provisions as set forth below.
(2) Monthly rate (effective April 1, 2008).
(a) All demand KW in excess of 5 KW billed at $5 per KW.
(b) The first 300 KWH shall be billed at $15.84 per KWH.
(c) The next 700 KWH shall be billed at $10.04 per KWH.
(d) All excess KWH shall be billed at $9.54 per KWH.
(e) Minimum charge. The monthly minimum charge shall be $10.
§ 111-21 CURFEW § 111-21
102:131
(f) Billing KW. Measurement of load, when necessary for billing
purposes, shall be determined monthly from the highest
registration of a fifteen-minute-block interval type meter
rounded to the nearest KW.
(3) Use provisions. This Rate Schedule is for 60 hertz, single or three
phase, 120/240 volt service and is applicable to the following:
(a) All customer installations, original and additions, shall be
inspected and approved by an Electric Department-approved
inspector before connection to the Borough's electric system.
(b) No more than 20 KW of electric space heating may be switched
at any one time.
(4) Payment. The above monthly rate applies if bills are paid within 20
days after billed. A late payment charge of 5% will apply if the bill is
not paid in 20 days.
(5) The contract period is not less than one year.
C. General Power Rate Schedule (GP).
(1) Application of Rate Schedule for General Power Service. This Rate
Schedule is available for electrical loads over 100 KW. Electric
service is for three-phase, 60 hertz electricity for general power
service supplied to the customer at 240 volts and higher.
(2) Monthly rate (effective April 1, 2008).
(a) The monthly customer charge shall be billed at $25.
(b) All monthly billing kW shall be billed at $3.50 per kW.
(c) All KWH shall be billed at $9.20 per KWH.
(d) Voltage credit. Twenty cents per KW Demand when the service
is supplied at 1,000 volts or greater.
(e) Minimum charge. The monthly minimum charge shall be $3.50
per kW for all KW of the customer's current monthly demand.
(f) Billing KW. Measurement of load, when necessary for billing
purposes, shall be determined monthly from the highest
registration of a fifteen-minute-block interval type meter
rounded to the nearest KW.
(3) Use provisions. This Rate Schedule is for 60 hertz, three phase,
240-volt-or-higher service and is applicable to the following:
(a) All customer installations, original and additions, shall be
inspected and approved by an Electric Department-approved
inspector before connection to the Borough's electric system.
§ 111-21 TARENTUM CODE § 111-21
102:132
(b) No more than 20 KW of electric space heating may be switched
at any one time.
(4) Payment. The above monthly rate applies if bills are paid within 20
days after billed. A late payment charge of 5% will apply if the bill is
not paid in 20 days.
(5) The contract period is for not less than one year.
D. Purchase power adjustment. A purchase power adjustment will be
applied to all KWH charges billed under all customer rates as amended
from time to time by resolution.
E. Streetlighting Service Rate Schedule.
(1) Availability of Streetlighting service. This service is available for
lighting of roadways, bridges and highway interconnections, and
private parking lots or other private areas as approved by the
Electric Department. Mercury vapor lighting is restricted and is not
available to new locations.
(2) Monthly rate (effective April 1, 2008, or as may be amended from
time to time by resolution).
(a) Mercury vapor.
8,150 Lumens-175 watts $12 each
74 KWH per month
11,500 Lumens-250 watts $17 each
103 KWH per month
21,500 Lumens-400 watts $21 each
162 KWH per month
(b) Sodium vapor.
9,500 Lumens-100 watts $13 each
51 KWH per month
22,000 Lumens-200 watts $18.50 each
86 KWH per month
50,000 Lumens-400 watts $27.50 each
167 KWH per month
(3) Payment. The above monthly rate applies if bills are paid within 20
days after billed (30 days for governmental accounts). A late
payment charge of 5% will apply if the bill is not paid in 20 days.
(4) The contract period is for not less than five years.
§ 111-21 CURFEW § 111-21
102:133
Chapter 115
ENERGY CONSERVATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Municipal Authorities — See Ch. 8.
Joint Zoning and Code Enforcement
Officer — See Ch. 35, Art. I.
Planning Commission — See Ch. 50.
Building construction — See Ch. 95.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 111.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 127.
Mechanical standards — See Ch. 155.
Mobile homes — See Ch. 159.
§ 115-1. Adoption of standards.50
The Council of the Borough of Tarentum does hereby adopt by reference
the BOCA National Energy Conservation Code, Seventh Edition, 1993, as
the Energy Conservation Code for the Borough of Tarentum, as though
the same were more fully set forth in this chapter, establishing minimum
requirements for energy conservation for all buildings and structures within
the Borough of Tarentum.
§ 115-2. Additions, insertions and changes.
Any reference within the code to a municipality shall be the "Borough of
Tarentum"; any reference to a county shall be the "County of Allegheny";
and any references to the state shall be the "Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania."
§ 115-3. Permit fees.
Any permit required to be issued shall not be issued until a permit fee as set
forth from time to time by resolution of the Borough Council is paid.
§ 115-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any section of this chapter shall, upon summary
conviction before the District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less
than $25 nor more than $300 and the costs of the proceeding for each
violation of this chapter, said fine to accrue to the benefit of the Borough
of Tarentum. Each day the violation exists shall be a separate violation. If
any person so fined shall be in default of payment of such fine and costs, he
shall be sentenced to imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 30
days; provided, however, that such fine or imprisonment shall be in addition
to any fee imposed by this chapter.
Chapter 123
50.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 111-21 TARENTUM CODE § 115-4
115:134
FIRE INSURANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 127.
§ 123-1. Designated officers.
The Borough Treasurer or Borough Manager is hereby appointed as the
designated officer who is authorized to carry out all responsibilities and
duties stated herein.
§ 123-2. Municipal certificate required.
No insurance company, association or exchange (hereinafter the "insuring
agent") doing business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall pay a
claim of a named insured for fire damage to a structure located within
the Borough of Tarentum (hereinafter the "Borough") where the amount
recoverable for the fire loss to the structure under all policies exceeds
$7,500, unless the named insured or insuring agent is furnished by the
Borough Treasurer or Borough Manager with a Borough certificate
pursuant to Section 638(b) of the Insurance Company Law and unless there
is compliance with Section 638(c) and (d) of the Insurance Company Law
and the provisions of this chapter.
§ 123-3. Claims payment procedure.
A. Where, pursuant to Section 638(b)(1)(i) of 40 P.S., the Borough
Treasurer or Borough Manager issues a certificate indicating that there
are no delinquent taxes, assessments, penalties or user charges against
real property, the insuring agent shall pay the claim of the named
insured; provided however, that if the loss agreed upon by the named
insured and the insuring agent equals or exceeds 60% of the aggregate
limit of liability on all fire policies covering the building restructure, the
following procedures must be followed:
(1) When the loss agreed to between the named insured and the
company, association or exchange equals or exceeds 60% of the
aggregate limits of liability on all fire policies covering the building
or other structure, the insuring agent shall transfer from the
insurance proceeds to the Borough Treasurer in the aggregate of
$2,000 for each $15,000 of a claim and for each fraction of that
amount of a claim; this section to be applied such that if the claim is
$15,000 or less, the amount transferred to the Borough shall be
$2,000; or
(2) If at the time of a proof of loss agreed to between the name insured
and the insuring agent the named insured has submitted a
contractor's signed estimate of the costs of removing, repairing or
§ 115-4 FIRE INSURANCE § 123-3
123:135
securing the building or other structure, the insuring agent shall
transfer to the Borough from the insurance proceeds the amount
specified in the estimate.
B. The transfer of proceeds shall be on a pro rata basis by all companies,
associations or exchanges insuring the building or other structure.
C. After the transfer, the named insured may submit a contractor's signed
estimate of the costs of removing, repairing or securing the building or
other structure, and the designated officer shall return the amount of
the funds transferred to the Borough in excess of the estimate to the
named insured if the Borough has not commenced to remove, repair or
secure the building or other structure.
D. Upon receipt of proceeds under this section, the Borough shall do the
following:
(1) The Borough Treasurer or Borough Manager shall place the
proceeds in the separate fund to be used solely as security against
the total costs of removing, repairing or securing the building or
structure which are incurred by the Borough. Such costs shall
include, without limitation, any engineering, legal or administrative
costs incurred by the Borough in connection with such removal,
repair or securing of the building or any proceedings related
thereto; and
(2) It is the obligation of the insuring agent when transferring the
proceeds to provide the Borough with the name and address of the
named insured. Upon receipt of the transferred funds and the name
and address of the named insured, the Borough Treasurer or
Borough Manager shall contact the named insured, certify that the
proceeds have been received by the Borough and notify the named
insured that the proceeds under this subsection shall be followed;
and
(3) When repairs, removal or securing of the building or other
structure have been completed in accordance with all applicable
regulations and orders of the Borough and the required proof of
such completion received by the Borough Treasurer or Borough
Manager, and if the Borough has not incurred any costs for repairs,
removing or securing, the fund shall be returned to the named
insured. If the Borough has incurred costs for repairs, removal or
securing of the building or other structure, the costs shall be paid
from the fund and, if excess funds remain, the Borough shall
transfer the remaining funds to the named insured; and
(4) To the extent that interest is earned on proceeds held by the
Borough pursuant to this section and not returned to the named
insured, such interest shall belong to the Borough. To the extent
that proceeds are returned to the named insured, interest earned
on such proceeds shall be distributed to the named insured at the
time that the proceeds are returned.
§ 123-3 TARENTUM CODE § 123-3
123:136
§ 123-4. Application of proceeds.
§ 123-5. Establishment of procedures and fees.
The Council of the Borough of Tarentum may by, resolution, adopt
procedures and regulations to implement Act 93 of 1994 as amended and
this chapter and may, by resolution, fix reasonable fees to be charged for
Borough activities or services provided pursuant to Act 93 of 1994 and
this chapter, including but not limited to issuance of certificates and bills,
performance of inspections and opening separate fund accounts.
§ 123-6. Violations and penalties.
Any owner of property, any named insured or any insuring agent who
violates this chapter shall be subject to a penalty of up to $1,000 per
violation.
E. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the ability of the
Borough to recover any deficiency. Furthermore, nothing in this
subsection shall be construed to prohibit the Borough and the named
insured from entering into an agreement that permits the transfer of
funds to the named insured if some other reasonable disposition of the
damaged property had been negotiated.
A. Where, pursuant to 40 P.S. 638 et seq. the Borough Treasurer or
Borough Manager issues a certificate and bill showing the amount of
delinquent taxes, assessment, penalties and user charges against the
property as of the date specified in the request that have not been paid
as of the date of the certificate and where the Borough Treasurer or
Borough Manager also shows as of the date of the Treasurer's
certificate the amount of the total costs, if any, certified to the Treasurer
or Manager that have been incurred by the Borough for the removal,
repair or securing of a building or other structure on the property, the
Treasurer or Manager shall total all costs and tender as part of the
certificate to the insurance company.
B. Upon receipt of the certificate pursuant to (1) Subsection (b)(1)(ii) of 40
P.S. § 638, the insuring agent shall return the bill to the Treasurer or
Manager and transfer to the Treasurer or Manager an amount from the
insurance proceeds necessary to pay the taxes, assessment, penalties,
charges and costs as shown on the bill. The Borough shall receive the
amount and apply or credit to payment of the items shown in the billing.
C. The insuring agent shall otherwise comply with § 123-3 of this chapter.
§ 123-3 FIRE INSURANCE § 123-6
123:137
Chapter 127
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Municipal Authorities — See Ch. 8.
Joint Zoning and Code Enforcement
Officer — See Ch. 35, Art. I.
Planning Commission — See Ch. 50.
Building construction — See Ch. 95.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 111.
Energy conservation — See Ch. 115.
Fire insurance escrow — See Ch. 123.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 127.
Mechanical standards — See Ch. 155.
Mobile homes — See Ch. 159.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 190.
Water — See Ch. 256.
§ 127-1. Adoption of standards.
§ 127-2. Modifications in BOCA National Fire Prevention Code.
A. BOCA National Fire Prevention Code. There is hereby adopted in its
entirety by the Borough of Tarentum that certain document known as
the "BOCA National Fire Prevention Code, 1999, Eleventh Edition," as
published by the Building Officials and Code Administrators
International, Inc., a copy of which is on file in the office of the borough,
save and except such provisions as hereinafter deleted, modified or
amended.51
B. National Fire Protection Association Code. There is hereby also adopted
in its entirety the National Fire Protection Association Code, 1978, as
published by the National Fire Protection Association, a copy of which
is on file in the office of the borough, save and except such provisions as
are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended, and except further, that
all administrative and enforcement procedures of said code shall be
carried out in accordance with the provisions of § 127-2B, Subsection
F-105.1, of this chapter.
A. Deletions. There shall be no deletions from the 1999 BOCA National
Fire Prevention Code.
B. Revisions. The following sections of the BOCA National Fire Prevention
Code are revised to read as follows: 52
(1) F-105.1 is hereby amended to read as follows:
51.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
52.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 123-6 TARENTUM CODE § 127-2
127:138
F-105.1 Enforcement Office. The Code Enforcement Officer,
the Fire Chief and Assistant Fire Chief of the Tarentum Fire
Department are hereby established as the municipal fire
inspectors. It shall be their duty and responsibility to enforce the
provisions of the Fire Prevention Code as herein adopted and in
accordance set forth. Whenever the fire official shall find any
violation or hazardous or dangerous condition, he shall serve
notice to the responsible owner, operator or occupant of the
building or premises, in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter and the BOCA National Fire Prevention Code adopted
herein.
1. The inspector shall issue recommendations to any owner or
occupier of property after an inspector and shall give a
reasonable time to the owner or occupier to comply with the
recommendations.
2. When the time limit has expired the premises shall be
reinspected by the same or another inspector. If the
recommendations have been disregarded, a citation shall be
issued by the Code Enforcement Office to the owner or
occupier of the premises. The citation shall state the sections
of the codes which are being violated and specify a time
period within which the violation shall be corrected.
3. When the time limitation has expired within which the
violations are to be corrected, whether from the original
citation or from the Board of Appeals, the Code Enforcement
Officer shall reinspect the property to see if violations have
been evaded. If the violations have not been abated, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall file appropriate action with the
District Justice for the violations of this chapter.
4. Any inspector, upon the complaint of any person or whenever
he/they deem it necessary, shall inspect any building or
premises within his jurisdiction, under the provisions of this
chapter.
(2) F-107.8 is hereby amended to read as follows:
F-107.8 Payment of Fees. A permit shall not be issued until the
designated fees, as established from time to time by resolution of
the Borough Council, have been paid.
(3) F-112.3 is hereby amended to read as follows:
§ 127-2 FIRE PREVENTION § 127-2
127:139
§ 127-3. Short title.
This chapter, together with the BOCA National Fire Prevention Code
adopted herein, shall be known and may be cited as the "Fire Prevention
Code of the Borough of Tarentum."
Chapter 136
HAZARDOUS WASTES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Emergency service — See Ch. 17.
Fire protection and rescue — See Ch. 24.
Police Department — See Ch.54.
§ 136-1. Command agency.
The governing body of the Borough of Tarentum hereby designates the Fire
Department as the hazardous materials incident command agency for all
hazardous materials incidents within the limits of the borough.
F-112.3 Penalty for violations. Any person or member of a
partnership or corporation who shall violate the provisions of this
code or who shall fail to comply with any of the requirements
thereof shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall pay a fine of
not more than $1,000 or by imprisonment of not more than 30
days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a
violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
(4) F-113.0 is hereby revised to read as follows:
Any owner or occupier of said premises having received a citation
may appeal to the Board of Appeals and have a hearing within 30
days of date of issuance of citation. The hearing shall be informal
and all evidence which the Code Enforcement Officer or the
owner of occupier wishes to place before the Board shall be
accepted for whatever value the Board places on that evidence.
The owner or occupier of said premises shall be permitted to be
represented by Counsel at the hearing, and Counsel shall be
permitted to cross examine the Code Enforcement Officers. The
Board of Appeals, within 10 days after the close of the hearing,
shall issue an order affirming or overruling the citation, either in
whole or in part. If the Board affirms the citation, a time
limitation shall be attached to the ruling permitting the owner or
occupier to abate the violations. If the Board of Appeals overrules
all or part of the citation, the violations shall be stricken from the
citation.
§ 127-2 TARENTUM CODE § 136-2
136:140
§ 136-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings, unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is
intended:
EMERGENCY ACTION — All of the activities conducted in order to prevent
or mitigate injury to human health or to the environment from a release or
threatened release of any material into or upon the environment.
EMERGENCY RESCUE PERSONNEL — Any public employee, including but
not limited to any fire fighter or emergency rescue personnel, who responds
to any condition caused, in whole or part, by a hazardous material that
jeopardizes or could jeopardize public health or safety or the environment.
FIRE CHIEF — The Fire Chief of the borough or appointed designee.
HANDLER — Any person who handles hazardous material.
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL — Any material that, because of its quantity,
concentration or physical or chemical characteristics, poses significant
present or potential hazard to human health and safety or to the
environment if released into the workplace or the environment. Hazardous
materials include but are not limited to hazardous substances, hazardous
waste and any material which a handler or the Fire Chief has a reasonable
basis for believing to be injurious to the health and safety of persons
or harmful to the environment if released into the workplace or the
environment.
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE — Any substance or chemical product for which
any of the following applies to the substance in the quantity involved:
A. The manufacturer or producer is required to prepare an MSDS for the
substance or product pursuant to any applicable federal law or
regulation.
B. The substance is listed as a radioactive material in Chapter 1 of Title 10
of the Code of Federal Regulations.
C. The substance is listed as a radioactive material in Title 10 of the Code
of Federal Regulations, Part 110, Appendix B.
D. The substance is classified as a pesticide in accordance with applicable
state law and regulations.
E. A substance is classified by the United States Environmental Protection
Agency as a priority organic pollutant.
HAZARDOUS WASTE OR EXTREMELY HAZARDOUS WASTE — Any
material or substance of which any one of the following applies:
F. The substance is identified as a hazardous waste substance by state law.
G. The substance is identified as an extremely hazardous waste by state
law.
§ 136-2 HAZARDOUS WASTES § 136-2
136:141
H. The substance is identified in the Code of Federal Regulations, Title 40,
Sections 261.31 through 261.33, inclusive.
MSDS — A material safety data sheet prepared pursuant to state law
or pursuant to the regulations or the Occupational Safety and Health
Administration of the United States Department of Labor.
PERSON — An individual, trust, firm, joint-stock company, corporation,
partnership or association.
RECOVERABLE EXPENSES — In general, those expenses that are
reasonable, necessary and allocable to the emergency action. Expenses
allowable for recovery may include but are not limited to:
I. Disposable materials and supplies acquired, consumed and expended
specifically for the purpose of the emergency action.
J. Compensation of employees for the time and efforts devoted specifically
to the emergency action.
K. Rental or leasing of equipment used specifically for the emergency
action (such as protective equipment or clothing and scientific and
technical equipment).
L. Replacement costs for equipment owned by the borough that is
contaminated beyond reuse or repair, if the equipment was a total loss
and the loss occurred during the emergency action (such as selfcontained
breathing apparatus irretrievably contaminated during the
response).
M. Decontamination of equipment contaminated during the response.
N. Special technical services specifically required for the response (such
as costs associated with the time and efforts of technical experts or
specialists not otherwise provided for by the borough).
O. Other special services specifically required for the emergency action.
P. Laboratory costs of analyzing samples taken during the emergency
action.
Q. Costs of cleanup, storage or disposal of the released material.
R. Costs associated with the services, supplies and equipment procured
for a specific evacuation.
S. Medical expenses incurred as a result of response activities.
T. Legal expenses that may be incurred as a result of the emergency
action, including efforts to recover expenses pursuant to this chapter.
RELEASE — Any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting,
emptying, discharging, injecting, excepting, leaching, dumping or
disposing into the environment.
§ 136-2 TARENTUM CODE § 136-2
136:142
§ 136-3. Report of release or threatened release.
§ 136-4. Liability for cleanup costs.
Any person or business causing an unauthorized release of any hazardous
material which requires the borough or its fire company to expend public
funds for the cleanup or removal of such hazardous material shall be civilly
liable to the borough for all costs incurred by the borough or its fire
company for such cleanup and removal.
§ 136-5. Cleanup or abatement; persons liable for cost.
The Fire Department is authorized to clean up or abate the effects of
any hazardous material unlawfully released, discharged or deposited upon
or onto property or facilities within the borough. The following described
persons shall be jointly and severally liable to the borough for the payment
of all costs incurred by the borough or its fire company as a result of such
cleanup or abatement activity.
STORE — The containment of substances or materials in such a manner
as not to constitute disposal of such substances or materials.
THREATENED RELEASE — A condition creating a substantial
probability of harm when the probability and potential extent of harm
make it reasonably necessary to take immediate action to prevent,
reduce or mitigate damages to persons, property or the environment.
A. The handler of any hazardous material shall, upon discovery,
immediately report any release or threatened release of a hazardous
material to the Fire Department. Each handler shall provide all state,
borough or county fire or public health or safety personnel and
emergency rescue personnel with access to the handler's facilities.
B. A copy of a report submitted to any state or federal agency concerning
such release may be filed with the Fire Chief, instead of any original
report.
A. Any person or persons whose negligent or willful act or omission
proximately caused such release, discharge or deposit;
B. The person or persons who owned or had custody or control of the
hazardous substance or the material at the time of such release,
discharge or deposit, without regard to fault or proximate cause; and
C. The person or persons who owned or had custody or control of the
container which held such hazardous material or substance at the time
of or immediately prior to such release, discharge or deposit, without
regard to fault or proximate cause.
§ 136-2 HAZARDOUS WASTES § 136-6
136:143
§ 136-6. Verification and supervision of cleanup.
In the event that any person undertakes, either voluntarily or upon order
of the Fire Chief or other borough official, to clean up or abate the effects
of any hazardous substance or material unlawfully released, discharged or
deposited upon or onto any property or facility within the borough, the
Fire Chief may take such action as is necessary to supervise or verify the
adequacy of the cleanup or abatement. The persons described in § 136-5
shall be liable to the borough for all costs incurred as a result of such
supervision or verification.
§ 136-7. Recovery of expense.
§ 136-8. Conflict with state or federal law.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to conflict with state or federal
laws requiring persons causing or responsible for releases or threatened
releases from engaging in remediation activities or paying the cost thereof,
or both.
A. Itemization of recoverable expenses. Borough personnel and
departments involved in an emergency action shall keep an itemized
record of recoverable expenses resulting from an emergency action.
Promptly after completion of an emergency action, the appropriate
borough department shall certify those expenses to the Borough
Manager.
B. Submission of claim. The borough shall submit a written itemized claim
for the total expenses incurred by the borough for the emergency action
to the responsible person and a written notice that, unless the amounts
are paid in full within 30 days after the date of mailing of the claim and
notice, the borough will file a civil action seeking recovery for the
stated amount.
C. Civil suit. The borough may bring a civil action for recovery of the
recoverable expenses against any and all persons causing or
responsible for the emergency action.
§ 136-6 TARENTUM CODE § 136-8
136:144
Chapter 155
MECHANICAL STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Municipal Authorities — See Ch. 8.
Joint Zoning and Code Enforcement
Officer — See Ch. 35, Art. I.
Planning Commission — See Ch. 50.
Building construction — See Ch. 95.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 111.
Energy conservation — See Ch. 115.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 127.
Mobile homes — See Ch. 159.
Plumbing — See Ch. 185.
Sewers — See Ch. 204.
Water — See Ch. 256.
§ 155-1. Adoption of standards.53
The Council of the Borough of Tarentum does hereby adopt by reference
the International Mechanical Code, 1998 Edition, as the Mechanical Code
for the Borough of Tarentum, as though the same were more fully set
forth in this chapter, establishing minimum standards for the design and
installation of all mechanical systems for all buildings and structures within
the Borough of Tarentum.
§ 155-2. Amendments.
Any reference within the Code to a municipality shall be the "Borough of
Tarentum"; any reference to a county shall be the "County of Allegheny";
and any reference to the state shall be the "Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania."
§ 155-3. Permit fee.
Any permit required to be issued shall not be issued until a permit fee as set
forth from time to time by resolution of the Borough Council is paid.
§ 155-4. Violations and penalties.54
Any person violating any section of this chapter shall, upon summary
conviction before the District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $1,000, and the costs of the proceeding for each violation of
this chapter, said fine to accrue to the benefit of the Borough of Tarentum.
Each day the violation exists shall be a separate violation. If any person
so fined shall be in default of payment of such fine and costs, he shall be
sentenced to imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 30 days;
53.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
54.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 136-8 MECHANICAL STANDARDS § 155-4
155:145
provided, however, that such fine or imprisonment shall be in addition to
any fee imposed by this chapter.
Chapter 159
MOBILE HOMES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 50.
Building construction — See Ch. 95.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
220.
Zoning — See Ch. 265.
§ 159-1. Permitted location.
Mobile homes shall be permitted only in approved trailer parks.
§ 159-2. Park requirements.55
No trailer park shall be permitted unless it meets the following
requirements:
§ 159-3. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
MOBILE HOME — Any house trailer or other vehicle used or intended for
use as a dwelling unit, camper, sleeping trailer, hunting trailer or similar
use.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A site designed and approved for the rental of park
sites for mobile homes.
A. No trailer park shall have an area of less than three acres.
B. Every trailer site within the park shall have an area of not less than
1,500 square feet.
C. No trailer shall be sited within 35 feet of any adjacent property.
D. Not less than 10% of the gross area of the park shall be improved for
recreational activities of the residents of the park.
E. The park shall be appropriately landscaped and screened from adjacent
properties.
55.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 265, Zoning, § 265-34D.
§ 155-4 TARENTUM CODE § 159-3
159:146
Chapter 163
MONUMENTS AND LANDMARKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
220.
Zoning — See Ch. 265.
§ 163-1. Unlawful acts; exceptions.
§ 163-2. Violations and penalties.56
Any person or persons violating the terms of this chapter, upon conviction
before the Mayor or any District Justice, may be sentenced to pay a fine
of not more than $600 and, in default to payment of fine costs, may be
committed to the borough lockup for a period of not exceeding 30 days or
to the county jail or workhouse for a period of not exceeding 30 days.
Chapter 170
NEWSRACKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 180. Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 216.
§ 170-1. License required; fee and procedure.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to remove, cover up or
interfere with, in any manner whatsoever, any public monument or
landmark upon or the line of the public street, alley, highway, parks,
squares and on private property, for the purpose of locating or fixing the
lines of the public streets, alleys, highways, parks and squares in the
Borough of Tarentum.
B. Provided, however, that whenever necessary to remove or replace a
public monument or landmark in the making of public improvements,
said monument or landmarks shall be removed or replaced by the
Borough Engineer; also, whenever necessary to remove or replace such
monuments or landmarks by a contractor in the making of a public
improvement, application shall be made to the Borough Engineer, who
shall do the work at the cost and expense of the applicant.
A. A license based must be obtained for each newsrack, sign and
commercial telephone booth installed within the borough limits on
56.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 159-3 MONUMENTS AND LANDMARKS § 170-1
163:147
§ 170-2. Application denials and permit revocation.
borough rights-of-way, thoroughfares and sidewalks with the one-time
amount as set forth from time to time by resolution of the Borough
Council, which fee would provide for the cost of keeping track of
the placement of each licensed sign and newsrack and the cost of
supervising and enforcing the regulation of this ordinance.
B. The fee shall not be prorated.
C. The license shall be issued by the office of the Borough Code
Enforcement Officer who shall issue a compliance sticker at the time of
payment of the fee and approval of application.
D. The fee and license shall be nontransferable or assignable to another
owner or location.
E. The application must include a drawing, which drawing shows the
precise situs for the placement of any aforementioned unit, showing
distances from curbs and building walls, and the distance from any
intersection, fire hydrant, crosswalk, railroad or other natural
obstruction within 15 feet of the proposed site.
F. The application, once approved, shall be kept on file by the Code
Enforcement Officer.
A. Application for permits issued pursuant to this section must be
approved or denied by the Code Enforcement Officer within 10 days of
the application or the application shall be considered approved. The
Code Enforcement Officer may deny or revoke an application or license
only after notice and hearing, if requested by the applicant, and only for
either of the following causes:
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation or any false statement contained in
application for such a permit; and
(2) Noncompliance with or violation of any provision of this section or
other ordinances regulating such rental application or rental
permits, or violation of any condition of the rental permit or any
other state law or borough ordinance.
B. The content of any newspaper sold or any censorship thereof shall not
be a good cause or reason for denial of a permit application or
revocation of a permit, except that pornographic material which
violates other ordinances of the borough, including Ordinance No.
95-3,57 or the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall not be
permitted to be sold from dispensing devices.
C. Preliminary determination.
57.Editor's Note: See specific definitions in Ch. 265, Zoning, and § 265-34P.
§ 170-1 TARENTUM CODE § 170-2
170:148
(1) Upon a preliminary determination by the Code Enforcement Officer
to deny a permit application or to revoke a permit for violation of
this chapter, the Code Enforcement Officer shall issue notice of
such preliminary determination to the applicant for a permit or to
the permittee. The notice shall be in writing and shall state the
specific reason for the preliminary determination denying the
application or revoking the permit.
(2) Upon issuance of the preliminary determination to deny the
application or revoke the permit, the applicant or permittee shall
have 10 calendar days after the receipt of the notice of revocation
to remedy the cause set forth in the notice or to appeal the
preliminary determination of the Code Enforcement Officer. If the
notice is for revocation, mandatory removal or replacement of the
licensed item is stayed if the applicant appeals the preliminary
determination.
(3) If the applicant or permittee elects to appeal the preliminary
determination, the Borough Council will conduct a hearing
concerning the facts and issues set forth in the preliminary
determination at the next regularly scheduled Council meeting,
after the issuance of such notice. The Council, at its meeting, shall
issue an immediate determination as to whether the permit should
be revoked or the application denied.
(4) A stenographic record shall be made of that portion of the Council
meeting set aside for the determination as to the Code
Enforcement Officer's denial or determination.
(5) If the applicant desires a hearing separate from a regularly
scheduled public meeting of Council, then Council shall set the
time and place for such hearing by certified mail to the applicant
and the applicant shall tender an amount as set forth from time to
time by resolution of the Borough Council for the advertising fee.
The applicant or aggrieved will be responsible for engaging a
stenographer for the hearing in either event.
(6) The Council may reverse, affirm or modify the decision of the Code
Enforcement Officer and any such decision of the Council shall be
final. If the Council fails to hear and decide such appeal within 45
days of the date of docketing such appeal on the Council agenda,
which shall be the first Council meeting after the filing of such
appeal, the appeal shall be sustained and relief sought and the
appeal shall be granted.
D. If the application or permittee remedies the cause set forth in the notice
issued pursuant to Subsection C(1) hereof within the seven-day period,
the Code Enforcement Officer shall either grant the application or
rescind the revocation of the existing permit and no hearing on the
preliminary determination shall be conducted.
§ 170-2 NEWSRACKS § 170-2
170:149
§ 170-3. Rules and regulations of placement; obligations of
permittee.
Placement of the aforementioned and licensed and controlled newsracks,
newspaper vending machines, telephones and telephone booths,
merchandise and the signs for the advertisement of merchandise and other
like commercial and noncommercial units must be placed on the sidewalks
and thoroughfares under the following restrictions.
E. Publishers of newspaper for profit and nonprofit may, acting in good
faith during unusual circumstances which create the potential of an
increase of newspaper sales, place a newsrack or newspaper
dispensing device without application of a permit having been approved
by the Borough Code Enforcement Officer, but the placement of said
newsrack or newspaper dispensing device must otherwise comply with
all other aspects of this chapter, as amended. The application for license
or permit must be submitted by the next weekday after placement or
the benefits of staying the removal requirement of any newsrack as
discussed more fully in § 170-2C will not be enjoyed by the applicant
and the publisher will be in violation of this chapter.
F. A person aggrieved by a final determination of the Code Enforcement
Officer in refusing to grant or in revoking a license after the hearing set
forth in Subsection C hereof may appeal, including a statement of the
grounds for the appeal, with the Borough Secretary within 10 days after
the notice of the final determination by the Code Enforcement Officer
has been given. If the applicant does not file within 10 days, the Code
Enforcement Officer's decision on the license application is final.
G. The filing of an appeal to the Council of the final determination of the
Code Enforcement Officer under this section shall stay the decision of
the Code Enforcement Officer to revoke a permit until after the
permittee has exhausted all rights of appeal provided by this chapter
and for seven days thereafter.
A. Licensed units.
(1) Must not be attached by chain, bolt or other means to the public
thoroughfares, sidewalks, utility poles, parking meter poles, traffic
signs or other borough property.
(2) May not exceed a height of 50 inches.
(3) May not have any sharp edges.
(4) May not have a base which extends outward more than the higher
dimensions of said unit.
(5) May not be placed at any location where the width of clear passage
in any direction on the sidewalk parallel to the street or avenue is
reduced to less than 42 inches.
§ 170-2 TARENTUM CODE § 170-3
170:150
§ 170-4. Amendment of rules and regulations.
The rules, regulations and the amount of fee of this chapter may be changed
from time to time by resolution of the Council of the Borough of Tarentum,
(6) May not be placed closer than 10 feet to any fire hydrant or other
emergency facility.
(7) May not be placed any closer than 3 feet of any marked crosswalk.
(8) Newsracks must be placed facing the street or 180° opposite,
approximately 18 inches from a curb or the paved edge of streets or
avenues.
(9) The licensed unit must be recessed back from the corner of the
street intersection along the curb (18 inches back) at a distance
equal to the wider intersecting sidewalk. (But in no event may a
licensed unit be closer than 3 feet of any handicapped ramp or
painted or established crosswalk.)
B. This chapter prohibits sidewalk sales, displays of merchandise,
sidewalk sign placement for the advertisement of merchandise or
lottery tickets, unless permission is granted from time to time by
Borough Council at a public meeting to a Chamber of Commerce or a
group of like merchants, at no fee to the applicants.
C. Permittee obligations and limitation of rights.
(1) The permittee, upon the removal of a newspaper dispensing device,
shall restore the property of the borough to the safe condition as
where the device was initially installed, ordinary wear-and-tear
excepted.
(2) The permittee shall maintain the device in good working order and
in a safe and clean condition and shall keep the immediate area
surrounding such device free from litter and debris.
(3) The license granted by the Code Enforcement Officer shall state
that the licensee shall save and hold the borough harmless from
any and all liability for any reason whatsoever occasioned upon the
installation and use of each newspaper dispensing device and other
like unit and shall file with the Code Enforcement Officer proof on
an annual basis that the licensee has a minimum of $100,000
liability insurance which shall cover any liability and defense of any
lawsuit arising from the issuance of the license and the use of said
unit.
(4) Rental licenses shall not be assignable and shall not grant any
permanent right.
(5) If the Code Enforcement Officer does not deny an application
within 21 days following the date of the application, the application
shall be deemed granted.
§ 170-3 NEWSRACKS § 170-4
170:151
provided that at all times the regulations must be content and/or product
neutral in enforcement and applied to profit and nonprofit organizations
equally in a purely objective manner, and further provided that any change
complies with rules and regulations, all state statutes and the requisites
of the United States of America and the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
constitutions.
§ 170-5. Violations and penalties.58
The owner of any licensed unit shall be first notified by regular mail that
the aforementioned newsrack, newspaper dispensing device, telephone or
telephone booth, sign or any unit covered by this chapter is in violation of
this chapter and has seven days from the date of mailing to get the unit in
compliance, after which time the final penalty shall be nor more than $600
per diem as controlled by § 170-2G and other language of this chapter.
Chapter 175
OUTDOOR STORAGE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 127.
Hazardous wastes — See Ch. 136.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 190.
Solid waste — See Ch. 210.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 246.
Zoning — See Ch. 265.
§ 175-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPLIANCES — Any range, stove, refrigerator, freezer, microwave, washer
or dryer.
LANDLORD — A duly registered property owner letting real property for
use or hire.
TENANT — Leasee, occupant, resident.
UPHOLSTERED FURNITURE — Any furniture that contains attached filling
material and is used or intended to be used for sitting, reclining, sleeping
or resting indoors.
§ 175-2. Prohibited acts.
A. The use, placement, or storage of any upholstered furniture
manufactured primarily for indoor use, including but not limited to
mattresses and box springs, sofas, loungers, recliners and chairs, and
58.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 170-4 TARENTUM CODE § 175-2
170:152
§ 175-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating this chapter or landlord permitting violation of this
chapter shall be fined a minimum of $200 and a maximum of up to $500
plus court costs. Each day after the five-day warning notice is issued that
the condition continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 175-4. Notice; enforcement.
The Tarentum Code Enforcement Officer or the Tarentum Police may
enforce this chapter on or after the date following the date five-day warning
notice posted on the door of the premises indicating violation of this
chapter.
§ 175-5. Landlords.
Landlords are deemed to violate this chapter if they have received a five-day
warning notice or if they are not registered owners.
Chapter 177
PARKS AND RECREATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Recreation Board — See Ch. 61.
Animals — See Ch. 88.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 180.
the use, placement, or storage of any appliance shall be prohibited
outdoors, including any front, back or side yard, porch, stoop, landing,
patio, deck or balcony.
B. The use, placement or storage of any motor vehicle part, engine parts,
tires, batteries, chemical containers or hazardous material shall be
prohibited outdoors, including any front, back or side yard, porch,
stoop, landing, patio, deck or balcony.
§ 175-2 PARKS AND RECREATION § 175-5
177:153

ARTICLE I
Park Rules and Regulations
[Adopted 3-26-1935 by Ord. No. 1254; amended in its entirety at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 177-1. Park rules approved.
The rules and regulations attached hereto for the government of all parks
in the Borough of Tarentum be and the same are hereby approved.
RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING PARKS
IN TARENTUM, PENNSYLVANIA
1. All requests for the use of parks must be made in writing to the
Borough Secretary, setting forth the purpose for which the park is to
be used, and such requests, if granted, will be granted in accordance
with the time of the receipt of such requests.
2. Such requests shall be granted by a permit to use said park, issued by
the Borough Secretary, with the approval of the Borough Council, and
shall be in substantially the following form:
PERMIT TO USE PARK
The Borough of Tarentum, at the request of _______________, hereby
grants a permit to ______________________ to use the _________________
Park, _____________________, Tarentum, PA, on ____________ from
______________ to _____________, upon the following conditions:
(a) __________________________________ hereby releases and discharges the
Borough of Tarentum from any and all damages that may or might be
suffered by any person in said park, while the same is occupied under
this permit, and hereby agrees to indemnify and save harmless the
borough from any and all damages that might be suffered by reason
of the use of said park or park equipment.
(b) __________________________________, a resident of the Borough of
Tarentum, agrees to pay for all electric current used while this permit
is in force at the rate of three cents per kilowatt and for all water
used at the rate of ten cents per thousand gallons.
(c) Nonresidents of the borough may be granted a permit to use said
park, upon the payment of the sum of $25 per day, which shall
include water and electric service.
§ 177-2. Violations and penalties.
Any person or persons violating the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof before the District Justice, be fined a sum not exceeding
$600 and, upon default in payment of said fine, may be committed to
imprisonment in the Allegheny County Jail for a period not exceeding 30
days.
§ 177-1 PARKS AND RECREATION § 177-2
177:155

ARTICLE II
Consumption of Alcoholic Beverages
[Adopted 11-7-1977 by Ord. No. 2091]
§ 177-3. Prohibited acts.
No person shall consume any alcoholic liquor or beverage containing
alcoholic liquor in the premises of the borough-owned riverfront park,
recreational areas, tot lots, playgrounds or Dreshar Stadium and Field
House.
§ 177-4. Posting of notices.
The borough shall post notices at each of its properties informing the public
of the provisions of this article and of the fines for violation of the same.
§ 177-5. Violations and penalties.59
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall, upon summary
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of no more than $600 and, upon
default in payment of said fine, may be committed to imprisonment in the
Allegheny County Jail for a period not exceeding 30 days.
59.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 177-3 PARKS AND RECREATION § 177-5
177:157

ARTICLE III
Feeding of Animals and Fowl
[Adopted 3-11-1996 by Ord. No. 96-4]
§ 177-6. Prohibited acts.
The feeding of water fowl or other animals is hereby prohibited.
§ 177-7. Violations and penalties.
Anyone caught feeding bread or any other food or nourishment to any
animal in Tarentum Memorial Park shall be subject to the following fines:
§ 177-8. Issuance of citations.
The Borough of Tarentum Code Enforcement Officer and the Borough of
Tarentum Police are hereby authorized to issue citations relative to this
article.
§ 177-9. List and distribution of copies of citations.
A list of all persons cited shall be kept by the Borough Secretary. The officer
issuing any citation relative to this article shall give a copy of the citation to
the Borough Secretary in order that a record can be kept so that a violator
may be fined under the appropriate section of this article.
§ 177-10. Certification.
The Borough Secretary shall certify to the District Court under seal to which
letter each citation applies.
§ 177-11. Posting of signs.
The Superintendent of Streets is directed to post signs, no less than every
75 feet from each other throughout, which state that the feeding of any
animal is prohibited and which signs shall list the fine amounts.
A. First offense: $10 and court costs.
B. Second offense: $50 and court costs.
C. Third offense and subsequent convictions: $600 and court costs.60
60.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 177-6 PARKS AND RECREATION § 177-11
177:159
Chapter 179
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 54.
§ 177-11 TARENTUM CODE § 177-11
179:160
ARTICLE I
Excessive Police Calls Surtax
[Adopted 5-15-2006 by Ord. No. 06-02]
§ 179-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, unless the context clearly indicates a different
meaning, a word shall have the meaning set forth below:
BUILDING — Any structure located within the Borough of Tarentum,
whether occupied or unoccupied.
OWNER — Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others, shall
have legal title to any building, structure or property, with or without
accompanying actual possession thereof.
PERSON — A corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization and
any other group acting as a unit, as well as individuals; and shall also
include an executor, administrator, trustee, receiver or other representative
appointed according to law. Whenever the word "person" is used in any
section prescribing a penalty or fine, as to partnerships or association, the
word shall include the partners or members thereof; as to corporations, it
shall include the officers, agents or members thereof who are responsible
for any violation of such section.
PROPERTY — Any lot located within the Borough of Tarentum, whether the
lot is vacant or has a structure erected thereon.
§ 179-2. Excessive police calls.
It is hereby deemed that in the event three police calls are dispatched
to a particular property and/or building within a consecutive thirty-day
period or less, each and every call in excess of three is hereby deemed to
be excessive. This provision shall apply to calls that are responded to by
either the Borough of Tarentum Police, police of a neighboring municipality,
Pennsylvania State Police, County Police, or Sheriff.
§ 179-3. Fee for excessive calls.
There is hereby imposed a surtax of $50 for each and every police call that
is excessive. Such fee is to be paid by the owner of the property and/or
building.
§ 179-4. Duties of Borough Police Department.
The Borough Police Department on behalf of the Borough of Tarentum
shall invoice, collect and receive such fees imposed by this article, and
shall maintain records showing the amounts and dates such amounts were
received. The Police Department will forward all such fees collected and a
complete accounting thereof to the Borough Manager. Upon the occurrence
of a third police call occurring within a consecutive thirty-day period or less,
the Borough Police Department shall notify the owner that the next call will
§ 179-1 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 179-4
179:161
result in imposition of the above fee. Notice may be served by hand delivery
or certified mail, return receipt requested, to either the owner's residence
or owner's address appearing on the property's real estate tax blotter.
§ 179-5. Failure to pay fee.
Any person who fails to pay the surtax imposed by this article within 10
days of the date of the invoice shall be subject to prosecution in a summary
proceeding before a District Justice and shall, on conviction thereof, be
guilty of a summary offense which is punishable by a fine of not less than
$50 nor more than $300, plus costs of prosecution, plus the amount of the
surtax. In default of payment of such fees, fines and costs, the owner shall
be subject to imprisonment not exceeding 30 days.
§ 179-4 TARENTUM CODE § 179-5
179:162
Chapter 180
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Newsracks — See Ch. 170.
§ 180-1. Definitions.
§ 180-2. License required.
No person shall engage in peddling in the Borough of Tarentum without first
having taken out a license as herein provided.
§ 180-3. Application.
Every person desiring to engage in peddling in the Borough of Tarentum
shall first make application to the Mayor or Chief of Police for a license.
If such person shall also be required to obtain a license from any county
officer, he shall, when making such application, exhibit a valid county
license. Upon such application such person shall give his name; address;
his previous criminal record, if any; exhibit a valid photo identification for
himself and his helpers; the name of the person for whom he works, if any;
the type of goods, wares and merchandise he wishes to peddle; the length
of time for which he wishes to be licensed; the type of vehicle he uses, if
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PEDDLER — Any person who shall engage in peddling, as herein
defined.
PEDDLING — Engaging in peddling, canvassing, soliciting or taking
of orders, either by sample or otherwise, for any goods, wares or
merchandise, upon any of the streets or sidewalks or from house to
house within the Borough of Tarentum. The word "peddling" shall
not apply to farmers selling their own produce; any manufacturers or
producers in the sale of bread and bakery products, meat and meat
products or milk or milk products; or the sale of goods, wares and
merchandise donated by the owners thereof, the proceeds whereof are
to be applied to any charitable or philanthropic purpose. Whether or
not peddling is a charitable or philanthropic purpose or not shall be at
the discretion of the Mayor or Chief of Police.
PERSON — Any natural person, association, partnership, firm or
corporation.
B. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural and the masculine
shall include the feminine and the neuter.
§ 179-5 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 180-3
179:163
any; and the number of helpers he has, provided that where a person makes
application for himself and one or more helpers, all applicable personal
information specified shall be given for each helper, and an individual
license shall be required for each helper. No license issued under this
chapter shall be transferable from one person to another.
§ 180-4. License fees.
No license shall be issued under this chapter until the proper fee, as follows,
shall be paid to the Mayor or the Chief of Police, which shall be for the use
of the borough:
§ 180-5. Issuance and display of license.
Upon making application therefor and paying the proper fee, as herein
specified, a license shall be issued to every peddler. Such license shall
contain the information required to be given upon the application therefor.
Every peddler shall, at all times when engaged in peddling in the borough,
carry such license upon his person and shall exhibit such license, upon
request, to all police officers, borough officials and citizens. No peddler
shall engage in selling any products not mentioned upon such license.
§ 180-6. Prohibited days, hours and locations.
No person licensed as a peddler under this chapter shall engage in peddling
at any time on Sunday or upon any other day of the week before 9:00 a.m. or
after 9:00 p.m.. Peddlers going to individual residences must use the main
door or front door of the residence. Peddlers are prohibited from peddling
at residences where "no soliciting" or "no peddling" signs are posted on the
front or main door.
§ 180-7. Noise.
No person, licensed as a peddler under this chapter, shall hawk or cry his
wares upon any of the streets or sidewalks of the borough, nor shall be use
any loudspeaker or horn or any other device for announcing his presence by
which the public is annoyed.
§ 180-8. Use of vehicles.
No person, licensed as a peddler under this chapter, shall park any vehicle
upon any of the streets or alleys of the borough in order to sort, rearrange
A. Foot peddler: as set forth from time to time by resolution of the Borough
Council.
B. Peddling operating from a motor vehicle: as set forth from time to time
by resolution of the Borough Council.
C. Each and every additional peddler employed by or with a foot peddler
or peddler operating from a motor vehicle: as set forth from time to
time by resolution of the Borough Council.
§ 180-3 TARENTUM CODE § 180-8
179:164
or clean any of his goods, wares or merchandise; nor may any such person
place or deposit any refuse upon any of such streets or alleys; nor may any
such person maintain or keep a street or curbstone market by parking any
vehicle upon any street or alley in the borough for longer than necessary in
order to sell therefrom to persons residing in the immediate vicinity.
§ 180-9. Fixed locations.
No person, licensed as a peddler under this chapter, shall occupy any fixed
location upon any of the streets, alleys or sidewalks of the borough for the
purpose of peddling, with or without any stand or counter.
§ 180-10. Record of licenses.
The Mayor shall keep a record of all licenses issued under this chapter, and
the Chief of Police shall apply daily to the Mayor for a list of all licenses
issued hereunder since the previous day. The Mayor and the Chief of Police
shall supervise the activities of all holders of such license.
§ 180-11. Suspension of license.
The Mayor of the Borough of Tarentum is hereby authorized to suspend
any license issued under this chapter when he deems such suspension
to be beneficial to the public health, safety or morals or for violation of
any provisions of this chapter or for giving false information upon any
application for a license hereunder.
§ 180-12. Violations and penalties.61
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600 and, in
default of payment thereof, to imprisonment of not more than 30 days.
Chapter 185
PLUMBING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Municipal Authorities — See Ch. 8.
Joint Zoning and Code Enforcement
Officer — See Ch. 35, Art. I.
Planning Commission — See Ch. 50.
Building construction — See Ch. 95.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 111.
Energy conservation — See Ch. 115.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 127.
Mechanical standards — See Ch. 155.
Mobile homes — See Ch. 159.
Plumbing — See Ch. 185.
Sewers — See Ch. 204.
Water — See Ch. 256
61.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 180-8 PLUMBING § 180-12
185:165
Chapter 190
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Joint Zoning and Code Enforcement
Officer — See Ch. 35, Art. I.
Planning Commission — See Ch. 50.
Building construction — See Ch. 95.
Uniform construction code — See Ch. 99.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 111.
Energy conservation — See Ch. 115.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 127.
Mechanical standards — See Ch. 155.
Mobile homes — See Ch. 159.
Outdoor storage — See Ch. 175.
Plumbing — See Ch. 185.
Solid waste — See Ch. 210.
Water — See Ch. 256.
§ 180-12 TARENTUM CODE § 180-12
185:166
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 9-6-2016 by Ord. No. 16-02]
§ 190-1. Adoption of standards.
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the Office of the
Borough of Tarentum, being marked and designated as the International
Property Maintenance Code, 2015 edition and all subsequent editions, as
published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted
as the Property Maintenance Code of the Borough of Tarentum in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania for regulating and governing the conditions
and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures; by providing
the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things
and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and
fit for occupation and use; and providing for the condemnation of building
and structures unfit for human occupancy and use, and the demolition of
such existing structures as herein provided; providing for the issuance of
permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Property Maintenance
Code on file in the Office of the Borough of Tarentum are hereby referred to,
adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter, with the
additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in § 190-2 of
this chapter.
§ 190-2. Modifications.
The following sections are hereby revised and added:
A. Section 101.1. Insert "Borough of Tarentum" in place of "(name of
jurisdiction)."
B. Section 103.5. Adopted from time-to-time by resolution.
C. Section 112.4. Insert: "$100" and "$600."
D. Section 302.4. Insert: "six inches."
E. Section 304.14. Insert: "March 1" and "December 15."
F. Section 602.3. Insert: . . . "shall supply heat year round" to maintain a
temperature. . .
G. Section 602.4. Insert: occupiable workspaces from "November 1" to
"April 1."
H. Chapter 9 is added:
Chapter 9 - Penalties
Any person violating this chapter shall be subject to a fine of no more
than $600 and no less than $100 and imprisonment of no more than 30
days and court costs.
§ 190-1 PLUMBING § 190-2
185:167
§ 190-3. Clean-up ticket.
As an additional remedy, and not in limitation of any other remedy available
to the Borough, the Ordinance Enforcement Officer may issue a clean-up
ticket to an owner or occupant of property being maintained in violation of
this article, as follows:
Each day of violation shall be subject to fines and penalties,
consecutively; for each day shall constitute a separate offense.
A. For owners or occupants who are, at the time of violation, already in
noncompliance with a notice to maintain previously issued pursuant to
this section, a clean-up ticket may be issued immediately upon
observation of violation by the Ordinance Enforcement Officer.
B. For all other owners or occupants, a clean-up ticket may be issued only
when the owner or occupant has failed for a period of at least five days
to comply with a notice issued pursuant to this section.
C. The clean-up ticket may be mailed or handed to the owner or occupant
of the premises, or may be posted upon the premises upon which the
violation occurred, by the Ordinance Enforcement Officer, who shall
keep a record of the issuance of the clean-up ticket. The clean-up ticket
will specify the amount that must be paid to the Borough and the
deadline for payment in order to avoid the issuance of a citation. If the
owner or occupant to whom the ticket has been issued fails to pay the
amount specified within the specified deadline, or indicates a desire to
plead not guilty and the Ordinance Enforcement Officer desires to
proceed with the case, then the Ordinance Enforcement Officer may file
a citation with the proper authority. If the defendant pays the amount
specified on the clean-up ticket and comes into compliance with the
ordinance as directed on the clean-up ticket, the case will be concluded
without filing a citation or other institution of a criminal proceeding.
D. The Ordinance Enforcement Officer is directed to prepare a standard
form clean-up ticket to be used in accordance with this article.
§ 190-2 TARENTUM CODE § 190-3
185:168
ARTICLE II
Vacant Properties
[Adopted 7-7-2018 by Ord. No. 18-03]
§ 190-4. Short title.
This article shall be known and cited as the "Vacant Property Ordinance."
§ 190-5. Applicability and scope.
This article shall be applicable to all abandoned real property and every
vacant building or structure located within the geographical confines of the
Tarentum Borough, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania, that has been vacant
for more than 30 consecutive days and to each owner, interest holder, or
local agent of any such abandoned real property or vacant building or
structure, without regard to whether such owner, interest holder, or local
agent is a public, private, governmental, commercial, industrial, residential,
institutional, nonprofit, or for-profit person.
§ 190-6. Purpose and enforcement.
§ 190-7. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall
be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage
and to give this article its most reasonable application. Where terms are
A. The purpose of this article requiring the registration of all vacant and
abandoned buildings and structures and the payment of registration
fees is to assist the Borough of Tarentum in protecting the public
health, safety and welfare, to monitor the number of vacant buildings in
the Borough, to assess the effects of the condition of those buildings on
nearby businesses and properties in the neighborhoods in which they
are located particularly in light of fire and safety hazards and unlawful,
temporary occupancy by transients, including illicit drug users and
traffickers, and to require of the owners of such vacant buildings their
registration and payment of related fees, and to promote substantial
efforts to rehabilitate such vacant buildings. The provisions of this
section are applicable to the owners of such vacant buildings as set
forth herein and are in addition to and not in lieu of any and all other
applicable provisions of the ordinances of Tarentum Borough and all
relevant codes and/or regulations adopted therein.
B. Administration and enforcement of this article shall remain under the
sole control of the Borough Manager. The Borough Manager and/or
designee shall have the authority to institute summary criminal
proceedings as a means of enforcement of this section and shall, when
acting within the scope of employment hereunder, have the powers of a
police officer to the Borough; provided however, that under no
circumstances shall they have the power to arrest.
§ 190-4 PLUMBING § 190-7
185:169
not defined, such terms shall have ordinarily accepted meanings such as the
context implies.
ABANDONED — Deserted or discarded for more than 180 days.
ABANDONED REAL PROPERTY — Any real property, including but not
limited to one or more buildings or structures, without respect to occupancy
or vacancy, that is subject to a mortgage and is either: (i) in default of a
mortgage for which a mortgagee has obtained a judgment in foreclosure;
(ii) in default of a mortgage and subject to an application or proceeds for
a tax deed or pending tax claim bureau or tax assessor sale for unpaid
property taxes; (iii) in default of a mortgage and subject to an application
or proceedings for a sheriff sale for unpaid claims, debts, or obligations; or
(iv) in default of a mortgage and has been transferred to a mortgagee by
deed in lieu of foreclosure, or any similar document. The designation of real
property as "abandoned real property" shall continue and remain in place
until such time as the real property is sold or transferred to a new owner,
the foreclosure action is dismissed, or any default on the mortgage has been
cured.
CELLAR — A room typically used for storage that is located in the basement
of a building and is not used for commercial, industrial, or residential
purposes.
COMMERCIAL BUILDING — A building that is used, or partially used, for
commercial business activities including, but not limited to, stores, offices,
schools, churches, gymnasiums, libraries, museums, hospitals, clinics,
warehouses, and jails.
COMMERCIAL BUSINESS — Any business that relates to the exchange of
goods or services.
DISCARDED — Cast aside as useless or undesirable.
GARBAGE — The animal or vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and the consumption of food.
GOOD FAITH EFFORT — Includes contracts with realtors, newspaper ads,
window signs, or other methods provided that the effort is actually likely to
generate interest in the property and the owner is actually willing to rent,
sell or lease.
GROUND FLOOR — Any occupied floor of a building with direct access to
grade, that is located less than one story above, or less than one story below
grade, provided that no portion of a floor that constitutes a cellar as defined
in this article shall constitute a "ground floor."
HABITABLE — Livable; with reference to this article, a structure with a
hard roof and sides that is equipped with heat, electricity, water service,
sewage service and functional plumbing, and is capable of being lived in
without undue risk to human health and safety.
INDUSTRIAL BUILDING — Property or design for, or used by, companies or
persons for manufacturing, warehousing or assemblage of components.
§ 190-7 TARENTUM CODE § 190-7
185:170
INDUSTRIAL BUSINESS — Any business that relates to the production or
manufacture of goods.
NOTICE — Written notice of a violation, pursuant to first class mail, to the
last known address of the owner of the property in question.
OCCUPIED — Any building or structure where one or more persons actually
conducts a lawful business or resides in all or any part of the building as the
licensed business occupant, or as the legal or equitable owner/occupant(s)
or tenant(s) on a permanent, nontransient business, or any combination of
the same.
OWNER — Any person (i) having a legal or equitable interest in a property;
(ii) having a legal interest in a property recorded in the official records
of the state, county or municipality as holding title to the property; or
(iii) otherwise having control of the property including the guardian of the
estate of any such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate
of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a court.
PERSON — An individual, corporation, partnership, financial institution,
bank, credit union, savings and loan company, investment firm, government
agency, government authority, municipal corporation or any other group
acting as a unit.
PROPERTY — Any portion of unimproved or improved real estate located
within the Tarentum Borough which includes the buildings or structures
located on it regardless of condition.
PUBLIC NUISANCE —
Any building, structure, or property, which, because of physical
condition, use or occupancy, is considered to be an attractive nuisance
to minors or uninvited persons.
A.
Any building or structure which because it is dilapidated, unsanitary,
unsafe, insect- or vermin-infested or lacking in the facilities and
equipment required by the Ordinances of Tarentum Borough and has
been designated by the City as a public nuisance.
B.
Any structure which is a fire hazard, a structural hazard, or is otherwise
dangerous to the safety of any persons or any property.
C.
Any building or structure, which lacks, or has rendered inoperable, fire
protection systems as required by the applicable codes and ordinances.
D.
Any structure, from which water, plumbing, heating, sewage or other
facilities have been disconnected, destroyed, removed or rendered
ineffective, so that the property creates a hazard to neighboring
properties.
E.
Any building or structure, which, for reason of neglect or lack of
maintenance has become a place for the accumulation of refuse, a
haven for insects, rodents, and other vermin.
F.
§ 190-7 PLUMBING § 190-7
185:171
REFUSE — Materials that are abandoned, discarded, or destined for
recycling. The term includes rubbish, garbage, scrap metal, tires,
appliances, vehicles, general trash, construction/demo debris, etc.
RUBBISH — Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except
garbage. The term shall include the residue from the burning of wood,
coal coke, and other combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes,
wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans,
metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery and dust, construction/demo debris
and other similar materials.
STOREFRONT — Any facade located on the ground floor of a commercial
building having one or more storefront windows.
STOREFRONT WINDOW — Any window of any commercial building that
permits an unobstructed public view into the interior of the building from
any immediately adjacent street, sidewalk or right-of-way.
STRUCTURES — Constructed objects. For purposes of this article, the term
includes but is not limited to, buildings, sheds, garages, swimming pools
and recreational facilities.
VACANT — A building or structure, or portion thereof, shall be deemed to
be vacant if no person or persons currently conducts a lawfully licensed
business there, or lawfully resides in or lives in any part of the building as
the legal or equitable owner(s) or tenant occupant(s) or owner-occupants or
tenant(s), on a permanent nontransient basis.
VACANT BUILDING — A property or structure, or portion thereof, that
is unoccupied for more than 60 days or has been the subject of (i) a
mortgage foreclosure action or notice; (ii) a bankruptcy sale or notice; (iii)
a delinquent tax sale or notice; or (iv) a mortgage foreclosure action where
the title to the property has been retained by the beneficiary of a deed
or trust involved in the foreclosure or transferred under a deed in lieu of
foreclosure/sale.
VACANT STOREFRONT — A storefront shall be deemed vacant if no person
or persons currently conducts a lawfully licensed business there.
WINDOW — An opening in a building that has a glass casement for
permitting natural light into a building.
WINDOW DISPLAY — A visual representation of information or graphics for
viewing by the public in a window.
WINDOW SIGN — A sign that is painted on, applied, attached to a window,
or that is located within the interior of a structure and that is plainly visible
and is erected, constructed or maintained for the primary purpose of being
viewed from the exterior of that structure.
§ 190-8. Registration process.
Any building or structure which as a result of its dilapidated,
unsanitary, unsafe, insect- or vermin-infested condition creates damage
or a risk of damage to a neighboring property.
G.
§ 190-7 TARENTUM CODE § 190-8
185:172
§ 190-9. Registration fee schedule.
The registration fee shall be established by the Council of Tarentum
Borough. Subsequent modifications to the fee structure shall be established
by resolution of Council. The fee structure is based on the number of
years the building, storefront, or portion thereof, has been vacant under its
current ownership. See § 190-24 for the initial registration fee schedule.
§ 190-10. Waiver of fees.
A waiver may be granted for the current year if either:
A. An owner shall register a vacant property with Tarentum Borough on a
form or forms provided by the Borough and pay the appropriate
registration fee.
B. Registration shall contain (i) the name of the owner(s) of the property;
(ii) the direct street/office mailing address of the owner(s) (no post
office box addresses are allowed); (iii) a direct contact name and phone
number for the owner(s); (iv) the local property management company
responsible for the security, maintenance and marketing of the
property; (v) the date of vacancy; and (vi) any other information deemed
necessary by Tarentum Borough.
C. Registration fees shall not be prorated.
D. Properties subject to registration under this article shall remain under
the registration fee requirement for as long as they remain vacant.
E. Each vacant building or structure shall be registered with the Borough
within 30 days of the date such building or structure becomes a vacant
building or structure, and annually thereafter by July 15, for each
subsequent calendar year, if such building or structure continues to be
a vacant building or structure during each subsequent calendar year,
until such time as such building or structure ceases to be a vacant
building or structure.
A. The following conditions are met:
(1) All local municipal fees are paid in full; and
(2) A good faith effort is shown to rent, sell, or lease the space; and
(3) Pricing is consistent with other similar buildings; and
(4) The building is in compliance with all Tarentum Borough codes and
ordinances; and
(5) The building is habitable.
B. Other good cause as determined by a majority vote of Council.
§ 190-8 PLUMBING § 190-11
185:173
§ 190-11. Duty to amend registration statement.
If the status of the registration information changes during the course
of any calendar year, it is the responsibility of the new owner, their
representative, or agent for the same to notify Tarentum Borough in writing
within 30 days of the occurrence of such change.
§ 190-12. Local agent requirement.
§ 190-13. Inspection process.
An inspection must be completed within 30 days of the initial registration.
In addition, an annual inspection of a registered vacant building shall
be performed by Tarentum Borough to determine if it complies with the
minimum requirements of the applicable Property Maintenance Code,
Building Code and/or Fire Prevention Code. If violations of these codes
are identified, Tarentum Borough shall issue a notice of violation per the
requirements of all applicable codes and give notice to the owner to comply
with the codes with a time to cure. If the violations are not corrected
within the time given, the property may be declared a public nuisance.
A. Each owner or interest holder of abandoned real property or any vacant
building or structure not providing a residence, office or business
location with an address within 40 miles from the corporate boundaries
of the Borough of Tarentum, shall designate a local agent and shall
provide the complete name, address, telephone number and email
address of such local agent on the registration form filed with the
Borough.
B. Such owner or interest holder shall also provide a statement signed by
the local agent whereby the local agent accepts the designation as local
agent of such owner or interest holder, which signed statement shall be
an acknowledgment of the local agent of the requirements,
responsibilities, and obligation under this article.
C. With such designation, a local agent shall be authorized by such owner
or interest holder to accept service of process, notices, statements,
invoices, and other communications resulting from or related to this
article on behalf of such owner or interest holder. With such
designation, a local agent shall be responsible for providing Tarentum
Borough with access to the abandoned property or vacant building or
structure for the purposes of making inspections, maintaining and
securing the abandoned property or vacant building structure, and
responding to any emergency associated with the abandoned property
or vacant building or structure affecting the public health, safety or
welfare.
D. Each owner and interest holder and each respective local agent shall be
jointly and severally responsible for compliance with ordinances of the
Borough and the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania as applied
to the abandoned property or vacant building or structure.
§ 190-11 TARENTUM CODE § 190-13
185:174
These annual inspections must occur within 60 days of the anniversary date
of the initial registration date. Inspection costs will be determined by the
Tarentum Borough.
§ 190-14. Failure to appear.
If the owner or their representative cannot be available at the proposed
time, said owner or representative shall provide no less than twenty-fourhour
written notice to Tarentum Borough. Upon failure to give such written
notice, or upon failure to gain entry, an administrative fee of $100 will
be assessed against the owner, or representative of the owner. For each
rescheduling beyond the second rescheduling, an administrative fee of $150
shall be assessed in all cases. Failure to pay administrative fees shall,
at the discretion of Tarentum Borough, constitute a violation of this or
the applicable code including, but not limited to, the Tarentum Borough
Property Maintenance Code. Failure of an owner, or his/her responsible
agent, to appear for a scheduled inspection shall be considered probable
cause for obtaining a search warrant to inspect the premises.
§ 190-15. Compliant inspections.
Nothing in this article shall preclude Tarentum Borough from performing
an inspection upon receipt of a complaint or violation of the Ordinances of
Tarentum Borough existing at the building or structure. Said inspections
shall be in accord with the applicable codes and ordinances and regulations
and policies established by Tarentum Borough.
§ 190-16. Maintenance requirements.
A. Properties subject to registration under this article shall be kept free of
weeds, high grass, dry brush, dead vegetation, trash, garbage, junk,
debris, rubbish, building materials, any accumulation of newspapers,
circulars, flyers, notices (except those required by federal, state or local
law), discarded personal items including, but not limited to, furniture,
clothing, large and small appliances, printed material, vehicle or
vehicle parts, or any other items that give the appearance that the
property is abandoned or vacant; and
B. The property shall be maintained free of graffiti, tagging or similar
markings.
(1) Visible front, side and rear yards shall be landscaped and
maintained. Landscaping includes, but is not limited to, grass,
ground covers, bushes, shrubs, hedges or similar plantings,
decorative rock or bark, or artificial turf sod. Landscaping does not
include weeds, gravel, broken concrete, asphalt, plastic sheeting,
indoor-outdoor carpet or any similar material unless approved by
the City.
(2) Pools and spas shall be kept in working order so the water remains
clear and free of larvae, pests, pollutant and debris, or drained and
§ 190-13 PLUMBING § 190-16
185:175
§ 190-17. Security requirements.
§ 190-18. Responsibility for vacant storefronts.
Responsibility for compliance with this section include any person owning,
leasing, maintaining, or otherwise in possession or control of any vacant
storefront located within Tarentum Borough, or any owner of the property
upon which the vacant storefront is located.
kept dry. In either case, a property with a pool or spa must comply
with the minimum security fencing requirements of the Tarentum
Borough Property Maintenance Code.
(3) Adherence to this article does not relieve any property owner of
any obligations set forth in any other Ordinance of Tarentum
Borough, including but not limited to, the Tarentum Borough
Property Maintenance Code.
(4) A property owner required to register a property under this article
is hereby given 30 days to comply with these maintenance
requirements.
A. Properties subject to registration under this article shall be maintained
in a secure manner so as not to be accessible to unauthorized persons,
vermin, and any other pests.
B. Secure manner includes, but is not limited to, the closure and locking of
windows, doors (walk-through, sliding and garage), gates, and any
other opening of such size that it may allow an uninvited person to
access the interior of the property and/or structure(s). In the case of
broken windows, securing means the reglazing or boarding of the
window.
C. If the property has been condemned, the property shall be posted with
the name and twenty-four-hour contact phone number of the owner and
local property Management Company. The posting shall be no less than
eight inches by 11 inches and shall be of a font that is legible, written in
English, and shall contain along with the name, Tarentum Borough
Vacant Property Registration Number, a twenty-four-hour contact
number, and the words "THIS PROPERTY MANAGED BY" and "TO
REPORT PROBLEMS OR CONCERNS CALL . . .". The posting shall be
placed on the interior of the window facing the street to the front of the
property, or, if no such area exists, on an area of sufficient size to
support the posting in a location that is visible to the front of the
property, but not readily accessible to vandals. Exterior posting must be
constructed of, and printed with, weather resistant materials.
§ 190-16 TARENTUM CODE § 190-19
185:176
§ 190-19. Maintenance of vacant storefronts.
The vacant storefront of a commercial building located in Tarentum
Borough shall be maintained in good condition, kept neat, clean, secure,
free of graffiti, and lighted.
§ 190-20. Window display requirement.
In order to improve the appearance of vacant storefronts and improve
overall security, any vacant storefront that is located within Tarentum
Borough shall, not more than 60 business days after the date on which
the ground floor premises first becomes vacant, contain a window display,
or other form of decorative screen, in each of the storefront windows. A
variety of window displays are acceptable provided they have a professional
appearance, achieve a desired coverage of 60% to 100%, and are not
offensive to the general public. Tarentum Borough shall approve all window
displays.
§ 190-21. Signage.
Handwritten signs are not permitted. Professionally made window signs and
real estate signs are permitted provided they meet the requirements of the
Tarentum Borough Zoning Ordinances. Not more than three square feet of
informational signage such as real estate signs or contact information may
be placed in a vacant ground floor window. Larger professional signs that
function as the window display are permitted.
§ 190-22. Violations and penalties.
§ 190-23. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, or clause of this article is held, for any
reason, to be invalid, such decision or decisions shall not affect the validity
of the remaining portions of this article.
§ 190-24. Fee schedule.
The registration fee is set forth as follows:
Vacant Property Registration Fee Schedule
Less than one year $150
1 year vacant $300
A. Any person who violates, or permits the violation, of any provision of
this article shall, upon conviction in a summary proceeding, be subject
to a fine of $1,000, and costs of the prosecution for each offense, or
imprisonment not to exceed 30 days, or both fine and imprisonment.
B. Any fines collected as a result of a violation of any provision of this
article shall be placed in the general fund of Tarentum Borough.
§ 190-19 PLUMBING § 190-24
185:177
Vacant Property Registration Fee Schedule
2 years vacant $500
3-4 years vacant $1,000
5-9 years vacant $2,500
10 years vacant $5,000
§ 190-24 TARENTUM CODE § 190-24
185:178
Chapter 197
REGISTRATION OF PROPERTY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 95. Zoning — See Ch. 265.
§ 197-1. Registration and occupancy permit required.
All owners or tenants of buildings in the Borough of Tarentum shall be
required to register with the Secretary-Treasurer of the borough a
statement of the kinds and classes of occupancy existing in any building
or building owned or occupied by said person. No residential, commercial
and industrial establishments may be occupied by new occupants until such
time as the owner or occupant has secured an occupancy permit to be
issued by the Secretary of the Borough.
§ 197-2. Application.
§ 197-3. Inspection; fees. [Amended 7-9-1990 by Ord. No. 90-2;
3-11-1996 by Ord. No. 96-2]
No permit for occupancy shall be issued to residential, commercial and
industrial establishments until such time as the premises have been
approved by the Building Inspector, Code Enforcement Officer, Zoning
Officer, Fire Marshal and/or other such person as Council of the Borough
may require, from time to time, without first paying the following schedule
of fees for inspection:
A. The Secretary of the Borough is authorized and directed to prepare and
forward to owners or occupants the necessary registration forms
required to effectuate the intention of this chapter and to administer its
provisions.
B. The application for the occupancy permit shall disclose the following
information:
(1) Address of the premises.
(2) Name and address of the owner.
(3) Number of apartments.
(4) The application shall also disclose the names, occupations and
employers of all occupants.
A. For residential homes: as set forth from time to time by resolution of the
Borough Council.
§ 190-24 REGISTRATION OF PROPERTY § 197-3
197:179
§ 197-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-11-1996 by Ord. No.
96-262]
Any owner of a building or other persons found guilty of willfully evading
or violating the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be
subject to a fine of not more than $600 for each violation, and each day's
violation shall be considered a separate offense.
Chapter 198
RENTAL PROPERTY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 99.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 111.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 190.
Registration of property — See Ch. 197.
Zoning — See Ch. 265.
B. For multifamily, businesses and commercial establishments: as set forth
from time to time by resolution of the Borough Council.
C. For industrial use: as set forth from time to time by resolution of the
Borough Council.
62.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 197-3 TARENTUM CODE § 197-4
197:180
Part 1
[Adopted 9-19R-e2n0t1a1l BUyniOtsrd. No. 11-02]
ARTICLE I
General Regulations
§ 198-1. Purpose/scope/declaration of policy and findings.
§ 198-2. Definitions.
As used in this part, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Tarentum, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania.
CODE — Any code or ordinance adopted, enacted, and/or in effect in and
for the Borough of Tarentum concerning fitness for habitation or the
construction, maintenance, operation, occupancy, use of appearance of any
premises or dwelling unit. Included within, but not limited by, this definition
are the following which are in effect as of the date of enactment of this
A. It is the purpose of this Part 1 and the policy of the Council of the
Borough of Tarentum, in order to protect and promote the public
health, safety and welfare of its citizens, to establish rights and
obligations of owners and occupants relating to the rental of certain
dwelling units in the Borough of Tarentum and to encourage owners
and occupants to maintain and improve the quality of rental housing
within the community. It is also the policy of the Borough that owners,
managers and occupants share responsibilities to obey the various
Codes adopted to protect and promote public health, safety and
welfare. As means to those ends, this Part 1 provides for a system of
inspections; issuances of occupancy permits and registrations; and sets
penalties for violations. This Part 1 shall be liberally construed and
applied to promote its purposes and policies.
B. In considering the adoption of this Part 1, the Borough of Tarentum
makes the following findings:
(1) There is a greater incidence of violations of various Codes of the
Borough at residential properties where owners of rental property
do not reside in the Borough than at owner-occupied residential
properties or family-occupied residential rental properties.
(2) There is a greater incidence of problems with the maintenance and
upkeep of residential properties where owners do not reside in the
Borough than at owner-occupied residential properties or familyoccupied
residential rental properties.
(3) There is a greater incidence of disturbances which adversely affect
the peace and quiet of the neighborhood at residential properties
where owners do not reside in the Borough than at owner-occupied
residential properties or family-occupied residential rental
properties.
§ 198-1 REGISTRATION OF PROPERTY § 198-2
197:181
Part 1: BOCA Basic Building Code; International Property Maintenance
Code; BOCA Basic Fire Prevention Code; National Electric Code; Floodplain
Management Ordinance; Weed and Vegetation Control Ordinance; Sidewalk
Maintenance and Ice Removal Ordinance; Zoning Ordinance; and any duly
enacted amendment or supplement to any of the above and any new
enactment falling within this definition.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The duly appointed Code Enforcement
Officer(s) having charge of the office of the Code Enforcement of the
Borough of Tarentum, any assistants or deputies thereof.
COMMON AREA — In multiple-unit dwellings, space which is not part of
a regulated rental unit and which is shared with other occupants of the
dwelling whether they reside in regulated dwelling units or not. Common
areas shall be considered as part of the premises for purposes of this Part
1.
DISRUPTIVE CONDUCT — Any form of conduct, action, incident or
behavior perpetrated, caused or permitted, by an occupant or visitor of a
regulated dwelling unit that is so loud, untimely (as to the hour of the day),
offensive, riotous, or that otherwise disturbs other persons of reasonable
sensibility in their peaceful enjoyment of their premises such that a report
is made to police and/or to the Code Enforcement Officer complaining of
such conduct, action, incident, or behavior. It is not necessary that such
conduct, action, incident or behavior constitute a criminal offense, or that
criminal charges be filed against any person in order for a person to have
perpetrated, caused or permitted the commission of disruptive conduct,
as defined herein; provided, however, that no disruptive conduct shall be
deemed to have occurred unless the Code Enforcement Officer or police
shall investigate and make a determination that such did occur, and keep
written records, including a disruptive conduct report, of such occurrence.
DISRUPTIVE CONDUCT REPORT — A written report of disruptive conduct
on a form to be prescribed therefor, to be completed by the Code
Enforcement Officer or police, as the case may be, who actually investigates
an alleged incident of disruptive conduct and which shall be maintained by
the Code Enforcement Officer.
DWELLING — A building having one or more dwelling units.
DWELLING UNIT — A room or group of rooms within a dwelling and
forming a single unit and used for living and sleeping purposes, having its
own cooking facilities and a bathroom with a toilet and a bathtub or shower.
GUEST — A person on the premises with the actual or implied consent of an
occupant.
LANDLORD — One or more persons, jointly or severally, in who is vested
all or part of the legal title to the premises, or all or part of the beneficial
ownership and a right to present use and enjoyment of the premises,
including a mortgage holder in possession of a regulated rental unit. (Same
as owner).
§ 198-2 TARENTUM CODE § 198-2
197:182
MANAGER — An adult individual designated by the owner of a regulated
rental unit under Article II, § 198-4. The manager shall be the agent of
the owner for service of process and receiving notices or demands and to
perform the obligation of the owner under this Part 1 and under rental
agreements with occupants.
MULTIPLE-UNIT DWELLINGS — A building containing two or more
independent dwelling units, including, but not limited to, double houses,
row houses, townhouses, condominiums, apartment houses, and conversion
apartments.
OCCUPANT — An individual who resides in a regulated rental unit, whether
or not he or she is the owner thereof, with whom a legal relationship with
the owner/landlord is established by a written lease or by the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
OWNER — One or more persons, jointly or severally, in whom is vested all
or part of the legal title to the premises, or all or part of the beneficial
ownership and a right to present use and enjoyment of the premises,
including a mortgage holder in possession of a regulated rental unit.
OWNER-OCCUPIED DWELLING UNIT — A dwelling unit in which the
owner resides on a regular, permanent basis.
PERSON — A natural person, partnership, corporation, unincorporation
association, limited partnership, trust, or any other entity.
POLICE — The Police Department of the Borough of Tarentum or any
properly authorized member or officer thereof or any other law enforcement
agency having jurisdiction within the Borough of Tarentum.
PREMISES — Any parcel or real property in the Borough, including the land
and all buildings and appurtenant structures or appurtenant elements, upon
which one or more regulated rental units is located.
REGULATED RENTAL UNIT — A dwelling unit occupied by any person
under a rental agreement.
RENTAL AGREEMENT — A written agreement between owner/landlord and
occupant/tenant supplemented by the addendum required under Article II,
§ 198-7, of this Part 1, embodying the terms and conditions concerning the
use and occupancy of a specified regulated rental unit or premises.
TENANT — An individual who resides in a regulated rental unit, whether
or not he or she is the owner thereof, with whom a legal relationship with
the owner/landlord is established by a written lease or by the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania (Same as occupant).
§ 198-2 REGISTRATION OF PROPERTY § 198-2
197:183

ARTICLE II
Owner's Duties
§ 198-3. General.
§ 198-4. Designation of manager.
Every owner who is not a full-time resident of the Borough of Tarentum,
or a resident elsewhere within 15 miles from Tarentum, shall designate a
manager who shall reside within 15 miles of the Borough of Tarentum. If
the owner is a corporation, a manager shall be required if any officer of
the corporation does not reside within the aforesaid distance. The officer
shall perform the same function as a manager. If the owner is a partnership,
a manager shall be required if a partner does not reside in the aforesaid
distance. Said partner shall perform the same function as a manager. The
manager shall be the agent of the owner for service of process and receiving
notices and demands, as well as for performing the obligations of the owner
A. It shall be the duty of every owner to keep and maintain all regulated
rental units in compliance with all applicable Codes and provisions of
all other applicable state laws and regulations and local ordinances,
and to keeps such property in good and safe condition.
B. As provided for in this Part 1, every owner shall be responsible for
regulating the proper and lawful use and maintenance of every dwelling
which he, she or it owns. As provided for in this Part 1, every owner
shall also be responsible for regulating the conduct and activities of the
occupants of every regulated rental unit which he, she or it owns in the
Borough, which conduct or activity takes place at such regulated rental
unit or its premises.
C. In order to achieve those ends, every owner of a regular rental unit
shall regulate the conduct and activity of the occupants thereof, both
contractually and through enforcement, as more fully set forth below.
D. This section shall not be construed as diminishing or relieving, in any
way, the responsibility of occupants or their guests for their conduct or
activity; nor shall it be construed as an assignment, transfer, or
projection over or onto any owner of any responsibility or liability which
occupants or their guests may have as a result of their conduct or
activity under a private cause of action, civil or criminal enforcement
proceeding, or criminal law; nor shall this section be construed so as to
require an owner to indemnify or defend occupants or their guests
when any such action or proceeding is brought against the occupant
based upon the occupant's conduct or activity. Nothing herein is
intended to impose any additional civil/criminal liability upon owners
other than that which is imposed by existing law.
E. This Part 1 is not intended, nor shall its effect be, to limit any other
enforcement remedies which may be available to the Borough against
an owner, occupant, or guest thereof.
§ 198-3 REGISTRATION OF PROPERTY § 198-4
197:185
under this Part 1 and under rental agreements with occupants. The identity,
address and telephone number(s) of a person who is designated as manager
hereunder shall be provided by owner or manager to the Borough, and such
information shall be kept current and updated as it changes.
§ 198-5. Disclosure.
The owner or manager shall disclose to the occupant in writing on or before
the commencement of the tenancy:
§ 198-6. Maintenance of premises.
§ 198-7. Written rental agreement.
A. The name, address and telephone numbers of the manager, if
applicable; and
B. The name, address and telephone number of the owner of the premises.
A. The owner shall maintain the premises in compliance with the
applicable Codes of the Borough and shall regularly perform all routine
maintenance, including lawn mowing and ice and snow removal, and
shall promptly make any and all repairs necessary to fulfill this
obligation.
B. The owner and occupant may agree that the occupant is to perform
specified repairs, maintenance tasks, alterations, or remodeling. In
such case, however, such agreement between the owner and occupant
must be in writing. Such an agreement may be entered into between
the owner and occupant only if:
(1) The agreement of the parties is entered into a good faith and not
for the purpose of evading the obligations of the owner or
occupant; and
(2) The agreement does not diminish or affect the obligation of the
owner to other occupants in the premises.
C. In no case shall the existence of any agreement between owner and
occupant relieve any owner of any responsibility under this Part 1 or
other ordinances or codes for maintenance of premises.
A. All rental agreements for regulating dwelling units shall be in writing
and shall be supplemented with the Addendum attached hereto as
Appendix A.63 Oral leases and oral modifications thereof are to be
memorialized in writing for the Code Enforcement Officer. All
disclosures and information required to be given to occupants by the
owner shall be furnished before the signing of the rental agreement.
The owner shall provide occupant with copies of the rental agreement
and addendum upon execution. The owner shall further secure a
63.Editor's Note: Said Appendix A is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 198-4 TARENTUM CODE § 198-7
197:186
§ 198-8. Complaints.
The owner shall reply promptly to reasonable complaints and inquiries from
occupants.
§ 198-9. Landlord/Tenant Act.
The owner shall comply with all provisions of the Landlord-Tenant Act64 of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 198-10. Common areas.
Where an owner does not regulate the use of common areas and the
behavior of occupants and guests in the common areas, the owner shall be
directly responsible for the behavior of occupants and guests in the common
area as if the owner were an occupant.
§ 198-11. Enforcement.
written acknowledgement from the occupants that they have received
the disclosures and information required by this Part 1.
B. Terms and conditions. The owner and occupant may include in a rental
agreement terms and conditions not prohibited by this Part 1 or other
applicable ordinances, regulations, and laws, including rent, term of the
agreement, and other provisions governing the rights and obligations of
the parties.
C. Prohibited provisions. Except as otherwise provided by this Part 1, no
rental agreement may provide that the occupant or owner agrees to
waive or to forego rights or remedies under this Part 1. A provision
prohibited by this subsection included in a rental agreement shall be
unenforceable.
D. Upon oral or written request by the police or Code Enforcement Officer,
the owner shall within 10 days of such request furnish to the Borough
copies of acknowledgement that the occupants have received the
disclosures and information required to be given and acknowledged as
required by this Part 1.
E. Upon oral or written request by the police or Code Enforcement Officer,
the owner shall within 10 days of such request furnish to the Borough
for inspection purposes copies of the leases the owner has entered into
for regulated rental units.
A. Within 10 days after receipt of written notice from the Code
Enforcement Officer that an occupant of a regulated rental unit has
violated a provision of this Part 1, the owner shall take immediate steps
to remedy the violation and take steps to assure that there is not a
reoccurrence of the violation.
64.Editor's Note: See 68 P.S. § 250.101 et seq.
§ 198-7 REGISTRATION OF PROPERTY § 198-11
197:187
§ 198-12. Code violations.
Upon receiving notice of any code violation from the Code Enforcement
Officer, the owner shall promptly take action, or cause the necessary action
to be taken, to abate the offending condition and eliminate the violation.
§ 198-13. Right of Borough to make repairs.
In case the owner of premises shall neglect, fail or refuse to comply with
any notice from the Borough of its Code Enforcement Officer to correct
a violation relating to maintenance and repair of the premises under any
Code within the period of time stated in such notice, the Borough may
cause the violation to be corrected. There shall be imposed upon the owner
a charge of the actual costs involved, plus 10% of said costs for each
time the Borough shall cause a violation to be corrected; and the owner
of the premises shall be billed after same has been completed. Any such
bill which remains unpaid and outstanding after this time specified therein
for payment shall be grounds for the imposition of a municipal lien upon
the premises as provided by law. Such a lien may be reduced to judgment
and enforced and collected as provided by law, together with interest at
the legal rate and court costs. The remedies provided by this subsection
are not exclusive and the Borough and its Code Enforcement Officer may
invoke such other remedies available under this Part 1 or other applicable
codes, ordinances or statutes, including, where appropriate, condemnation
proceedings or declaration of premises as unfit for habitation.
B. Within 20 days after receipt of a notice of violation, the owner shall file
with the Code Enforcement Officer a report, on a form provided by the
Borough, setting forth what action the owner has taken to remedy the
violation and what steps he or she has taken to prevent a reoccurrence
of the violation. The report shall also set forth a plan as to steps the
owner will take in the future if the violation recurs.
C. The Code Enforcement Officer shall review the report and, if adequate
steps have been taken and the plan is adequate to address the future
violations, shall approve the plan. The owner shall, on his or her
initiative, enforce the plan and failure to do so shall be a violation of this
Part 1.
D. In the event that a second violation occurs within a license year
involving the same occupant or occupants, the Code Enforcement
Officer may direct the owner to evict the occupants who violated this
Part 1 and to not permit the occupant to occupy the premises.
E. If an occupant has been evicted from a regulated unit pursuant this Part
1, he or she shall not be eligible to rent any other regulated unit within
the Borough of Tarentum.
§ 198-11 TARENTUM CODE § 198-14
197:188
§ 198-14. Inspections.
The owner shall permit inspections of any premises by the Code
Enforcement Officer at reasonable times upon reasonable notice.
§ 198-14 REGISTRATION OF PROPERTY § 198-14
197:189

ARTICLE III
Occupant Duties
§ 198-15. General.
The occupant shall comply with all obligations imposed upon occupants by
this Part 1, all applicable Codes and ordinances of the Borough and all
applicable provisions of state law.
§ 198-16. Health and safety regulations.
§ 198-17. Peaceful enjoyment.
The occupant shall conduct himself or herself and require the other
persons, including, but not limited to, guests on the premises and within his
or her regulated rental unit with his or her consent to conduct themselves
in a manner that will not disturb the peaceful enjoyment of the premises
by others, and that will not disturb the peaceful enjoyment of adjacent or
nearby dwellings by the persons occupying the same.
§ 198-18. Residential use.
The occupant shall, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law or
ordinance, occupy or use his or her regulated rental unit for no other
purpose than as a residence.
§ 198-19. Illegal activity.
The occupant shall not engage in nor tolerate nor permit others on the
premises to engage in any conduct declared illegal under the Pennsylvania
Crimes Code (18 Pa. C.S.A. § 101 et seq.) or Liquor Code (47 P.S. § 1-101 et
seq.), or the Controlled Substance, Drug, Device and Cosmetic Act (35 P.S.
§ 780-101 et seq.).
§ 198-20. Disruptive conduct.
A. The maximum number of persons permitted in any regulated rental unit
at any time shall not exceed one person for each 50 square feet of
habitable floor space in said regulated rental unit. The maximum
number of persons permitted in the commons area of any multi-unit
dwelling at any time shall not exceed person for each 15 square feet of
common area on the premises.
B. The occupant shall dispose from his or her regulated rental unit all
rubbish, garbage and other waste in a clean and safe manner in
compliance with Tarentum's Solid Waste Ordinance65 and all other
applicable ordinances, laws and regulations.
65.Editor's Note: See Ch. 210, Solid Waste.
§ 198-15 REGISTRATION OF PROPERTY § 198-20
197:191
§ 198-21. Compliance with rental agreement.
The occupant shall comply with all lawful provisions of the rental agreement
entered into between owner and occupant. Failure to comply may result in
the eviction of the occupant by the owner.
§ 198-22. Damage to premises.
The occupant shall not intentionally cause, nor permit nor tolerate others to
cause, damage to the premises. Conduct which results in damages in excess
of $500 shall be considered of violation of this Part 1.
§ 198-23. Inspection of premises.
The occupant shall permit inspections by the Code Enforcement Officer of
the premises at reasonable times, upon reasonable notice.
A. The occupant shall not engage in, nor tolerate nor permit others on the
premises to engage in, disruptive conduct, or other violations of this
Part 1.
B. When police or the Code Enforcement Officer investigate an alleged
incident of disruptive conduct, they shall complete a disruptive conduct
report upon a finding that the reported incident did, in their judgment,
constitute "disruptive conduct" as defined herein. The information filled
in a said report shall include, if possible, the identity or identities of the
alleged perpetrator(s) of the disruptive conduct and all other obtainable
information including the factual basis for the disruptive conduct
requested on the prescribed form. Where the police made such
investigation, said police officer shall then submit the completed
disruptive conduct report to the Code Enforcement Officer, within
seven working days. In all cases, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
mail a copy of the disruptive conduct report to the owner or manager
within 10 working days of the occurrence of the alleged disruptive
conduct, whether this person making the investigation on behalf of the
Borough is the Code Enforcement Officer or police.
§ 198-20 TARENTUM CODE § 198-23
197:192
ARTICLE IV
Violations and Penalties
§ 198-24. Basis for violation.
It shall be unlawful for any person, as either owner or manager of a
regulated rental unit, to allow the number of occupants in a regulated rental
unit to exceed the maximum limit as set forth herein, or to violate any other
provision of this Part 1. It shall be unlawful for any occupant to violate this
Part 1.
§ 198-25. Penalties.
Any violation of this Part 1 shall constitute a summary offense punishable,
upon conviction thereof by a District Justice, by a fine not to exceed $600,
plus costs of prosecution or, in default of payment of such fines and costs,
by a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day of violation shall
constitute a separate and distinct offence.
§ 198-26. Nonexclusive remedies.
The penalty provisions of this Part 1, suspensions and revocation
procedures provided in this Part 1 shall be independent, on mutually
exclusive separate remedies, all of which shall be available to the Borough
as may be deemed appropriate for carrying out the purposes of this Part
1. The remedies and procedures in this Part 1 for violation hereof are
not intended to supplant or replace, to any degree, the remedies and
procedures available to the Borough in the case of a violation of any other
Code or ordinance of the Borough, whether or not such other Code or
ordinance is referenced in this Part 1 and whether or not an ongoing
violation of such other Code or ordinance is cited as the underlying ground
for a finding of a violation of this Part 1.
§ 198-24 REGISTRATION OF PROPERTY § 198-26
197:193

ARTICLE V
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 198-27. Notices.
§ 198-28. Changes in ownership occupancy.
It shall be the duty of each owner of a regulated dwelling unit to notify
the Code Enforcement Officer in writing of any change in ownership of the
premises or of the number of regulated rental units on the premises. It
shall also be the duty of the owner to notify the Code Enforcement Officer
in writing of any increase in the number of occupants in any regulated
dwelling unit or of the changing of a dwelling unit from owner-occupied
to non-owner-occupied, which thereby transforms the dwelling into a
regulated rental unit for purposes of this Part 1.
§ 198-29. Owners severally responsible.
If any regulated rental unit is owned by more than one person, in any form
of joint tenancy, as a partnership, or otherwise, each person shall be jointly
and severally responsible for the duties imposed under the terms of this Part
1, and shall be severally subject to prosecution for the violation of this Part
1.
§ 198-30. Severability.
If any provision of this Part 1 or the application thereof to any person
or circumstances is held invalid, such holding shall not affect the other
provisions or applications of this Part 1 which can be given effect without
the invalid provision or application, and to this end, the provisions of this
Part 1 are declared severable.
§ 198-31. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances which are inconsistent herewith are
hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency. Any ordinance not
inconsistent with this Part 1 on the same subject matter is to be read in pari
materia.
A. For purposes of this Part 1, any notice required hereunder to be given
to a manager shall be deemed as notice given to the owner.
B. There shall be a rebuttal presumption that any notice required to be
given to the owner under this Part 1 shall have been received by such
owner if the notice was given to the owner in the manner provided by
this Part 1.
C. A claimed lack of knowledge by the owner of any violation hereunder
cited shall be no defense as long as all notices prerequisite to institution
of such proceedings have been given and deemed received in
accordance with the applicable provisions of this Part 1.
§ 198-27 REGISTRATION OF PROPERTY § 198-31
197:195

Part 2
Denial Of [OAcdcoupptaendc9y- P19er-2m0i1ts1 FBoyr OCredr.t aNino .R 1e1n-0ta3l] Dwellings
ARTICLE VI
Denial of Occupancy Permit for Delinquent Bills
§ 198-32. Definitions.
As used in this part, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
RENTAL DWELLING UNIT — A dwelling unit rented to or available for
rent by tenants or otherwise occupied by persons other than the owner
or the owner's relatives, including, but not limited to, units in singlefamily
houses, two-family houses, multiple-family dwellings, multiple-family
houses, apartment houses, row houses, townhouses, and other buildings
of similar character, and also including group homes, community living
arrangements, boarding houses, domiciliary homes, long-term-care
facilities or personal-care homes.
TENANT or OCCUPANT — A person who has the use, either by himself or
with others, of a dwelling unit or a business unit owned by a person other
than himself, for a period exceeding 30 days.
§ 198-33. Bill collection.
Money paid to the Borough for utilities shall be applied first to water bill,
then electric bill, then refuse collection, and finally E.P.A. surcharge.
§ 198-34. Duties of Code Enforcement Officer.
A. The Officer shall investigate to determine whether the landowner owns
any real property within the Borough of Tarentum for which there exists
on the real property a final and unappealable tax, water, sewer or
refuse collection bill delinquency on account of the actions of the
landowner and within the meaning of the Neighborhood Blight
Reclamation Revitalization Act.66
B. If the Officer finds that such a delinquency exists, then the Officer shall
deny an occupancy permit for the dwelling unit in question in
accordance with all applicable procedures set forth in the
Neighborhood Blight Reclamation Revitalization Act.
C. The Officer shall investigate to determine whether the rental dwelling
unit is in violation of the International Property Maintenance Code. If
there is a violation he shall deny the occupancy permit.
D. The Officer shall state in writing the reasons for any denial or
revocation of an occupancy permit. Any person aggrieved by the
Officer's denial of revocation of an occupancy permit may appeal such
denial by submitting a written request for a Local Agency Law hearing
66.Editor's Note: See 53 Pa. C.S.A. § 6101.
§ 198-32 REGISTRATION OF PROPERTY § 198-34
197:197
§ 198-35. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article or who knowingly
files a false report requiring by this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be
sentenced to pay a civil fine of not more than $600.
to the office of the Borough Manager within 20 days from the date
of mailing of the denial letter and accompanied by a nonrefundable
$700 appeal fee, the amount of such fee to be subject to adjustment
by resolution of the Council of the Borough of Tarentum. Any funds not
used for advertising, attorney, or stenographic fees shall be refunded to
applicant. Such written request for a Local Agency Law hearing shall
state the grounds upon which the request is made. The Council of the
Borough of Tarentum may act as the Local Agency Law appeal hearing
body or may appoint a tribunal or hearing officer to hear the appeal and
to make a recommended ruling to the Borough Council.
§ 198-34 TARENTUM CODE § 198-35
197:198
Chapter 200
RIVERVIEW MEMORIAL PARK
GENERAL REFERENCES
Recreation Board — See Ch. 61.
Monuments and landmarks — See Ch. 163.
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 177.
§ 200-1. Prohibited acts.
The following activities and behavior are strictly prohibited in the Riverview
Memorial Park:
§ 200-2. Violations and penalties.
Any person convicted of any activity in § 200-1 supra shall be subject to the
following fines:
§ 200-3. Posting of notices.
The Borough shall post notices at main entrances to the Riverview Memorial
Park of the acts of behavior prohibited and that fines are up to $600 for
violations.
§ 200-4. Other provisions; enforcement.
This chapter shall be read and enforced pari materia with Chapter 177 of
the Borough Code.
Chapter 204
A. Use of skateboards and bicycles.
B. Consumption of alcoholic beverages.
C. The walking of any dog or cat, or any other domesticated animal,
leashed or not.
D. Use of any illegal drugs.
E. Any acts of vandalism or criminal mischief.
A. First offense: $10 and court costs.
B. Second offense: $50 and court costs.
C. Third offense and subsequent convictions: $600 and court costs.
D. Any person refusing or neglecting to pay fines and costs is subject to up
to 30 days confinement in the Allegheny County jail.
§ 198-35 SEWERS § 200-4
204:199
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Upper Allegheny Joint Sanitary
Authority — See Ch. 8, Art. II.
Building construction — See Ch. 95.
Mobile homes — See Ch. 159.
Plumbing — See Ch. 185.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
220.
§ 200-4 TARENTUM CODE § 200-4
204:200
ARTICLE I
Connections Outside Borough
[Adopted 10-28-1924 by Ord. No. 863]
§ 204-1. Application; connection fee.
All persons owning property outside of the Borough of Tarentum and
desiring sewer connection with the borough sewer system shall be required
to make application to the Council of the Borough of Tarentum for such
connection and, after receiving the permission of the Council, to pay to the
Secretary thereof a charge as set forth from time to time by resolution of
the Borough Council for the same.
§ 204-2. Annual service fee.
All persons owning property outside of the borough shall pay, in addition to
the connection fee aforesaid, an annual service fee or charge per annum, as
set forth from time to time by resolution of the Borough Council, payable in
advance, for each dwelling, garage, stable or other building receiving sewer
service of the borough. This annual charge for service shall also apply to all
persons owning property outside of the borough and now connected with
the borough sewer system, the first payment to be made within 10 days
after this article is enacted into a law.
§ 204-3. Cancellations and refunds.
The borough reserves the right to cancel all permissions for the sewer
service provided for herein at any time upon a sixty-day notice. In event of
such cancellation, the unearned portion of the annual service charge will be
returned to the person paying the same.
§ 204-4. Compliance required; enforcement.
The Street Commissioner is directed to disconnect all sewer connections
of persons owning property outside of the Borough of Tarentum who have
not complied with this article after he (the Street Commissioner) has been
directed to do so by the Council of the Borough.
§ 204-1 SEWERS § 204-4
204:201

ARTICLE II
Rates and Charges
[Adopted 3-6-1961 by Ord. No. 1755]
§ 204-5. Rates.
The schedule of sewer rates, rents and charges as recommended by the
Authority's consulting engineers be, and it hereby is, adopted by the
Borough of Tarentum. A copy of said schedule of sewer rates, rents and
charges is attached hereto and marked "Schedule A."67
§ 204-6. Billing.
Bills for said sewer service shall be rendered in a manner and in the form
to be prescribed by the borough. All bills for sewage treatment service shall
be rendered to the owner of the premises to which the sewage treatment
service is furnished, and such owner shall in all cases be liable for payment
of such bills.
§ 204-7. Collection.
The borough shall collect and receive all sewer rates, rents and charges
prescribed by this article. All such moneys shall be deposited to the credit
of a special fund, to be designated "Tarentum Borough Sewage Treatment
Service Fund," pursuant to the terms of the aforesaid service agreement,
which shall be a separate and distinct fund of the Borough of Tarentum.
67.Editor's Note: Sewer rates shall be as set forth from time to time by the Sanitary Authority
or the Borough Council, as appropriate. Said rates shall be on file in the borough offices.
§ 204-5 SEWERS § 204-7
204:203

ARTICLE III
Connections
[Adopted 3-6-1961]
§ 204-8. Connection required.
Every owner of property in the Borough of Tarentum whose property abuts
upon any public sanitary sewer presently in existence or to be constructed
in the future shall connect, at its own cost, the house, building or other
structures located on said property with the aforementioned public sanitary
sewers for the purpose of disposing of all sanitary sewage as is customarily
disposed of in such a system of sanitary sewers.
§ 204-9. Prohibited means of disposal of waste.
It shall be unlawful for any owner, lessee or occupier of any property
in the Borough of Tarentum abutting upon any public sanitary sewer to
employ any means, either by septic tank, cesspool, privy vault, mine hole or
otherwise, for the disposal of sanitary sewage other than into and through
said public sanitary sewers.
§ 204-10. Notification of owner.
Where any house, building or structure in the borough is now or hereafter
may be using any method for the disposal of sanitary sewage other than
through said public sanitary sewers, it shall be the duty of the Borough
Secretary or such other person as shall be authorized by the Borough
Council to notify the owner, lessee or occupier of such structure in writing,
either by personal service, certified mail or registered mail, to disconnect
the same and make proper connection for the discharge and disposal of
the sewage through said public sanitary sewers, as herein provided, within
60 days after receipt of such notice; provided, however, notwithstanding
anything herein contained to the contrary, no owner, lessee or occupier of
such house, building or structure shall be required to make a connection
where his sewage would not by natural gravity flow into said public sanitary
sewers.
§ 204-11. Prohibited connections to public sewer.
No privy vault, cesspool, septic tank, mine hole or similar receptacle for
human excrement shall at the present time or at any time hereafter be
connected with the aforesaid public sanitary sewers.
§ 204-12. Permit required.
No person, firm or corporation shall make or cause to be made any
connection with any of the aforementioned public sanitary sewers until he
has made proper application for and received a permit from the borough.
§ 204-8 SEWERS § 204-13
204:205
§ 204-13. Construction specifications.
The construction of all building sewer lines or house service sewers shall
be done in accordance with the specifications, plans and procedures
established by the borough after notice to the consulting engineers for
Upper Allegheny Joint Sanitary Authority, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania,
as the same may be from time to time published and amended, copies of
which shall be placed on file with the Borough Secretary.
§ 204-14. Borough to perform work; costs to be lien.
If the owner or owners of any occupied houses, buildings or structures in
the borough shall neglect or refuse to comply with the provisions of this
article or the written notice as prescribed in § 204-10, the borough may
perform or cause to be performed such work and labor and furnish or
cause to be furnished such material as may be necessary to comply with
the provisions of this article at the cost and expense of such owner or
owners, together with 10% additional thereof and all charges and expenses
incidental thereto, which sum shall be collected from said owner or owners
for the use of the borough as debts are by law collectible, or the borough
may, by its proper officer, file a municipal claim or lien therefor against said
premises as provided by law.
§ 204-15. Violations and penalties.68
In addition to any penalty hereinabove prescribed, any person, firm or
corporation violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof before a District Justice, be fined not more than $600
and, in default of payment thereof, be sentenced to undergo an
imprisonment of not more than 30 days in the county jail.
68.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 204-13 TARENTUM CODE § 204-15
204:206
ARTICLE IV
Extensions
[Adopted 12-19-1961 by Ord. No. 1991]
§ 204-16. Contract required.
Before the borough extends its sewer system to serve any developer, firm,
person or corporation, the municipality and the developer, firm, person or
corporation shall enter into a contract providing for the payment to the
borough of the cost of said improvement and providing further for the
return to the developer, person, firm or corporation of said amounts as
additional sewers tap into said system.
§ 204-17. Signatories authorized.
The proper officers of the borough are authorized, ordered and directed to
enter into such a contract with said parties, the form of said contract being
attached hereto and made a part of this article.69
69.Editor's Note: Said attachment is on file in the borough offices.
§ 204-16 SEWERS § 204-17
204:207

ARTICLE V
Nonpayment of Sewage Treatment Rates
[Adopted 5-20-1963 by Ord. No. 1802]
§ 204-18. Liability for payment.
The owners and occupants, jointly and severally, of any premises serviced
by the sewer system of the Borough of Tarentum and serviced by sewage
treatment by the Upper Allegheny Joint Sanitary Authority shall be liable for
all rentals, rates or charges for such sewerage or sewage treatment.
§ 204-19. Payment date.
All owners and occupants of such premises, jointly and severally, are hereby
required to pay such rentals, rates and charges imposed by the Authority
promptly on the date due therefor.
§ 204-20. Shutoff of water.
If any owner or occupant of such premises, jointly or severally, shall fail to
pay such rentals, rates and charges imposed by the Upper Allegheny Joint
Sanitary Authority, for a period of 30 days from the date thereof, and said
Authority shall have assigned or transferred its claim for such service to the
Borough of Tarentum, then the proper officers of the Borough of Tarentum
are directed to request and direct the municipal water department of the
Borough of Tarentum to shut off the supply of water to such premises until
all such overdue rentals, rates and charges, together with any penalties,
and interest thereon shall be paid.
§ 204-21. Notice of shutoff.
The Borough of Tarentum and the Municipal Water Department thereof,
before turning off said water supply, shall give 10 days' written notice of
intention so to do to the owners or occupants, jointly or severally, liable for
the payment of the said rentals and charges and, in addition thereto, shall
post a written notice at the main entrance to the premises.
§ 204-22. Resumption of service; payment of costs.
The service of water shall not be resumed or supplied to said premises
after shutoff until all the proper rentals, rates and charges, together with
the penalties and interest thereon, shall be paid. The charges shall include
the cost of turning off the water supply and the cost of returning service
incurred thereby.
§ 204-23. Collection of delinquent payments.
The method of collection of delinquent rentals, rates or charges for sewer,
sewerage or sewage treatment set forth in this article are not exclusive,
but shall be in addition to the remedies otherwise provided for by law with
respect to municipal liens and suits.
§ 204-18 SEWERS § 204-23
204:209

ARTICLE VI
Prohibited Discharges
[Adopted 4-3-1978 by Ord. No. 78-4]
§ 204-24. Permitted and prohibited discharges.
§ 204-25. Inspection.70
On and after April 3, 1978, the borough shall make an inspection of all
residences and buildings within the borough for the purpose of determining
violations of this article. Any person then found violating the provisions
of this article by discharging stormwater or roof water into the sanitary
sewerage system of the borough shall, upon conviction as hereinafter
provided, be subject to a fine of $600 and the costs of prosecution. Any
person continuing the unlawful use of the sanitary sewerage system as
herein defined shall be subject to the payment of a fine of up to $600 per
month, until such unlawful use shall be discontinued and stopped.
§ 204-26. Violations and penalties.71
Any person, firm, corporation or agent or agents thereof found violating the
provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof before the District
Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine or fines herein stipulated, together with
the costs of prosecution, and in default of payment thereof shall undergo
imprisonment in the Allegheny County Jail for not more than 30 days. The
borough may elect to collect the judgment and costs of such proceedings
out of goods or property by execution or other process from the goods or
property of any person found guilty of violating the provisions of this article.
A. The sanitary sewerage system of the borough shall be used exclusively
for the reception and conveyance of household liquid, wastes and
human excrete as is necessary and customary in a system of sanitary
sewers. The discharge of stormwater or roof water into the sanitary
sewers overtaxes the capacity of the sanitary sewer system and is
hereby declared unlawful and a violation of this article. Resolution No.
43 of the Upper Allegheny Joint Sanitary Authority adopted January 26,
1971, relating to discharge into sanitary sewer systems, is hereby
incorporated by reference into this article and made a part hereof. A
copy of said resolution is available for public inspection at the borough
office and/or the Sanitary Authority office.
B. On and after the passage of this article, no person, firm, corporation or
agent or agents thereof shall discharge stormwater or roof water into
the sanitary sewer or cause the same to discharge into the sanitary
sewers of the borough.
70.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
71.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 204-24 SEWERS § 204-26
204:211
Chapter 207
SIGNS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 265.
§ 204-26 TARENTUM CODE § 204-26
207:212
ARTICLE I
Unauthorized Posting of Signs, Notices and Placards
[Adopted 7-19-2004 by Ord. No. 04-08]
§ 207-1. Posting on traffic signs and utility poles prohibited.
No signs, advertisements, notices, notes, placards or communication of any
kind unauthorized by the Public Safety Committee of Council are permitted
to be placed against or attached to traffic signs and utility poles belonging
to the Borough of Tarentum and/or utility poles within the borders of
Tarentum of which the Borough has use or any poles in the public right-ofway.
§ 207-2. Exceptions.
Notices of events benefiting any charities or other nonprofit organizations
which are exempt from real estate taxes may be authorized upon certain
safety conditions and time restraints and limitations regarding parking or
traffic control by the Public Safety Committee of the Borough of Tarentum.
§ 207-3. Violations and penalties.
§ 207-4. Restitution.
Violators shall be ordered to pay the costs and wages for the removal and
disposal of each sign, notice, placard, etc., in violation of this article.
A. First conviction: $10 for each sign, notice or placard placed prior to
first conviction, plus court costs.
B. Second conviction: $25 for each sign, notice or placard placed prior to
second conviction, plus court costs.
§ 207-1 SIGNS § 207-4
207:213
Chapter 210
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Health enforcement — See Ch. 30.
Building construction — See Ch. 95.
Hazardous wastes — See Ch. 136.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 190.
§ 207-4 TARENTUM CODE § 207-4
207:214
ARTICLE I
Recycling
[Adopted 9-9-1991 by Ord. No. 91-5]
§ 210-1. Title.
The short title of this article shall be the "Tarentum Recycling Ordinance,"
and the same may be cited in that manner.
§ 210-2. Definitions.
The following words and phrases used throughout this article shall have the
following meanings:
ACT 101 — The Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste Reduction
Act of 1988.72
ALUMINUM — All aluminum beverage or food cans.
BIMETAL CONTAINERS — Empty food or beverage containers consisting of
steel and aluminum.
COLLECTOR — The entity or entities authorized by the municipality to
collect recyclable materials from residences or authorized by commercial
municipal and institutional establishments that do not receive collection
services from the municipality to collect recyclable materials from those
properties.
COMMERCIAL ENTITY — Those properties used primarily for commercial,
industrial purposes, governmental or institutional establishments and all
community activities.
COMMUNITY ACTIVITIES — Events that are sponsored by public or private
agencies or individuals that include but are not limited to fairs, bazaars,
socials, picnics and organized sporting events attended by 200 or more
individuals per day.
CORRUGATED PAPER — Structural paper material with an inner core
shaped in rigid parallel furrows and ridges.
FERROUS CONTAINERS — Empty steel or tin-coated food or beverage
containers.
GLASS CONTAINERS — Bottles and jars made of clear, green or brown
glass. Expressly excluded are non-container glass, plate glass, automotive
glass, light bulbs, blue glass and porcelain and ceramic products.
HIGH-GRADE OFFICE PAPER — All white paper, bond paper and computer
paper used in commercial, institutional and municipal establishments and
in residences.
72.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
§ 210-1 SIGNS § 210-2
207:215
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENT — Those facilities that house or serve
groups or people, including but not limited to hospitals, nursing homes,
orphanages, day-care centers, schools and universities.
LEAD ACID BATTERIES — Include but are not be limited to automotive,
truck and industrial batteries that contain lead.
LEAF WASTE — Leaves from trees, bushes and other plants, garden
residues, clipped shrubbery and tree trimmings, but not including grass
clippings.
MAGAZINES AND PERIODICALS — Printed matter containing
miscellaneous written pieces published at fixed or varying intervals.
Expressly excluded are all other paper products of any nature whatsoever.
MULTIFAMILY HOUSING PROPERTIES — Any properties having four or
more dwelling units per structure.
MUNICIPAL ESTABLISHMENT — Public facilities operated by the
municipality and other governmental and quasi-governmental authorities.
MUNICIPALITY — The Borough of Tarentum.
MUNICIPAL WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, industrial, lunchroom or other
material, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous material,
resulting from operation of residential, municipal, commercial or
institutional establishments and from community activities and any sludge
not meeting the definition of residual or hazardous waste in the Solid Waste
Management Act73 from a municipal, commercial or institutional water
supply, treatment plant, wastewater treatment plant or air pollution control
facility. The term does not include source-separated recyclable materials.
NEWSPAPERS — Paper of the type commonly referred to as "newsprint"
and distributed at fixed intervals, having printed thereon news and
opinions, containing advertisement and other matters of public interest.
Expressly excluded are newspapers which have been soiled, color comics,
glossy advertising inserts and advertising inserts printed in colors other
than black and white often included with newspapers.
PERSON(S) — Owners, lessees and occupants of residences and
commercial, municipal and institutional establishments.
PLASTIC CONTAINERS — Empty plastic food and beverages containers
which may be more specifically defined in the rules and regulations as
amended.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Materials generated by residences and
commercial, municipal and institutional establishments which are specified
by the municipality and can be separated from municipal waste and
returned to commerce to be reused as a resource in the development of
useful products. Recyclable materials may include, but are not necessarily
limited to, clear glass, colored glass, aluminum, steel and bimetallic cans,
high-grade office paper, newsprint, corrugated paper, leaf waste, plastics
73.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
§ 210-2 TARENTUM CODE § 210-2
207:216
and any other items selected by the municipality or specified in future
revisions to Act 101. The recyclable materials selected by the municipality
may be revised from time to time as deemed necessary by the municipality.
RECYCLING — The collection, separation, recovery and sale or reuse of
metals, glass, paper, leaf waste, plastics and other materials which would
otherwise be disposed or processed as municipal waste or the mechanized
separation and treatment of municipal waste (other than through
combustion) and creation and recovery of reusable materials.
RESIDENCE — Any occupied single-family or multifamily dwelling having
up to four dwelling units per structure for which the municipality provides
municipal waste collection service.
SOURCE-SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Those materials
separated at the point of origin for the purpose of being recycled.
WASTE — A material whose original purpose has been completed and which
is directed to a disposal or processing facility or is otherwise disposed. The
term does not include source-separated recyclable materials or material
approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection for
beneficial use.
§ 210-3. Establishment of program and grant of power.
A. The municipality hereby establishes a recycling program for the
mandatory separation and collection of recyclable materials of
aluminum, steel and bimetallic cans (refer to rules and regulations
addendum74); clear, green and amber (brown) glass; and the separation,
collection and composting of leaf waste from all residences and all
commercial, municipal and institutional establishments located in the
municipality for which waste collection is provided by the municipality
or any other collector. Collection of the recyclable materials shall occur
bimonthly on the day scheduled for regular weekly garbage pickup by
the municipality, its designated agent or any other solid waste
collectors authorized to collect recyclable materials from residences or
from commercial, municipal and institutional establishments. The
recycling program shall also contain a sustained public information and
education program.
B. Specific program regulations are provided as an attachment to this
article.75 The Council of the Borough of Tarentum is empowered to
make changes to recycling program regulations as necessary, as
described in § 210-10. Subsequent changes in the program regulations
may be made through approval of the Council of the Borough of
Tarentum as recommended by the Civic Library and Health Committee
of Council with appropriate public notice and public vote and
notification, as defined by the Borough, to all affected parties.
74.Editor's Note: Said addendum is on file in the Borough offices.
75.Editor's Note: Said attachment is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 210-2 SIGNS § 210-3
207:217
§ 210-4. Disposal of lead acid batteries.
Disposal by persons of lead acid batteries with other municipal wastes is
prohibited and shall be a violation of this article.
§ 210-5. Separation and collection.
C. This article is ordained pursuant to the Borough Code.76
A. All persons who are residents of the municipality shall separate all of
those recyclable materials currently designated by the municipality
from all other municipal waste produced at their homes, apartments
and other residential establishments, store and commingle such
materials for collection and shall place the same for collection in
accordance with the guidelines established in this article and the
recycling program regulations, as amended. The present recyclables
designated are clear glass, green glass, amber (brown) glass,
aluminum, steel and bimetal cans (refer to rules and regulations
addendum).77 The municipality reserves the right to include additional
and/or to delete recyclables from the present recycling program
regulations.
(1) Persons in residences must separate recyclable materials from
other refuse. Recyclable materials shall be placed at the curbside
in containers provided by the municipality for collection no sooner
than 12 hours before the day of collection. Any containers provided
to residences for collection of recyclable materials shall be the
property of the municipality and shall be used only for the
collection of recyclable materials. Any resident who moves within
or from the municipality shall be responsible for returning the
allocated container(s) to the municipality or shall pay the
replacement cost of said container(s). Use of recycling containers
for any purpose other than the designated recycling program or
use of the recycling containers by any person other than the person
allocated such container(s) shall be a violation of this article. Real
estate owners are responsible for the theft or damage of their bins.
(2) An owner, landlord, manager or agent of an owner, landlord or
manager of a multifamily housing property with more than four
units may comply with its recycling responsibilities by establishing
a collection system at each property. The collection system must
include suitable containers for collecting and sorting the recyclable
materials, easily accessible locations for the containers and written
instructions to the occupants concerning the use and availability of
the collection system. Owners, landlords, managers and agents of
owners, landlords or managers who comply with this article shall
not be liable for noncompliance of occupants of their buildings. If
recyclable materials are collected by a collector other than the
76.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 45101 et seq.
77.Editor's Note: Said addendum is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 210-3 TARENTUM CODE § 210-5
207:218
municipality or its authorized agent, owners, landlords and agents
of owners or landlords shall submit an annual report to the
municipality reporting the tonnage of materials recycled during the
previous year. This requirement may be fulfilled by submission of
a letter or form from the collector which certifies that recyclable
materials are being collected from the multifamily housing
property.
B. All persons must separate leaf waste from other municipal waste
generated at their houses, apartments and other residential
establishments for collection unless those persons have otherwise
provided for composting of leaf waste.
C. Persons must separate high-grade office paper, aluminum, corrugated
paper, leaf waste and such other materials as may be designated by the
municipality generated at commercial, municipal and institutional
establishments and from community activities of 200 persons per day
and store the recyclable materials until collection.
(1) A person may be exempted from this subsection by:
(a) Providing for the recycling of high-grade office paper,
aluminum, corrugated paper, leaf waste and other materials
deemed appropriate by the municipality.
(b) Submitting, at a minimum, an annual recycling report to the
governing body of the municipality. The report shall document
the amount of municipal waste generated per year as well as
the type and weight of materials that were recycled in the
previous calender year. Valid documentation shall include
information from an end-use recycler or waste hauler which
describes the type and weight of each recyclable material that
was collected and marketed.
[1] Documentation may be in the form of one of the following:
[a] Copies of weight receipts or statements which
consolidate such information;
[b] A report from the provider of recycling collection
services which identifies the amount of each material
collected and marketed. The type and weight of
recyclables generated by an individual establishment
may be approximated based on a representative
sample of its source-separated materials; or
[c] A report from the provider of waste collection services
that identifies the type and weight of each recyclable
material collected and marketed in cases where
recyclables are commingled with the establishment's
waste. The type and weight of recyclables generated
§ 210-5 SIGNS § 210-5
207:219
by an individual establishment may be approximated
based on a representative sample of its waste.
[2] For Subsection C(1)(b)[1][b] and [c], where recyclables
from several establishments are collected in the same
vehicle, an individual establishment's contribution to the
load may be apportioned. Only the weight of materials
marketed for recycling purposes can be credited to an
establishment.
(2) If recyclable materials are collected by a collector other than the
municipality or its authorized agent, occupants of said
establishments shall submit an annual report to the municipality
reporting the type and weight of materials recycled during the
previous calender year. This requirement may be fulfilled by
submission of a letter or form from the collector which certifies that
recyclable materials are being collected from the establishment.
(3) All employees, users (patrons) and residents of commercial,
municipal and institutional establishments must be informed of the
recycling program. The education program should describe the
program's features and requirements and should include at a
minimum an annual program meeting and an orientation to the
program upon the arrival of a new employee or resident.
Receptacles should be clearly marked with the recycling symbol
and the type of recyclable material that is to be placed in the
receptacle and signs should be prominently displayed stating the
requirement of the program.
(4) Commercial, municipal and institutional establishments which
generate more than 2,200 pounds of municipal waste per month
should also implement a waste minimization opportunity
assessment which includes:
(a) Waste characterization, including source, generation rate,
management techniques and management costs. The
assessment should expressly consider high-grade office paper,
aluminum, corrugated paper, leaf waste and any other
materials generated in significant quantities.
(b) A description of all possible waste minimization options,
including use and waste reclamation.
(c) An evaluation of the economic and technical feasibility of each
option and a ranking of each option.
(d) An estimate of the payback period for each feasible option.
(e) A statement of which options will be implemented, including an
explanation and a timetable.
§ 210-5 TARENTUM CODE § 210-5
207:220
§ 210-6. Ownership of recyclable materials.
All recyclable materials placed by persons for collection by the municipality
or authorized collector pursuant to this article shall, from time of placement
at the curb, become the property of the municipality or the authorized
collector, except as otherwise provided by § 210-8 of this article. Nothing in
this article shall be deemed to impair the ownership of separated recyclable
materials by the generator unless and until such materials are placed at the
curbside for collection.
§ 210-7. Collection by unauthorized persons.
(f) Identification of the individual(s) who will be responsible for
implementing the plan.
(5) The waste minimization plan should be periodically updated.
Implementation of the plan should include:
(a) Recycling or composting of materials, to the greatest extent
feasible, either privately or through a municipal recycling
program.
(b) Use, to the greatest extent feasible, of products and materials
which are recyclable or made of post-consumer materials.
(c) Substitution, to the greatest extent feasible, of durable and
reusable products and materials for products that are not
durable or reusable.
(d) Appropriate education materials and signs should be made
available to employees or the public to encourage participation
in recycling and waste reduction.
D. All rigid recycling containers supplied by the municipality to residents
shall be and remain the property of the municipality. The containers
shall remain with the residence and shall not move with the resident
owner or renter of any municipal dwelling. The Code Enforcement
Officer shall not issue an occupancy permit without proof that a rigid
recycling container provided by the municipality is on premises and is
in use.
A. It shall be a violation of this article for any person, firm or corporation,
other than the municipality or one authorized by the Council of the
Borough of Tarentum or other entity responsible for providing for
collection of recyclable materials placed by residences or commercial,
municipal and institutional establishments for collection by the
municipality or an authorized collector, unless such person, firm or
corporation has prior written permission from the generator to make
such collection. In violation hereof, unauthorized collection from one or
more residences or commercial, municipal and institutional
establishments on one calendar day shall constitute a separate and
distinct offense punishable as hereinafter provided.
§ 210-5 SIGNS § 210-7
207:221
§ 210-8. Existing recycling operations.
Any residence or commercial, municipal or institutional establishment may
donate or sell recyclable materials to any person, firm or corporation,
whether operating for profit or not, provided that the receiving person,
firm or corporation shall not collect such donated recyclable materials from
the collection point of a residence or commercial, municipal or institutional
establishment without prior written permission from the Borough Council
or other entity responsible for authorizing collection of recyclable materials
to make such a collection.
§ 210-9. Recycling of materials.
Disposal by any persons or agents of the Borough of recyclable materials
with wastes is prohibited and shall be a violation of this article. The
collected recyclable materials shall be taken to a recycling facility. Disposal
by collectors or operators of recycling facilities of source-separated
recyclable materials in landfills or to be burned in incinerators is prohibited
unless markets do not exist and the collectors or operators have notified the
Code Enforcement Officer in writing.
§ 210-10. Enforcement and administration; violations and penalties.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to collect, remove or dispose of solid
waste which contains designated recyclables combined with other
forms of solid waste.
A. The Council of the Borough of Tarentum, upon recommendation of the
Civic Library and Health Committee of Council, is hereby authorized
and directed to make reasonable rules and regulations for the operation
and enforcement of this article as deemed necessary, including but not
limited to:
(1) Establishing recyclable materials to be separated for collection and
recycling by residences and additional or elimination of recyclable
materials to be separated by commercial, municipal and
institutional establishments.
(2) Establishing collection procedures for recyclable materials.
(3) Establishing reporting procedures for amounts of materials
recycled.
(4) Establishing procedures for the distribution, monitoring, collection
and replacement cost of recyclable containers destroyed or stolen
or otherwise unaccounted for by residents and real estate owners.
(5) Establishing procedures and rules for the collection of leaf waste.
(6) Fines.
§ 210-7 TARENTUM CODE § 210-10
207:222
§ 210-11. Fees and charges.
§ 210-12. Franchise or license.
The municipality may enter into an agreement or agreements with public
or private agencies or firms to authorize them to collect all or part of the
recyclable materials from outside.
§ 210-13. Modifications.
The municipality may, from time to time, modify, add to or remove from the
standards and regulations herein and as authorized in § 210-10.
B. Except as hereinafter provided, any person, firm or corporation who or
which shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600 and costs
of prosecution for each and every offense. [Amended 12-27-1999 by
Ord. No. 99-2]
C. The municipality or its authorized agent reserves the right not to collect
municipal waste containing recyclable materials in combination with
nonrecyclable materials.
A. The Council of the Borough of Tarentum shall have the authority to
impose and collect, for the use of the Borough, a fee or charge to cover
all or part of the expenses of the collection and disposal of the
recyclable materials, including reasonable fees for administration. This
charge, to be designated as the recyclable collection charge, shall be
fixed by resolution or ordinance of the Council of the Borough of
Tarentum as soon as practical after the enactment of this article and
may be changed from time to time by resolution of the Council of the
Borough of Tarentum. The recyclable collection charge shall be
imposed on an annual rate and shall be billed and payable in advance,
on a monthly basis, each bill to be rendered with the resident's water
bill unless owner of the real estate, if different, wishes to pay water bill,
garbage collection and recycling charges himself by arrangements
made through the office of the Borough of Tarentum.
B. The rate is also subject to change upon market conditions and value of
recyclables as reflected in a change of costs submitted by duly
authorized collecting agent of the Borough. In the alternative, the
Council may so choose to include the recycling fee in its monthly
garbage billing fee, subject to change upon market conditions and value
of recyclables as reflected in a change of costs submitted by duly
authorized collecting agent of the Borough.
§ 210-10 SIGNS § 210-13
207:223

ARTICLE II
Garbage and Rubbish Collection
[Adopted 9-9-1991 by Ord. No. 91-6; amended 12-29-2017 by Ord.
No. 17-04]
§ 210-14. Title.
This article shall be known and referred to as the "Solid Waste Ordinance."
§ 210-15. Definitions.
A. The following words and phrases, as used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed herein, unless the context clearly indicates a
different meaning:
ACT or ACT 97 — The Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act of
1980 (P.L. 380, No. 97, July 7, 1980).78
AGRICULTURAL WASTE — Poultry and livestock manure or residual
materials in liquid or solid form, generated in the production and
marketing of poultry, livestock, fur-bearing animals and their products,
provided that such waste is not a hazardous waste. The term includes
the residual materials generated in producing, harvesting and
marketing of agronomic, horticultural, silvicultural and agricultural
crops or commodities grown on what are usually recognized and
excepted as farms, forests or other agricultural lands.
BULKY WASTE — Large items of solid waste, including but not limited
to appliances, furniture, large auto parts, trees, branches or stumps
which may require special handling due to their size, shape or weight.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment engaged in
nonmanufacturing or nonprocessing business, including but not limited
to stores, markets, office buildings, restaurants, shopping centers and
theaters.
CONSTRUCTION DEMOLITION WASTE — All municipal and residual
waste building materials, grubbing waste and rubble resulting from
construction, remodeling, repair and demolition operations on houses,
commercial buildings and other structures and pavements.
COVERED DEVICE — Shall be the equivalent of "covered device" as
defined in the Covered Device Recycling Act79 (Act 108 of 2010), as
amended from time to time.
DEPARTMENT — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection.
DISPOSAL — The incineration, deposition, injection, dumping, spilling,
leaking or placing of solid waste into or on the land or water in a
manner that the solid waste or a constituent of the solid waste enters
78.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
79.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6031.101 et seq.
§ 210-14 SIGNS § 210-15
207:225
the environment, is emitted into the air or is discharged to the waters
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
DOMESTIC WASTE or HOUSEHOLD WASTE — Solid waste, comprised
of garbage and rubbish, which normally originates in the residential
private household or apartment house.
GARBAGE — Any solid waste derived from animal, grain, fruit or
vegetable matter that is capable of being decomposed by
microorganisms with sufficient rapidity to cause such nuisances as
odors, or vectors.
HAULER or PRIVATE COLLECTOR — Any person, firm, copartnership,
association or corporation who or which has been licensed by the
Borough or its designated representative to collect, transport and
dispose of refuse for a fee as herein prescribed.
HAZARDOUS WASTE — Any solid waste or combination of solid wastes,
as defined in the act, which because of its quantity, concentration
or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may cause or
significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in
morbidity in either an individual or the total population or pose a
substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the
environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of
or otherwise managed.
INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment engaged in
manufacturing or processing, including but not limited to factories,
foundries, mills, processing plants, refineries, mines and
slaughterhouses.
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment engaged in
service, including but not limited to hospitals, nursing homes,
orphanages, schools and universities.
MUNICIPAL WASTE — Garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or office
waste or other material, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained
gaseous material resulting from operation of residential, municipal,
commercial or institutional establishments and from community
activities; and any sludge not meeting the definition of residual or
hazardous waste under Act 97 from a municipal, commercial or
institutional water supply treatment plant, wastewater treatment plant
or air pollution control facility. The term does not include sourceseparated
recyclable materials.
MUNICIPALITY — The Borough of Tarentum, Allegheny County,
Pennsylvania.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation, association,
institution, cooperative enterprise, state institution and agency, or any
other legal entity which is recognized by law as the subject of rights and
duties. In any provisions of this article prescribing a fine, imprisonment
or penalty or any combination of the foregoing, the term "person" shall
§ 210-15 TARENTUM CODE § 210-15
207:226
include the officers and directors of any corporation or other legal
entity having officers and directors.
PROCESSING — Any technology used for the purpose of reducing the
volume or bulk of municipal or residual waste or any technology used to
convert part or all of such waste materials for off-site reuse. Processing
facilities include, but are not limited to, transfer facilities, composting
facilities and resource recovery facilities.
REFUSE — All solid waste materials which are discarded as useless.
RESIDUAL WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, other discarded material
or other waste, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous
materials resulting from industrial, mining and agricultural operations
and any sludge from an industrial, mining or agricultural water supply
treatment facility, wastewater treatment facility or all pollution control
facility, provided that it is not hazardous. The term "residual waste"
shall not include coal refuse as defined in the Coal Refuse Disposal
Control Act. See 52 P.S. § 30.51 et seq. Residual waste shall not include
treatment sludges from coal mine drainage treatment plants, disposal
of which is being carried on pursuant to and in compliance with a valid
permit issued pursuant to the Clean Streams Law.80
RUBBISH — All nonputrescible municipal waste except garbage and
other decomposable matter. This category includes but is not limited to
ashes, bedding, cardboard, cans, crockery, glass, paper, wood and yard
cleanings.
SCAVENGING — The unauthorized and uncontrolled removal of
material placed for collection or from a solid waste processing or
disposal facility.
SEWAGE TREATMENT RESIDUES — Any coarse screenings, grit and
dewatered or air-dried sludges from sewage treatment plants and
pumping from septic tanks or septage which are a municipal solid waste
and require proper disposal under Act 97.
SOLID WASTE — Any waste, including but not limited to municipal,
residual or hazardous wastes, including solid, liquid, semisolid or
contained gaseous material.
SOURCE-SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Those materials
separated at the point of origin for the purpose of being recycled.
STORAGE — The containment of any waste on a temporary basis in
such a manner as not to constitute disposal of such waste. It shall
be presumed that the containment of any waste in excess of one year
constitutes disposal. This presumption can be overcome by clear and
convincing evidence to the contrary.
TRANSFER STATION — Any supplemental transportation facility used
as any adjunct to solid waste route collection vehicles.
80.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 210-15 SIGNS § 210-15
207:227
§ 210-16. Prohibited acts.
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
§ 210-17. Storage standards.
TRANSPORTATION — The off-site removal of any solid waste at any
time after generation.
B. In this article, the singular shall include the plural and the masculine
shall include the feminine and the neuter.
A. Accumulate or permit to accumulate upon any public or private
property within the Borough any garbage, rubbish, bulky waste or any
other Borough or residual solid waste except in accordance with the
provision of this article, any Department rules and regulations adopted
pursuant to Act 97 and the Health Department Rules and Regulations,
Article VIII.
B. Burn any solid waste within the Borough except in accordance with the
provisions of this article, any Department rules and regulations adopted
pursuant to Act 97 and the Health Department Rules and Regulations,
Article VIII.
C. Dispose of any solid waste in the Borough except in accordance with the
provisions of this article, any Department rules and regulations adopted
pursuant to Act 97 and the Health Department Rules and Regulations,
Article VIII.
D. Haul, transport, collect or remove any solid waste from public or
private property within the Borough without first securing a license to
do so in accordance with the provisions of this article.
E. Scavenge any materials from any solid waste that is stored or deposited
for collection within the Borough without prior approval by the
Borough.
F. Salvage or reclaim any solid wastes within the Borough except at an
approved and permitted resource recovery facility under Act 97 and
any department rules and regulations adopted pursuant to Act 97.
G. Throw, place or deposit or cause or permit to be thrown, placed or
deposited any solid waste in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, body of
water, public or private property within the Borough except as provided
in this article.
H. It shall be unlawful for any person to place in solid waste a covered
device or any of its components.
A. The storage of all solid waste shall be practiced so as to prevent the
attraction, harborage or breeding of insects or rodents and to eliminate
conditions harmful to public health or which create safety hazards,
odors, unsightliness or public nuisances.
§ 210-15 TARENTUM CODE § 210-17
207:228
B. Any person producing municipal waste shall provide a sufficient
number of approved containers to store all waste materials generated
during periods between regularly scheduled collections, and shall place
and store all waste materials therein.
C. Any person storing municipal waste for collection shall comply with the
following preparation standards:
(1) All municipal waste shall be drained free of liquids before being
placed in storage containers.
(2) All garbage or other putrescible waste shall be securely wrapped in
paper, plastic or similar material or placed in properly tied plastic
bags.
(3) All cans, bottles or other food containers should be rinsed free of
food particles and drained before being placed in storage
containers.
(4) Garden clippings and tree trimmings shall be placed in approved
containers or shall be cut and tied securely into bundles. Bundles
shall be not more than four feet in length, not more than two feet in
diameter and not more than 40 pounds in weight.
(5) Newspapers and magazines shall be placed in approved containers
or shall be tied securely into bundles of not more than 40 pounds in
weight.
(6) When specified by the Borough or its designated representative,
special preparation and storage procedures may be required to
facilitate the collection and resource recovery of certain waste
materials.
D. All municipal waste shall be stored in containers approved by the
Borough or its designated representative. Individual containers and
bulk containers utilized for storage of municipal waste shall comply
with the following standards:
(1) Reusable containers shall be constructed of durable, watertight,
rust and corrosion resistant material, such as plastic, metal or
fiberglass, in such manner as to be leakproof, weatherproof,
insectproof and rodentproof.
(2) Reusable containers for individual residences shall have a tightfitting
cover and suitable lifting handles to facilitate collection.
(3) Reusable containers for individual residences shall have a capacity
of not less than 10 gallons nor more than 40 gallons, and a loaded
weight of not more than 40 pounds.
(4) Disposable plastic bags or sacks are acceptable containers,
provided that the bags are designated for waste disposal. Plastic
bags shall have sufficient wall strength to maintain physical
§ 210-17 SIGNS § 210-17
207:229
integrity when lifted by the top, shall be securely tied at the top for
collection and shall have a capacity of not more than 30 gallons and
a loaded weight of not more than 35 pounds.
(5) All containers, either reusable or disposable, shall also comply with
the minimum standards established by the National Sanitation
Foundation.
E. Any person storing municipal waste for collection shall comply with the
following storage standards:
(1) Containers shall be kept tightly sealed or covered at all times. Solid
waste shall not protrude or extend above the top of the container.
(2) Reusable containers shall be kept in a sanitary condition at all
times. The interior of the container shall be thoroughly cleaned,
rinsed, drained and disinfected, as often as necessary, to prevent
the accumulation of liquid residues or solids on the bottom or sides
of the containers.
(3) Containers shall be used and maintained so as to prevent public
nuisances.
(4) Containers that do not conform to the standard of this article or
which have sharp edges, ragged edges or any other defect that may
hamper or injure collection personnel shall be promptly replaced
by the owner upon notice from the Borough or its designated
representative.
(5) Containers shall be placed by the owner or customer at a collection
point specified by the Borough or its designated representative.
(6) With the exception of pickup days when the containers are placed
out for collection, the container shall be properly stored on the
owner or customer premises at all times.
(7) Bulk waste items such as furniture, automobile parts, machinery,
appliances and tires shall be stored in a manner that will prevent
the accumulation or collection of water, the harborage of rodents,
safety hazards and fire hazards.
(8) Containers for solid waste or recyclable materials shall be set out
at the collection point no earlier than 4:00 p.m. on the day
preceding the day designated for collection. The resident, occupant
or person in charge of the property from which solid waste or
recyclable materials have been collected shall remove or cause to
be removed all emptied storage containers from the collection
point not later than 10:00 p.m. on the day of collection. No storage
container may be placed or maintained at the collection point
except during the days and times listed in this subsection.
F. The storage of all municipal waste from multifamily residential units,
commercial establishments, institutions and industrial lunchroom or
§ 210-17 TARENTUM CODE § 210-17
207:230
§ 210-18. Collection standards and regulations.
office waste sources is subject to the regulations and standards set
forth in this article. The type, size and placement requirements for bulk
containers shall be determined by the waste generator and the waste
hauler and are subject to approval by the Borough.
A. The Borough shall provide for the collection of all garbage, rubbish and
bulky wastes from individual residences and multifamily residential
sources with fewer than three units, or it may contract with a private
collector or collectors to provide this essential residential collection
service.
B. All households and homeowners shall utilize the residential collection
service provided by the Borough unless they can demonstrate that they
have made alternate arrangements that are consistent with this article
and approved by the Borough.
C. All multifamily residential sources (with more than three units),
commercial, institutional and industrial establishments shall negotiate
and individually contract collection service with the Borough's collector
or any other properly licensed waste hauler of their choice and shall be
required by this article to provide a refuse dumpster to their tenants
that is large enough to store their solid waste until pickup.
D. All residential garbage and rubbish shall be collected at least once a
week. Bulky wastes shall be collected following prior arrangement with
the Borough's collector and payment of any required special fees.
E. All commercial, institutional, public and industrial lunchroom and office
waste containing garbage shall be collected at least once a week.
Rubbish collection from these sources shall be made as often as
necessary to control health hazards, odors, flies and unsightly
conditions. The Borough reserves the right to require more frequent
collection when deemed necessary.
F. Residential collection schedules shall be published regularly by the
Borough or its contracted hauler.
G. All solid waste collection activity shall be conducted from Monday
through Friday between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. or on
Saturdays between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., unless prior
approval or any exception has been granted by the Borough. No
collection, hauling or transporting of solid waste shall be permitted on
Sunday.
H. All licensed haulers and haulers under contract with the Borough shall
comply with the following standards and regulations:
(1) All municipal waste collected within the Borough shall ultimately
be disposed only at a landfill cited in the Allegheny County Solid
Waste Plan 1990, or on subsequent revisions thereto.
§ 210-17 SIGNS § 210-18
207:231
§ 210-19. Collection and disposal charges.
§ 210-20. Appeals.
(2) Any trucks or other vehicles used for the collection and
transportation of municipal waste must comply with the
requirements of Act 97, and any Department regulations adopted
pursuant to Act 97 and must be licensed by the Allegheny County
Health Department.
(3) All collection vehicles conveying domestic waste and garbage shall
be watertight and suitably enclosed to prevent leakage, roadside
littering, attraction of vectors, the creation of odors and other
nuisances.
(4) Collection vehicles for rubbish and other nonputrescible solid
waste shall be capable of being enclosed or covered to prevent
roadside litter and other nuisances.
(5) All solid waste shall be collected and transported so as to prevent
public health hazards, safety hazards and nuisances.
(6) All solid waste collection vehicles shall be operated and maintained
in a clean and sanitary condition.
A. The government body of the Borough shall be authorized to make funds
available, in accordance with the laws and procedures of the Borough,
for the establishment, maintenance and operation of a municipal solid
waste collection and disposal system or for the contracting of such
service to a private collector.
B. Annual fee schedules shall be published by the borough on any
competitively bid residential collection service contract that may be
awarded by the Borough.
C. The Borough's contracted hauler and other licensed haulers shall be
responsible for the collection of any fees for solid waste collection and
disposal services provided to residential, commercial, institutional or
industrial sources within the Borough.
A. All appeals shall be made, in writing, to the Council of the Borough.
B. Pending a reversal or modification, all decisions of the Borough shall
remain effective and enforceable.
C. Appeals may be made by the following persons:
(1) Any person who is aggrieved by a new standard or regulation
issued by the Borough may appeal within 10 days after the Borough
gives notice of its intention to issue the new standard or regulation.
D. The notice of appeal shall be served, in writing, and sent by certified
mail with return receipt requested. Within 20 days after receipt of the
§ 210-18 TARENTUM CODE § 210-20
207:232
§ 210-21. Enforcement.
The Borough may petition the Court of Common Pleas for an injunction,
either mandatory or prohibitive, to enforce any of the provisions of this
article.
§ 210-22. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction,
be guilty of a summary offense which is punishable by a fine of not less than
$300 nor more than $500 or, in default of payment of such fine, then by
imprisonment for a period of not more than 10 days, or both. Each day of
violation shall be considered a separate and distinct offense.
notice of appeal, the Borough shall hold a public hearing. Notice of
the hearing shall be sent to both parties in time to adequately prepare
for the hearing. Notice shall be sent to the parties by certified mail
with return receipt requested at the last known address in addition to
publication in the local newspaper.
§ 210-20 SIGNS § 210-22
207:233
Chapter 214
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
§ 210-22 TARENTUM CODE § 210-22
207:234
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 214-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Tarentum Borough
Stormwater Management Ordinance."
§ 214-2. Statement of findings.
The governing body of the municipality finds that:
§ 214-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote health, safety, and welfare within
the municipality and its watershed by minimizing the harms and maximizing
the benefits described in § 214-2 of this chapter, through provisions
designed to:
A. Inadequate management of accelerated runoff of stormwater resulting
from development throughout a watershed increases runoff volumes,
flows and velocities, contributes to erosion and sedimentation,
overtaxes the carrying capacity of streams and storm sewers, greatly
increases the cost of public facilities to carry and control stormwater,
undermines floodplain management and flood control efforts in
downstream communities, reduces groundwater recharge, threatens
public health and safety, and increases nonpoint source pollution of
water resources.
B. A comprehensive program of stormwater management (SWM),
including regulation of development and activities causing accelerated
runoff, is fundamental to the public health, safety, and welfare and the
protection of people of the commonwealth, their resources, and the
environment.
C. Stormwater is an important water resource that provides groundwater
recharge for water supplies and supports the base flow of streams.
D. The use of green infrastructure (GI) and low impact development (LID)
are intended to address the root cause of water quality impairment by
using systems and practices which use or mimic natural processes to: 1)
infiltrate and recharge, 2) evapotranspire, and/or 3) harvest and use
precipitation near where it falls to earth. Green infrastructure practices
and LID contribute to the restoration or maintenance of
predevelopment hydrology.
E. Federal and state regulations require certain municipalities to
implement a program of stormwater controls. These municipalities are
required to obtain a permit for stormwater discharges from their
separate storm sewer systems under the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES) program.
§ 214-1 SIGNS § 214-3
207:235
§ 214-4. Statutory authority.
The municipality is empowered to regulate land use activities that affect
runoff by the authority of the Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, The
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code,81as amended, and/or the Act
of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act 167), 32 P.S. Section 680.1, et seq., as
amended, The Stormwater Management Act.
§ 214-5. Applicability.
All regulated activities and all activities that may affect stormwater runoff,
including land development and earth disturbance activity, are subject to
regulation by this chapter.
§ 214-6. Repealer.
Any other ordinance provision(s) or regulation of the municipality
inconsistent with any of the provisions of this chapter is hereby repealed to
the extent of the inconsistency only.
§ 214-7. Severability.
In the event that a court of competent jurisdiction declares any section or
provision of this chapter invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of
any of the remaining provisions of this chapter.
A. Meet legal water quality requirements under state law, including
regulations at 25 Pa. Code 93 to protect, maintain, reclaim, and restore
the existing and designated uses of the waters of this commonwealth.
B. Preserve natural drainage systems.
C. Manage stormwater runoff close to the source, reduce runoff volumes
and mimic predevelopment hydrology.
D. Provide procedures and performance standards for stormwater
planning and management.
E. Maintain groundwater recharge to prevent degradation of surface and
groundwater quality and to otherwise protect water resources.
F. Prevent scour and erosion of stream banks and streambeds.
G. Provide proper operation and maintenance of all stormwater best
management practices (BMPs) that are implemented within the
municipality.
H. Provide standards to meet NPDES permit requirements.
81.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 214-3 TARENTUM CODE § 214-8
207:236
§ 214-8. Compatibility with other requirements.
Approvals issued and actions taken under this chapter do not relieve the
applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits or approvals for
activities regulated by any other code, law, regulation or ordinance.
§ 214-9. Erroneous permit.
Any permit or authorization issued or approved based on false, misleading
or erroneous information provided by an applicant is void without the
necessity of any proceedings for revocation. Any work undertaken or use
established pursuant to such permit or other authorization is unlawful. No
action may be taken by a board, agency or employee of the municipality
purporting to validate such a violation.
§ 214-10. Waivers.
A. If the municipality determines that any requirement under this chapter
cannot be achieved for a particular regulated activity the municipality
may, after an evaluation of alternatives, approve measures other than
those in this chapter, subject to Subsection B. The proposed area of
disturbance shall be less than one acre. The request for a modification
or waiver shall originate with the landowner, shall be in writing, and
shall accompany the stormwater management site plan submitted to
the municipality. The request shall provide the facts on which the
request is based, the provisions of the chapter involved, and the
proposed modification. The designated plan reviewer shall review the
request to determine if it meets the requirements of the chapter,
including Subsection B below. If acceptable to the municipality, the
municipality may grant the waiver or modification.
B. Waivers or modifications of the requirements of this chapter may be
approved by the municipality if enforcement will exact undue hardship
because of unique physical circumstances or conditions peculiar to the
land in question, provided that the modifications will not be contrary or
detrimental to the public interest and will achieve the intended
outcome, and that the purpose of the chapter is preserved. Hardship
must be due to such unique physical circumstances or conditions and
not to circumstances or conditions generally created by the provisions
of the Stormwater Management Ordinance. Cost or financial burden
shall not be considered a hardship. Modifications shall not substantially
or permanently impair the appropriate use or development of adjacent
property. A request for modifications shall be in writing and accompany
the stormwater management site plan submission, as directed in
Subsection A above.
C. No waiver or modification of any regulated stormwater activity
involving earth disturbance greater than or equal to one acre may be
granted by the municipality.
§ 214-8 SIGNS § 214-11
207:237
§ 214-11. Version of regulations and standards.
Any reference to a statute, regulation or standard, shall be interpreted to
refer to the latest or most current version of that document.
§ 214-12. Definitions.
A. For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms and words used herein
shall be interpreted as follows:
(1) Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the
singular number includes the plural, and the plural number
includes the singular; words of masculine gender include feminine
gender; and words of feminine gender include masculine gender.
(2) The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the
specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other
instances of like kind and character.
(3) The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory; the words "may" and
"should" are permissive.
B. These definitions do not necessarily reflect the definitions contained in
pertinent regulations or statutes, and are intended for this chapter only.
ACT 167 — The municipality is empowered to regulate land use
activities that affect runoff and surface and groundwater quality and
quantity by the authority of the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act
167), 32 P.S. Section 680.1, et seq., as amended, the "Storm Water
Management Act."
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY — Activities associated with agriculture
such as agricultural cultivation, agricultural operation, and animal
heavy use areas. This includes the work of producing crops including
tillage, land clearing, plowing, disking, harrowing, planting, harvesting
crops or pasturing and raising of livestock and installation of
conservation measures. Construction of new buildings or impervious
area is not considered an agricultural activity.
APPLICANT — A landowner, developer, or other person who has filed an
application to the municipality for approval to engage in any regulated
activity at a project site in the municipality.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP) — Activities, facilities,
designs, measures, or procedures used to manage stormwater impacts
from regulated activities, to meet state water quality requirements, to
promote groundwater recharge, and to otherwise meet the purposes
of this chapter. Stormwater BMPs are commonly grouped into one of
two broad categories or measures: "structural" or "non-structural." In
this chapter, non-structural BMPs or measures refer to operational
and/or behavior-related practices that attempt to minimize the contact
of pollutants with stormwater runoff, whereas structural BMPs or
measures are those that consist of a physical device or practice that
§ 214-11 TARENTUM CODE § 214-12
207:238
is installed to capture and treat stormwater runoff. Structural BMPs
include, but are not limited to, a wide variety of practices and devices,
from large-scale retention ponds and constructed wetlands, to smallscale
underground treatment systems, infiltration facilities, filter strips,
low-impact design, bioretention, wet ponds, permeable paving, grassed
swales, riparian or forested buffers, sand filters, detention basins, and
manufactured devices. Structural stormwater BMPs are permanent
appurtenances to the project site.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — A conservation district, as defined in
Section 3(c) of the Conservation District Law (3 P.S. § 851(c)) that
has the authority under a delegation agreement executed with DEP to
administer and enforce all or a portion of the regulations promulgated
under 25 Pa. Code 102.
DEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
DESIGN STORM — The magnitude and temporal distribution of
precipitation from a storm event measured in probability of occurrence
(e.g., a five-year storm) and duration (e.g., 24 hours) used in the design
and evaluation of stormwater management systems. Also see Return
Period.
DESIGNATED PLAN REVIEWER — A qualified professional as defined
herein, or organization such as the Allegheny County Conservation
District, that has been designated by the municipality to be the
reviewer of SWM site plans for the municipality, and shall be
understood to be the reviewer where indicated as the municipality
within this chapter.
DETENTION BASIN — An impoundment designed to collect and retard
stormwater runoff by temporarily storing the runoff and releasing it at a
predetermined rate. Detention basins are designed to drain completely
in a designed period after a rainfall event, and to become dry until the
next rainfall event.
DETENTION VOLUME — The volume of runoff that is captured and
released into the waters of the commonwealth at a controlled rate.
DEVELOPMENT SITE (SITE) — See Project Site.
DISTURBED AREA — An unstabilized land area where an earth
disturbance activity is occurring or has occurred.
EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — A construction or other human
activity which disturbs the surface of the land, including, but not limited
to: clearing and grubbing; grading; excavations; embankments; road
maintenance; building construction; and the moving, depositing,
stockpiling, or storing of soil, rock, or earth materials.
EROSION — The natural process by which the surface of the land is
worn away by water, wind, or chemical action.
EXISTING CONDITION — The dominant land cover during the five-year
period immediately preceding a proposed regulated activity.
§ 214-12 SIGNS § 214-12
207:239
FEMA — Federal Emergency Management Agency.
FLOODPLAIN — Any land area susceptible to inundation by water
from any natural source or delineated by applicable FEMA maps and
studies as being a special flood hazard area. Also includes areas that
comprise Group 13 Soils, as listed in Appendix A of the Pennsylvania
DEP Technical Manual for Sewage Enforcement Officers (as amended
or replaced from time to time by DEP).
FLOODWAY — The channel of the watercourse and those portions of
the adjoining floodplains that are reasonably required to carry and
discharge the 100-year flood. Unless otherwise specified, the boundary
of the floodway is as indicated on maps and flood insurance studies
provided by FEMA. In an area where no FEMA maps or studies have
defined the boundary of the 100-year floodway, it is assumed, absent
evidence to the contrary, that the floodway extends from the stream to
50 feet from the top of the bank of the stream.
FOREST MANAGEMENT/TIMBER OPERATIONS — Planning and
activities necessary for the management of forestland. These include
conducting a timber inventory, preparation of forest management
plans, silvicultural treatment, cutting budgets, logging road design and
construction, timber harvesting, site preparation, and reforestation.
GREEN INFRASTRUCTURE — Systems and practices that use or mimic
natural processes to infiltrate, evapotranspire, or reuse stormwater on
the site where it is generated.
GROUNDWATER — Water beneath the earth's surface that supplies
wells and springs and is within the saturated zone of soil and rock.
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE — The replenishment of existing natural
underground water supplies from precipitation or overland flow.
HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP (HSG) — Infiltration rates of soils vary
widely and are affected by subsurface permeability as well as surface
intake rates. Soils are classified into four HSGs (A, B, C, and D)
according to their minimum infiltration rate, which is obtained for bare
soil after prolonged wetting. The NRCS defines the four groups and
provides a list of most of the soils in the United States and their group
classification. The soils in the area of the development site may be
identified from a soil survey report that can be obtained from local
NRCS offices or conservation district offices. Soils become less pervious
as the HSG varies from A to D (NRCS82).
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE (IMPERVIOUS AREA) — A surface that
prevents the infiltration of water into the ground. Impervious surfaces
(or areas) shall include, but not be limited to: roofs; additional indoor
living spaces, patios, garages, storage sheds and similar structures; and
any new streets or sidewalks. Decks, parking areas, and driveway areas
are counted as impervious areas if they directly prevent infiltration.
82.Editor's Note: See § 214-38A and B.
§ 214-12 TARENTUM CODE § 214-12
207:240
INFILTRATION — Movement of surface water into the soil, where it is
absorbed by plant roots, evaporated into the atmosphere, or percolated
downward to recharge groundwater.
INVASIVE SPECIES — DCNR defines invasive plants as those species
that are not native to the state, grow aggressively, and spread and
displace native vegetation. (See http://www.dcnr.state.pa.us/cs/groups/
public/documents/document/dcnr 010314.pdf for a list of invasive
species.)
LAND DEVELOPMENT (DEVELOPMENT) — Inclusive of any or all of
the following meanings: (i) the improvement of one lot or two or more
contiguous lots, tracts, or parcels of land for any purpose involving (a)
a group of two or more buildings or (b) the division or allocation of
land or space between or among two or more existing or prospective
occupants by means of, or for the purpose of streets, common areas,
leaseholds, condominiums, building groups, or other features; (ii) any
subdivision of land; (iii) development in accordance with Section
503(1.1) of the PA Municipalities Planning Code.83
LOW IMPACT DEVELOPMENT (LID) — Site design approaches and
small-scale stormwater management practices that promote the use
of natural systems for infiltration, evapotranspiration, and reuse of
rainwater. LID can be applied to new development, urban retrofits, and
revitalization projects. LID utilizes design techniques that infiltrate,
filter, evaporate, and store runoff close to its source. Rather than rely
on costly large-scale conveyance and treatment systems, LID addresses
stormwater through a variety of small, cost-effective landscape features
located on-site.
MUNICIPALITY — Tarentum Borough, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania.
NATIVE VEGETATION — Plant species that have historically grown in
Pennsylvania and are not invasive species as defined herein.
NRCS — USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (previously
SCS).
PEAK DISCHARGE — The maximum rate of stormwater runoff from a
specific storm event.
PERVIOUS AREA — Any area not defined as impervious.
PROJECT SITE — The specific area of land where any regulated
activities in the municipality are planned, conducted, or maintained.
QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL — Any person licensed by the
Pennsylvania Department of State or otherwise qualified under
Pennsylvania law to perform the work required by this chapter.
REGULATED ACTIVITIES — Any earth disturbance activities or any
activities that involve the alteration or development of land in a manner
that may affect stormwater runoff.
83.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 214-12 SIGNS § 214-12
207:241
REGULATED EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — Activity involving
earth disturbance subject to regulation under 25 Pa. Code 92, 25 Pa.
Code 102, or the Clean Streams Law.84
RELEASE RATE — The percentage of existing conditions peak rate of
runoff from a site or subarea to which the proposed conditions peak
rate of runoff must be reduced to protect downstream areas.
RELEASE RATE DISTRICT — A watershed or portion of a watershed
for which a release rate has been established by an adopted Act 167
Stormwater Management Plan.
RETENTION VOLUME/REMOVED RUNOFF — The volume of runoff
that is captured and not released directly into the surface waters of this
commonwealth during or after a storm event.
RETURN PERIOD — The average interval, in years, within which a
storm event of a given magnitude can be expected to occur one time.
For example, the twenty-five-year return period rainfall would be
expected to occur on average once every 25 years; or stated in another
way, the probability of a twenty-five-year storm occurring in any one
year is 0.04 (i.e., a 4% chance).
RIPARIAN BUFFER — A permanent vegetated area of trees and shrubs
located adjacent to streams, lakes, ponds and wetlands.
RUNOFF — Any part of precipitation that flows over the land.
SEDIMENT — Soils or other materials transported by surface water as
a product of erosion.
STATE WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS — The regulatory
requirements to protect, maintain, reclaim, and restore water quality
under Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code and the Clean Streams Law.85
STORMWATER — Drainage runoff from the surface of the land
resulting from precipitation or snow or ice melt.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY — Any structure, natural or
man-made, that, due to its condition, design, or construction, conveys,
stores, or otherwise affects stormwater runoff. Typical stormwater
management facilities include, but are not limited to: detention and
retention basins; open channels; storm sewers; pipes; and infiltration
facilities.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SITE PLAN — The plan prepared by
the developer or the developer's representative indicating how
stormwater runoff will be managed at the development site in
accordance with this chapter. Stormwater management site plan will be
designated as SWM site plan throughout this chapter.
84.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
85.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 214-12 TARENTUM CODE § 214-12
207:242
STREAM — A channel or conveyance of surface water having a defined
bed and banks, whether natural or artificial, with perennial or
intermittent flow.
SUBDIVISION — As defined in The Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code,86 Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247.
USDA — United States Department of Agriculture.
WATERCOURSE — See Stream.
WATERS OF THIS COMMONWEALTH — Any and all rivers, streams,
creeks, rivulets, impoundments, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers,
lakes, dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs, and all other bodies
or channels of conveyance of surface and underground water, or parts
thereof, whether natural or artificial, within or on the boundaries of this
commonwealth.
WATERSHED — Region or land area drained by a river, watercourse, or
other surface water of this commonwealth to a downstream point.
WETLAND — Areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or
groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that
under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, including swamps,
marshes, bogs, and similar areas.
C. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in
common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
Where terms are not defined, such terms shall have ordinarily accepted
meanings such as the context implies.
86.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 214-12 SIGNS § 214-12
207:243

ARTICLE II
Stormwater Management Standards
§ 214-13. General requirements.
A. For all regulated activities, unless preparation of an SWM site plan is
specifically exempted in § 214-14:
(1) Preparation and implementation of an approved SWM site plan is
required.
(2) No regulated activities shall commence until the municipality
issues written approval of an SWM site plan, which demonstrates
compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
B. SWM site plans approved by the municipality, in accordance with
§ 214-23, shall be on site throughout the duration of the regulated
activity.
C. These standards apply to the landowner and any person engaged in
regulated activities.
D. For all regulated earth disturbance activities, erosion and sediment
control BMPs shall be designed, implemented, operated, and
maintained during the regulated earth disturbance activities (e.g.,
during construction) to meet the purposes and requirements of this
chapter and to meet all requirements under Title 25 of the Pennsylvania
Code and the Clean Streams Law.87 Various BMPs and their design
standards are listed in the Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control
Program Manual (E&S Manual88), No. 363-2134-008, as amended and
updated.
E. Impervious areas:
(1) The measurement of impervious areas shall include all of the
impervious areas in the total proposed development even if
development is to take place in stages.
(2) For development taking place in stages, the entire development
plan must be used in determining conformance with this chapter.
(3) For projects that add impervious area to a parcel, the total
impervious area on the parcel is subject to the requirements of this
chapter; except that the volume controls in § 214-14 and the peak
rate controls of § 214-15 do not need to be retrofitted to existing
impervious areas that are not being altered by the proposed
regulated activity.
F. Stormwater flows onto adjacent or downstream property shall not be
created, increased, decreased, relocated, impeded, or otherwise
87.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
88.Editor's Note: See § 214-38D.
§ 214-13 SIGNS § 214-13
207:245
altered without written notification of the affected property owner(s).
Notification shall include a description of the proposed development
and the stormwater flows that are being created, increased, decreased,
relocated, impeded, or otherwise altered. Adjacent property shall at
a minimum include any property having a shared boundary with the
subject property of the SWM site plan, however, if in the judgement of
the designated plan reviewer additional properties are being affected,
additional notifications may be required. Proof of notification (signed
postal receipt for example) shall be included as part of the SWM plan
submission to the municipality. Such stormwater flows shall be subject
to the requirements of this chapter.
G. All regulated activities shall include such measures as necessary to:
(1) Protect health, safety, and property.
(2) Meet the water quality goals of this chapter by implementing
measures to:
(a) Minimize disturbance to floodplains, wetlands, and wooded
areas.
(b) Maintain or extend riparian buffers.
(c) Avoid erosive flow conditions in natural flow pathways.
(d) Minimize thermal impacts to waters of this commonwealth.
(e) Disconnect impervious surfaces by directing runoff to pervious
areas, wherever possible.
(3) Incorporate methods described in the Pennsylvania Stormwater
Best Management Practices Manual (BMP Manual89). If methods
other than green infrastructure and LID methods are proposed to
achieve the volume and rate controls required under this chapter,
the SWM site plan must include a detailed justification, acceptable
to the designated plan reviewer, demonstrating that the use of LID
and green infrastructure is not practicable.
H. Infiltration BMPs should be dispersed throughout the project site at
strategic locations, made as shallow as practicable, and located to
maximize use of natural on-site infiltration features while still meeting
the other requirements of this chapter.
I. Normally dry, open top, storage facilities should completely drain both
the volume control and rate control capacities over a period of time not
less than 24 hours and not more than 72 hours from the end of the
design storm.
J. The design storm precipitation depths to be used in the analysis of peak
rates of discharge shall be as obtained in PennDOT's Drainage Manual,
89.Editor's Note: See § 214-38C.
§ 214-13 TARENTUM CODE § 214-13
207:246
§ 214-14. Exemptions.
Publication 584, Appendix 7A; or obtained from the latest version of the
Precipitation-Frequency Atlas of the United States, National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), National Weather Service,
Hydrometeorological Design Studies Center, Silver Spring, Maryland.
NOAA's Atlas 1490 can be accessed at: http://hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/hdsc/
pfds/.
K. For all regulated activities, SWM BMPs shall be designed,
implemented, operated, and maintained to meet the purposes and
requirements of this chapter and to meet all requirements under Title
25 of the Pennsylvania Code, the Clean Streams Law,91 and the Storm
Water Management Act.92
L. Various BMPs and their design standards are listed in the BMP
Manual.93
M. The municipality may, after consultation with DEP, approve measures
for meeting the state water quality requirements other than those in
this chapter, provided that they meet the minimum requirements of and
do not conflict with, state law including, but not limited to, the Clean
Streams Law.94
A. Regulated activities that result in cumulative earth disturbances less
than one acre are exempt from the requirements in § 214-18 except as
provided in Subsection B below.
B. Earth disturbances between 0.25 acre (10,890 square feet) and one
acre of earth disturbance must submit a SWM site plan to the
municipality which shall consist of the following items and related
supportive material needed to determine compliance with §§ 214-14
through 214-16. The applicant can use the protocols in the small project
stormwater management site plan if municipality has adopted Appendix
C.
(1) General description of proposed stormwater management
techniques, including construction specifications of the materials
to be used for stormwater management facilities.
(2) An erosion and sediment control plan, including all reviews and
letters of adequacy from the Conservation District where
appropriate.
(3) Limits of earth disturbance, including the type and amount of
impervious area that is proposed; proposed structures, roads,
90.Editor's Note: See § 214-38E.
91.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
92.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
93.Editor's Note: See § 214-38C.
94.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 214-13 SIGNS § 214-14
207:247
§ 214-15. Volume controls.
The green infrastructure and low-impact development practices provided
in the BMP Manual95 shall be utilized for all regulated activities wherever
possible. Water volume controls shall be implemented using the Design
Storm Method in Subsection A or the Simplified Method in Subsection B
below. Water volume controls shall be implemented using the Design Storm
Method in Subsection A or the Simplified Method in Subsection B below, or
alternative design criteria as allowed by PA Code Title 25, Chapter 102.
paved areas, and buildings; and a statement, signed by the
applicant, acknowledging that any revision to the approved
drainage plan must be approved by the municipality, and that a
revised erosion and sediment control plan must be submitted to the
municipality or Conservation District for approval.
(4) All stormwater management facilities must be located on a plan
and described in detail; and all calculations, assumptions, and
criteria used in the design of the stormwater management facilities
must be shown.
C. Agricultural activity is exempt from the SWM site plan preparation
requirements of this chapter provided the activities are performed
according to the requirements of 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102.
D. Forest management and timber operations are exempt from the SWM
site plan preparation requirements of this chapter provided the
activities are performed according to the requirements of 25 Pa. Code
Chapter 102.
E. Roadway resurfacing and maintenance projects, which do not increase
impervious area, and underground infrastructure projects are exempt
from the provisions of this chapter, provided the activities meet the
requirements of all other municipal, state and federal requirements.
F. Exemptions from any provisions of this chapter shall not relieve the
applicant from the requirements in § 214-13D through J.
G. The municipality may deny or revoke any exemption pursuant to this
section at any time for any project that the municipality believes may
pose a threat to public health and safety or the environment.
H. Voluntary Green Stormwater Infrastructure (GSI) retrofit projects that
are solely intended to better manage runoff from existing development
and are not part of new development or redevelopment, are exempt
from the stormwater management provisions of this chapter. This does
not exempt such projects from any other municipal, state, or federal
regulation.
95.Editor's Note: See § 214-38C.
§ 214-14 TARENTUM CODE § 214-15
207:248
A. The Design Storm Method (CG-1 in the BMP Manual96) is applicable as
a method to any size of regulated activity. This method requires detailed
modeling based on site conditions. The following shall be incorporated
into the CG-1 method:
(1) Do not increase the post-development total runoff volume for all
storms equal to or less than the two-year, twenty-four-hour
duration precipitation.
(2) At least the first one inch of runoff from the net increase in
impervious surfaces shall be permanently removed from the runoff
flow, i.e., it shall not be released into the surface waters of this
commonwealth. Removal options include reuse, evaporation,
transpiration, and infiltration. If the developer provides
justification that the listed removal options are not feasible, and the
designated plan reviewer agrees, runoff shall be detained in a
facility designed for a twenty-four-to-seventy-two-hour dewatering
time in an area with a dedicated stormwater system (not
contributory to a combined sewer system) and shall be detained in
a facility designed for a seventy-two-hour dewatering time in an
area contributory to a combined sewer system before discharge to
local stormwater systems or the environment.
(3) For modeling purposes:
(a) Existing (predevelopment) nonforested pervious areas must be
considered meadow in good condition.
(b) 20% of existing impervious area, when present, shall be
considered meadow in good condition in the model for existing
conditions.
B. The Simplified Method (CG-2 in the BMP Manual97) provided below is
independent of site conditions and should be used if the Design Storm
Method is not followed. This method is not applicable to regulated
activities greater than one acre or for projects that require design of
stormwater storage facilities. For new impervious surfaces:
(1) Stormwater facilities shall capture at least the first two inches of
runoff from the net increase in impervious surfaces.
(2) At least the first one inch of runoff from the net increase in
impervious surfaces shall be permanently removed from the runoff
flow, i.e., it shall not be released into the surface waters of this
commonwealth. Removal options include reuse, evaporation,
transpiration, and infiltration. If the developer provides
justification that the listed removal options are not feasible, and the
designated plan reviewer agrees, runoff shall be detained in a
facility designed for a twenty-four-hour dewatering time in an area
96.Editor's Note: See § 214-38C.
97.Editor's Note: See § 214-38C.
§ 214-15 SIGNS § 214-15
207:249
§ 214-16. Rate controls.
§ 214-17. Riparian buffers.
with a dedicated stormwater system (not contributory to a
combined sewer system) and shall be detained in a facility designed
for a seventy-two-hour dewatering time in an area contributory
to a combined sewer system before discharge to local stormwater
systems or the environment.
(3) Wherever possible, infiltration facilities should be designed to
accommodate infiltration of the entire permanently removed
runoff; however, in all cases at least the first 0.5 inch of the
permanently removed runoff should be infiltrated.
(4) This method is exempt from the requirements of § 214-16, Rate
controls.
A. For areas not covered by a release rate map from an approved Act 167
Stormwater Management Plan:
Post-development discharge rates shall not exceed the
predevelopment discharge rates for the one-, two-, five-, ten-, twentyfive-,
fifty-, and 100-year, twenty-four-hour storm events. This is the
equivalent to a 100% release rate area when compared to those rates
shown in the maps contained in Appendix A (New and Existing Release
Rate Management Districts). This predevelopment to postdevelopment
control is not to be misconstrued as the same as the
"Conditional Direct Discharge" areas on the release rate maps. If
it is shown that the peak rates of discharge indicated by the postdevelopment
analysis are less than or equal to the peak rates of
discharge indicated by the pre-development analysis for one-, two-,
five-, ten-, twenty-five-, fifty-, and 100-year, twenty-four-hour storms,
then the requirements of this section have been met. Otherwise, the
applicant shall provide additional controls as necessary to satisfy the
peak rate of discharge requirement. Peak flows should be computed
using the methods included in the chapter titled "Stormwater
Calculations and Methodology" of the PADEP Stormwater
Management BMP Manual.
B. For areas covered by a release rate map from an approved Act 167
Stormwater Management Plan: For the one-, two-, five-, ten-, twentyfive-,
fifty-, and 100-year, twenty-four-hour storm events, the postdevelopment
peak discharge rates will follow the applicable approved
release rate maps. These maps are contained in Appendix A (New and
Existing Release Rate Management Districts) of this chapter. For any
areas not shown on the release rate maps, the post-development
discharge rates shall not exceed the predevelopment discharge rates
for the specified design events. Peak flows should be computed using
the methods included in Chapter 8 of the PADEP Stormwater
Management BMP Manual.
§ 214-15 TARENTUM CODE § 214-17
207:250
A. In order to protect and improve water quality, a riparian buffer
easement shall be created and recorded as part of any subdivision or
land development that encompasses a riparian buffer. The intent of this
chapter in establishing a riparian buffer is to protect and improve
stream water quality. The riparian buffer is intended to slow overland
flow to the stream through the presence of native grasses, trees and
shrubs, allowing infiltration/groundwater recharge; causing deposition
of sediment, nutrients, pesticides, and other pollutants in the buffer
rather than in the stream; and reducing erosion by providing stream
bank stabilization. The trees provide shade for streams; keeping waters
cooler and reducing evaporation.
B. Except as required by PA Code Title 25 Chapter 102, the riparian buffer
easement shall be required for all streams (as defined in § 214-12) with
a contributing watershed area of greater than 10 acres. The riparian
buffer easement shall be measured to be a minimum of 35 feet from the
top of the streambank (on each side).
C. Minimum management requirements for riparian buffers.
(1) No use or construction within the riparian buffer shall be permitted
that is inconsistent with the intent of the riparian buffer as
described in Subsection A.
(2) Existing native vegetation shall be protected and maintained within
the riparian buffer easement.
(3) Whenever practicable, invasive vegetation shall be actively
removed and the riparian buffer easement shall be planted with
native trees, shrubs and other vegetation to create a diverse native
plant community appropriate to the intended ecological context of
the site.
D. The riparian buffer easement shall be enforceable by the municipality
and shall be recorded in the appropriate county recorder of deeds
office, so that it shall run with the land and shall limit the use of the
property located therein. The easement shall allow for the continued
private ownership and shall count toward the minimum lot area
required by zoning, unless otherwise specified in the municipal Zoning
Ordinance.
E. Any permitted use within the riparian buffer easement shall be
conducted in a manner that will maintain the extent of the existing
100-year floodplain, improve or maintain the stream stability, and
preserve and protect the ecological function of the floodplain.
F. Stormwater drainage pipes shall be permitted within the riparian buffer
easement, but they shall cross the easement in the shortest practical
distance. Other structural stormwater management facilities are not
permitted within the riparian buffer easement.
§ 214-17 SIGNS § 214-17
207:251
G. The following conditions shall apply when public and/or private
recreation trails are permitted by the municipality within riparian
buffers:
(1) It is preferred that trails be designed to be permeable and for
nonmotorized use only; however, impermeable trails are permitted
provided they have adequate drainage
(2) Trails shall be designed to have the least impact on native plant
species and other sensitive environmental features.
H. Septic drainfields and sewage disposal systems shall not be permitted
within the riparian buffer easement and shall comply with setback
requirements established under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 73.
I. Underground utilities shall be permitted within the riparian buffer
easement; however, work shall be performed to minimize disturbance
area and removal of trees. Restoration within the riparian buffer
easement shall be with native species of trees, grasses, and other
plantings. One tree shall be planted for each tree removed and the
restoration shall be designed by a registered professional with the
requisite experience. Aboveground utilities shall only be permitted to
cross the easement perpendicular to the easement or in the shortest
practical distance. Existing utilities may remain and be maintained as
required.
§ 214-17 TARENTUM CODE § 214-17
207:252
ARTICLE III
Stormwater Management (SWM) Site Plan Requirements
§ 214-18. Plan requirements.
A. Appropriate sections from the municipality's Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance, and other applicable local ordinances, shall be
followed in preparing the SWM site plans. In instances where the
municipality lacks subdivision an land development regulations, the
content of SWM site plans shall follow the Allegheny County
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
B. The municipality shall not approve any SWM site plan that is deficient
in meeting the requirements of this chapter. At its sole discretion and in
accordance with this article, when a SWM site plan is found to be
deficient, the municipality may either disapprove the submission and
require a resubmission, or in the case of minor deficiencies, the
municipality may accept submission of modifications.
C. The following items shall be included in the SWM site plan:
(1) Provisions for permanent access or maintenance easements for all
physical SWM BMPs, such as ponds and infiltration structures, as
necessary to implement the Operation and Maintenance (O&M)
Plan discussed in Subsection C(3)(i) below.
(2) The following signature block for the municipality: "(Municipal
official or designated plan reviewer (§ 214-20A)), on this date
November 15, 2018, has reviewed and hereby certifies that the
SWM site plan meets all design standards and criteria of the
Municipal Ordinance No. 18-04, except where waivers have been
granted as noted on the plan. The review is based on a survey and
plan prepared by others and assumes that all information is correct
and valid as submitted."
(3) The SWM site plan shall provide the following information:
(a) The overall stormwater management concept for the project.
(b) A determination of site conditions in accordance with the BMP
Manual.98A detailed site evaluation shall be completed for
projects proposed in environmentally sensitive areas, such as
brownfields.
(c) Stormwater runoff design computations and documentation as
specified in this chapter, or as otherwise necessary to
demonstrate that the maximum practicable measures have
been taken to meet the requirements of this chapter, including
the recommendations and general requirements in § 214-13.
98.Editor's Note: See § 214-38C.
§ 214-18 SIGNS § 214-18
207:253
§ 214-19. Plan submission.
Up to five copies of the SWM site plan shall be submitted as follows:
§ 214-20. Plan review.
(d) Expected project time schedule.
(e) A soil erosion and sediment control plan, where applicable, as
prepared for and submitted to the approval authority.
(f) The effect of the project (in terms of runoff volumes, water
quality, and peak flows) on surrounding properties and aquatic
features and on any existing stormwater conveyance system
that may be affected by the project.
(g) Plan and profile drawings of all SWM BMPs, including drainage
structures, pipes, open channels, and swales.
(h) SWM site plan shall show the locations of existing and
proposed on-lot wastewater facilities and water supply wells,
property boundaries, existing and proposed topography,
point(s) of interest, utilities, and potential utility conflicts.
(i) The SWM site plan shall include an O&M plan for all existing
and proposed physical stormwater management facilities. This
plan shall address long-term ownership and responsibilities for
O&M including type and schedule/frequency of maintenance
activities, personnel and equipment requirements, estimated
annual maintenance costs, and method of financing continuing
O&M.
(j) A justification, acceptable to the designated plan reviewer,
must be included in the SWM site plan if BMPs other than
green infrastructure methods and LID practices are proposed
to achieve the volume, rate and water quality controls under
this chapter.
A. Two copies to the municipality.
B. One copy to the municipal engineer (when applicable).
C. One copy to the Allegheny County Conservation District (when
requested by the District).
D. One copy to the Allegheny County Sanitary Authority (in areas with
combined sewer systems).
A. The municipality has designated the Zoning Officer as the designated
plan reviewer of SWM site plans for the municipality, and shall be
understood to be the reviewer where indicated as the municipality
within this chapter.
§ 214-18 TARENTUM CODE § 214-20
207:254
§ 214-21. Modification of plans.
A modification to a submitted SWM site plan that involves a change in SWM
BMPs or techniques, or that involves the relocation or redesign of SWM
BMPs, or that is necessary because soil or other conditions are not as stated
on the SWM site plan, as determined by the designated plan reviewer, shall
require a resubmission of the modified SWM site plan in accordance with
this article.
§ 214-22. Resubmission of disapproved SWM site plans.
A disapproved SWM site plan may be resubmitted, with the revisions
addressing the municipality's concerns, to the municipality in accordance
with this article. The applicable review fee, in accord with Article V, must
accompany a resubmission of a disapproved SWM site plan.
§ 214-23. Authorization to construct and term of validity.
The municipality's approval of an SWM site plan authorizes the regulated
activities contained in the SWM site plan for a maximum term of validity
of five years following the date of approval. The municipality may specify a
term of validity shorter than five years in the approval for any specific SWM
site plan. Terms of validity shall commence on the date the municipality
signs the approval for an SWM site plan. If an approved SWM site plan is
B. SWM site plans shall be reviewed by the municipality for consistency
with the provisions of this chapter.
C. The municipality shall notify the applicant in writing within 45 days
whether the SWM site plan is approved or disapproved or requires
additional documentation. If the SWM site plan involves a subdivision
and land development plan, the notification shall occur within the time
period allowed by the Municipalities Planning Code99 (90 days). If a
longer notification period is provided by other statute, regulation, or
ordinance, the applicant will be so notified by the municipality.
D. For any SWM site plan that proposes to use any BMPs other than green
infrastructure and LID practices to achieve the volume and rate
controls required under this chapter, the municipality will not approve
the SWM site plan unless it determines that green infrastructure and
LID practices are not practicable.
E. If the municipality disapproves the SWM site plan, the municipality will
state the reasons for the disapproval in writing. The municipality also
may approve the SWM site plan with conditions and, if so, shall provide
the acceptable conditions for approval in writing.
F. The applicable review fee, in accord with Article V, must accompany a
resubmission of a disapproved SWM site plan.
99.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 214-20 SIGNS § 214-23
207:255
not completed according to § 214-24 within the term of validity, then the
municipality may consider the SWM site plan disapproved and may revoke
any and all permits. SWM site plans that are considered disapproved by the
municipality shall be resubmitted in accordance with § 214-22.
§ 214-24. Record drawings, completion certificate, and final
inspection.
A. The developer shall be responsible for providing record drawings of all
SWM BMPs included in the approved SWM site plan. The record
drawings and an explanation of any discrepancies with the construction
plans shall be submitted to the municipality.
B. The record drawing submission shall include a certification of
completion signed by a qualified professional verifying that all
permanent SWM BMPs have been constructed according to the
approved plans and specifications. The latitude and longitude
coordinates for all permanent SWM BMPs must also be submitted, at
the central location of the BMPs. If any licensed qualified professionals
contributed to the construction plans, then a licensed qualified
professional must sign the completion certificate.
C. The municipality may conduct inspections during construction as it
deems appropriate. If inspections performed by the municipality reveal
deficiencies from the submitted and approved SWM site plan, the
municipality may request corrective actions. Any corrective action shall
be at the cost of the stormwater facility owner.
D. After receipt of the completion certification by the municipality, the
municipality may conduct a final inspection.
§ 214-23 TARENTUM CODE § 214-24
207:256
ARTICLE IV
Operation and Maintenance
§ 214-25. Responsibilities of developers and landowners.
§ 214-26. Operation and maintenance agreements.
A. The municipality shall make the final determination on the continuing
maintenance responsibilities prior to final approval of the SWM site
plan. The municipality may require a dedication of such facilities as part
of the requirements for approval of the SWM site plan. Such a
requirement is not an indication that the municipality will accept the
facilities. The municipality reserves the right to reject or accept the
ownership and operating responsibility for any portion of the
stormwater management controls.
B. Facilities, areas, or structures used as SWM BMPs shall be enumerated
as permanent real estate appurtenances and recorded as deed
restrictions or conservation easements that run with the land.
C. The O&M plan shall be recorded as a restrictive deed covenant that
runs with the land.
D. The municipality may take enforcement actions against an owner for
any failure to satisfy the provisions of this article.
A. Prior to final approval of the SWM site plan, the property owner shall
sign and record an operation and maintenance (O&M) agreement (see
Appendix B) covering all stormwater control facilities which are to be
privately owned.
(1) The owner, successor and assigns shall maintain all facilities in
accordance with the approved maintenance schedule in the O&M
agreement.
(2) The owner shall convey to the municipality conservation easements
to assure access for periodic inspections by the municipality and
maintenance, as necessary.
(3) The owner shall keep on file with the municipality the name,
address, and telephone number of the person or company
responsible for maintenance activities; in the event of a change,
new information shall be submitted by the owner to the
municipality within 10 working days of the change.
B. The owner is responsible for operation and maintenance (O&M) of the
SWM BMPs. If the owner fails to adhere to the O&M agreement, the
municipality may perform the services required and charge the owner
appropriate fees. Nonpayment of fees may result in a lien against the
property.
§ 214-25 SIGNS § 214-27
207:257
§ 214-27. Performance guarantee.
For SWM site plans that involve subdivision and land development, the
applicant shall provide a financial guarantee to the municipality for the
timely installation and proper construction of all stormwater management
controls as required by the approved SWM site plan and this chapter
in accordance with the provisions of Sections 509, 510, and 511 of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.100
100. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 214-27 TARENTUM CODE § 214-27
207:258
ARTICLE V
Fees and Expenses
§ 214-28. General.
A. The municipality may include all costs incurred into the review fee
charged to an applicant.
B. The review fee may include, but not be limited to, costs for the
following:
(1) Administrative/clerical processing.
(2) Review of the SWM site plan.
(3) Review of a SWM site plan resubmission.
(4) Attendance at meetings.
(5) Inspections.
§ 214-28 SIGNS § 214-28
207:259

ARTICLE VI
Prohibitions
§ 214-29. Prohibited discharges and connections.
A. Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, that
allows any nonstormwater discharge including sewage, process
wastewater, and wash water to enter a regulated small MS4 or to enter
the surface waters of this commonwealth is prohibited.
B. No person shall allow, or cause to allow, discharges into a regulated
small MS4, or discharges into waters of this commonwealth, which are
not composed entirely of stormwater, except (1) as provided in
Subsection C below and (2) discharges authorized under a state or
federal permit.
C. The following discharges are authorized unless they are determined to
be significant contributors to pollution of a regulated small MS4 or to
the waters of this commonwealth:
(1) Discharges or flows from firefighting activities.
(2) Discharges from potable water sources including water line
flushing and fire hydrant flushing, if such discharges do not contain
detectable concentrations of total residual chlorine (TRC).
(3) Noncontaminated irrigation water, water from lawn maintenance,
landscape drainage and flows from riparian habitats and wetlands.
(4) Diverted stream flows and springs.
(5) Noncontaminated pumped ground water and water from
foundation and footing drains and crawl space pumps.
(6) Noncontaminated HVAC condensation and water from geothernal
systems.
(7) Residential (i.e., not commercial) vehicle wash water where
cleaning agents are not utilized.
(8) Noncontaminated hydrostatic test water discharges, if such
discharges do not contain detectable concentrations of TRC.
(9) Dechlorinated swimming pool and hot tub discharges, as long as
the PADEP guidelines for swimming pool water discharge are
followed.
D. In the event that the municipality or DEP determines that any of the
discharges identified in Subsection C significantly contribute pollutants
to a regulated small MS4 or to the waters of this commonwealth, the
municipality or DEP will notify the responsible person(s) to cease the
discharge.
§ 214-29 SIGNS § 214-30
207:261
§ 214-30. Roof drains and sump pumps.
Roof drains and sump pumps shall discharge to infiltration or vegetative
BMPs wherever feasible.
§ 214-31. Alteration of SWM BMPs.
No person shall modify, remove, fill, landscape, or alter any SWM BMPs,
facilities, areas, drainage easements, or structures that were installed as a
requirement of this chapter without the written approval of the municipality.
§ 214-30 TARENTUM CODE § 214-31
207:262
ARTICLE VII
Enforcement and Penalties
§ 214-32. Right of entry.
Upon presentation of proper credentials, the municipality or its designated
agent may enter at reasonable times upon any property within the
municipality to inspect the condition of the stormwater structures and
facilities in regard to any aspect regulated by this chapter.
§ 214-33. Inspection.
§ 214-34. Enforcement.
§ 214-35. Suspension and revocation.
A. The landowner or the owner's designee (including the municipality for
dedicated and owned facilities) shall inspect SWM BMPs, facilities and/
or structures installed under this chapter according to the following
frequencies, at a minimum, to ensure the BMPs, facilities and/or
structures continue to function as intended:
(1) Annually for the first five years.
(2) Once every three years thereafter.
(3) During or immediately after the cessation of a ten-year or greater
storm.
B. Inspections should be conducted during or immediately following
precipitation events. A written inspection report shall be created to
document each inspection. The inspection report shall contain the date
and time of the inspection, the individual(s) who completed the
inspection, the location of the BMP, facility or structure inspected,
observations on performance, and recommendations for improving
performance, if applicable. Inspection reports shall be submitted to the
municipality within 30 days following completion of the inspection.
A. It shall be unlawful for a person to undertake any regulated activity
except as provided in an approved SWM site plan, unless specifically
exempted in § 214-14.
B. It shall be unlawful to violate § 214-31 of this chapter.
C. Inspections regarding compliance with the SWM site plan are a
responsibility of the municipality.
A. Any approval or permit issued by the municipality pursuant to this
chapter may be suspended or revoked for:
(1) Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of the
approved SWM site plan or O&M agreement.
§ 214-32 SIGNS § 214-35
207:263
§ 214-36. Penalties.
§ 214-37. Appeals.
(2) A violation of any provision of this chapter or any other applicable
law, ordinance, rule, or regulation relating to the regulated activity.
(3) The creation of any condition or the commission of any act during
the regulated activity which constitutes or creates a hazard,
nuisance, pollution, or endangers the life or property of others.
B. A suspended approval may be reinstated by the municipality when:
(1) The municipality has inspected and approved the corrections to the
violations that caused the suspension.
(2) The municipality is satisfied that the violation has been corrected.
C. An approval that has been revoked by the municipality cannot be
reinstated. The applicant may apply for a new approval under the
provisions of this chapter.
D. If a violation causes no immediate danger to life, public health, or
property, at its sole discretion, the municipality may provide a limited
time period for the owner to correct the violation. In these cases, the
municipality will provide the owner, or the owner's designee, with a
written notice of the violation and the time period allowed for the owner
to correct the violation. If the owner does not correct the violation
within the allowed time period, the municipality may revoke or suspend
any, or all, applicable approvals and permits pertaining to any provision
of this chapter.
A. Anyone violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
summary offense, and upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine of not
more than $1,000 for each violation, recoverable with costs. Each day
that the violation continues shall be a separate offense and penalties
shall be cumulative.
B. In addition, the municipality may institute injunctive, mandamus, or any
other appropriate action or proceeding at law or in equity for the
enforcement of this chapter. Any court of competent jurisdiction shall
have the right to issue restraining orders, temporary or permanent
injunctions, mandamus, or other appropriate forms of remedy or relief.
A. Any person aggrieved by any action of the municipality or its designee,
relevant to the provisions of this chapter, may appeal to the
municipality within 30 days of that action.
B. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the municipality, relevant to
the provisions of this chapter, may appeal to the county court of
common pleas in the county where the activity has taken place within
30 days of the municipality's decision.
§ 214-35 TARENTUM CODE § 214-37
207:264
ARTICLE VIII
References
§ 214-38. Cited documents.
A. U.S. Department of Agriculture, National Resources Conservation
Service (NRCS). National Engineering Handbook. Part 630: Hydrology,
1969-2001. Originally published as the National Engineering
Handbook, Section 4: Hydrology. Available from the NRCS online at:
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/.
B. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation
Service. 1986. Technical Release 55: Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds, 2nd Edition. Washington, D.C.
C. Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. No.
363-0300-002 (December 2006), as amended and updated.
Pennsylvania Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual.
Harrisburg, PA.
D. Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. No.
363-2134-008 (March 31, 2012), as amended and updated. Erosion and
Sediment Pollution Control Program Manual. Harrisburg, PA.
E. U.S. Department of Commerce, National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration, National Weather Service, Hydrometeorological Design
Studies Center. 2004-2006. Precipitation-Frequency Atlas of the United
States, Atlas 14, Volume 2, Version 3.0, Silver Spring, Maryland.
Internet address: http://hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/hdsc/pfds/.
§ 214-38 SIGNS § 214-38
207:265
Chapter 216
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parking AuthoritySee Ch. 8, Art. II.
Police DepartmentSee Ch. 54.
Brush, grass and weedsSee Ch. 92.
Newsracks, signs and telephone boothsSee
Ch. 170.
SewersSee Ch. 204.
Subdivision and land developmentSee Ch.
220.
Abandoned vehiclesSee Ch. 246.
Vehicles and trafficSee Ch. 250.
Street openingsSee Ch. 256, Art. II.
ZoningSee Ch. 265.
§ 214-38 TARENTUM CODE § 214-38
207:266
ARTICLE I
Curb Cuts
[Adopted 9-27-1924 by Ord. No. 856]
§ 216-1. Regulated acts.
The cutting, chipping or breaking of the curb situate on the public streets
or alleys within the Borough of Tarentum be and the same is hereby
prohibited, except in the manner and form provided for herein.
§ 216-2. Application; costs. [Amended 12-27-1999 by Ord. No. 99-2]
Any person or persons desiring to have the curb cut, chipped, or otherwise
changed in front of his or her property for the purpose of ingress and
egress to and from the same shall make an application, in writing, to the
Council of the Borough of Tarentum for permission to have such work
done, and at the same time shall deposit with the Borough Secretary a sum
sufficient to cover the probable cost of doing such work. If the Borough
Council approves such application, the work shall be done by the Public
Works Director at the cost and expense of the applicant. Any sum or sums
remaining in the possession of the Borough after such cost and expense has
been paid shall be returned to the applicant; provided, however, that when
the driveway for which the permit aforesaid is given ceases to be used as a
driveway, that the then owner of the property shall be required to restore or
replace the curb to the condition in which said curb was at the time it was
chipped.
§ 216-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-27-1999 by Ord. No.
99-2]
Any person or persons violating the terms of this article shall, on conviction
thereof before the Mayor or any District Justice, be sentenced to pay a
fine of not exceeding $600 and, in default of payment of said fine and the
costs, may be sentenced and committed to the Borough lockup for a period
not exceeding 30 days or to the county jail or workhouse for a period not
exceeding 30 days.
§ 216-1 SIGNS § 216-3
207:267

ARTICLE II
Specifications
[Adopted 12-18-1961 by Ord. No. 1772]
§ 216-4. Minimum requirements for acceptance.
Prior to the acceptance by the Borough of Tarentum of any streets and
alleys for public upkeep and maintenance, said streets shall meet the
following minimum requirements:
§ 216-5. Unplotted streets.
For that portion of Tarentum Borough in which lots, streets and alleys have
not been plotted and recorded, the requirements shall be as follows:
§ 216-6. Minimum construction requirements.
Prior to acceptance of streets and alleys by the Borough of Tarentum for
public maintenance, in that section of the Borough in which lots, streets and
alleys have not been plotted and recorded, the minimum requirements for
the construction of said streets shall be as follows:
A. For streets and alleys already plotted and recorded, the streets and
alleys shall not be less in width between property lines than the streets
and alleys to which they join and extend.
B. The width of the cartways of said streets shall not be less than 70% of
the total width of the street between property lines and each side of the
cartway shall be curbed.
C. The width of the cartway of alleys shall not be less than 80% of the total
width between property lines.
A. All streets shall not be less than 50 feet in width between property lines
and the cartway between curbs shall not be less than 60% of the width
of said street between property lines.
B. All alleys shall not be less than 20 feet in width between property lines
and the cartway shall not be less than 16 feet in width.
A. All streets and alleys shall be provided with property storm drainage
facilities to meet the approval of the Borough Engineer and the Street
Committee of Council.
B. Sanitary sewer mains and laterals shall be installed in alleys and streets
to provide proper sanitary facilities for each lot abutting such street or
alley. The main sewers in street and alleys shall be not less than eight
inches in size and the lateral sewers not less than six inches in size. All
materials for main and lateral sewers and the installation of the same
must meet the approval of the Borough Engineer and Street Committee
of Council.
§ 216-4 SIGNS § 216-6
207:269
§ 216-7. Paving for alleys.
The minimum standard requirements for paving for alleys shall be
bituminous or asphaltic concrete not less than 21/2 inches thick after
compression placed on an eight-inch flexible base. All paving shall be
installed to the grade and section approved by the Borough Engineer.
§ 216-8. Paving for streets.
The minimum standard requirements for paving for streets shall be
bituminous or asphaltic concrete not less than 2 1/2 inches thick after
compression placed on an eight-inch flexible base curbed on each side. The
paving shall be installed to the grade and section approved by the Borough
Engineer.
§ 216-9. Filing of plans; setting of grades.
Before any work is performed in connection with the construction of streets
or alleys within the Borough by a developer or any other person, plans
and specifications shall be filed with the Secretary of the Borough showing,
in addition to the matters heretofore provided for in this article, grades,
drainage facilities and any other matters required by the Borough Engineer.
Before any work is begun in connection with said construction, the Borough
will, if satisfied with the grades, enact an ordinance setting said grades.
C. All water mains and water connections to each lot shall be installed in
accordance with the ordinance in effect in the Borough of Tarentum.101
101. Editor's Note: See Ch. 256, Water.
§ 216-6 TARENTUM CODE § 216-9
207:270
ARTICLE III
Sidewalks
[Adopted 11-16-1982 by Ord. No. 82-11]
§ 216-10. Maintenance.
All sidewalks on public streets within the Borough of Tarentum shall be
graded, paved, repaired and maintained by owners of lots adjacent thereto
and shall be maintained as to be safe and usable by the public at all times,
subject to the provisions herein.
§ 216-11. Specifications.
All sidewalks hereafter constructed and reconstructed within the Borough
of Tarentum shall be as follows: of concrete at least four inches thick or of
Z-Brick or equivalent, constructed of high-strength concrete, and shall be
laid from the property line toward the curbline and on a grade falling 1/4 of
one inch to one foot of width of such sidewalk which shall be in elevation,
where, if extended, it will not be below the top of the curb and not more
than one inch above the top of the curb.
§ 216-12. Existing defective sidewalks.
All sidewalks now existing within the Borough of Tarentum in which the
material under which the sidewalk is constructed, whether brick, stone,
asphalt or concrete, shall have become defective and in such condition
as to render the sidewalk dangerous to public travel shall hereinafter be
constructed of concrete as specified in § 216-11.
§ 216-13. Inspections; notice of defects. [Amended 3-16-1998 by
Ord. No. 98-2]
All sidewalks within the Borough of Tarentum shall be maintained at all
times by the owner of the property fronting or abutting thereon in a safe
and passable condition. The Borough shall conduct periodic inspections of
sidewalks and report to the Secretary of the Borough any defects found to
exist. Notice of defects and direction to remedy the same within 15 days
shall be mailed to the owners of the premises fronting or abutting thereon.
If such premises are vacant, notice shall be posted on the premises in a
conspicuous manner. Such notice shall require the owner to remedy the
defects in a sidewalk within 15 days from the date that the notice was
posted. If any owner does not comply with a notice of defects as prescribed
by this section, the Borough may make necessary repairs and charge such
repairs to the owner at the cost of such repair, plus 10%. Alternatively, the
Borough may serve the owner with a notice of violation of this article and
proceed to the District Magistrate for compliance with the section. Any sum
of money expended by the Borough to enforce this section may be recovered
from the owner in an action of assumpsit, by filing a municipal lien claim
against the premises or any other legal remedy available to the Borough.
§ 216-10 SIGNS § 216-14
207:271
§ 216-14. Snow and ice removal.
All owners, tenants or their agents of real estate within the Borough of
Tarentum shall remove all snow from the sidewalks fronting or abutting
the premises within 24 hours after the same has fallen and shall, at all
times, keep such sidewalks free from an accumulation of snow and ice.
The Borough, at its option, may remove such snow or ice and charge the
costs of material and labor thereof, plus 10%, against said owner and collect
the same either by an action of assumpsit, by filing a municipal lien claim
against the premises, or any other legal remedy available to the Borough of
Tarentum.
§ 216-15. Obstructions.
All sidewalks within the Borough of Tarentum shall, at all times, be kept
open and free of obstructions to public travel, except where construction
operations are in progress, in which case, such portion of the sidewalk as
may be reasonably necessary for such purposes may be occupied.
§ 216-16. Covered openings to be flush with surface.
All curb boxes, coal holes and sidewalk cellars in sidewalks shall be so
constructed as to be flush with the adjoining portions of the sidewalk and
be of solid and substantial construction so as to prevent sinking.
§ 216-17. Trees and awnings.
Any trees overhanging sidewalks within the Borough of Tarentum shall be
trimmed to a height of at least seven feet above the sidewalk level, and all
awnings or other overhead construction overhanging sidewalks shall not be
connected with the sidewalk in any manner and shall be maintained at least
seven feet above the sidewalk level.
§ 216-18. Obstruction by merchandise prohibited.
Sidewalks within the Borough of Tarentum shall not be obstructed by
the use of display places for goods, wares or merchandise, and if such
obstructions are found, the owner or tenant shall be given 24 hours to abate
the obstruction at the cost of such owner or tenant.
§ 216-19. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-27-1999 by Ord.
No. 99-2; 3-16-1998 by Ord. No. 98-2]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, pay a fine of not more than $600 and, in default of
payment, be sentenced to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days.
Every day that a violation of this article continues shall constitute a separate
violation of this article.
§ 216-14 TARENTUM CODE § 216-19
207:272
ARTICLE IV
Street Openings and Excavations
[Adopted 3-16-1998 by Ord. No. 98-3; amended 5-3-2018 by Ord.
No. 18-02]
§ 216-20. Short title.
The short title of this article shall be and this article shall be hereinafter
referred to as the "Tarentum Borough Street Opening Ordinance."
§ 216-21. Definitions.
A. The following words, when used in this article, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section, except in those instances where the
context clearly indicates otherwise:
APPLICANT — Any person, corporation, partnership or business entity
who makes application for a street opening permit.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Tarentum, County of Allegheny,
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, acting through its Council and Mayor,
or other authorized representative.
BOROUGH ENGINEER — The Engineer of Tarentum Borough, or their
duly authorized representative.
BOROUGH FOREMAN — The Foreman of the Street, Electric and Water
Distribution Department of Tarentum Borough or their duly authorized
representative.
BOROUGH MANAGER — The Borough Manager or their duly
authorized deputy or representative.
CHIEF OF POLICE — The Chief of Police of Tarentum Borough or their
authorized deputy or representative.
DIRECTOR OF THE DEPARTMENT OF STREETS — The Council
member of Tarentum Borough in charge of the Streets and Sanitary
Sewers Committee or their authorized deputy, representative or
inspector.
EMERGENCY — Any unforeseen circumstance or occurrence, the
existence of which constitutes a clear and immediate danger to persons
or properties and which calls for immediate action or remedy.
LANE — The distance from the curb to the center line of the roadway.
PENNDOT — The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation.
PERMIT — A street opening permit issued to a permittee, which
authorizes the permittee to engage in the opening of a street, alley or
public right-of-way within Tarentum Borough subject to the limitations
of such permit and the terms of this article.
§ 216-20 SIGNS § 216-21
207:273
§ 216-22. Permit required.
PERMITTEE — Any person, firm, association, partnership, corporation,
public authority, public utility or any other entity who has been issued
a street opening permit and has agreed to fulfill all the terms of this
article.
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, firm, association, public
or private utility, corporation or authority created pursuant to an act
of the general assembly. Whenever used in any section prescribing and
imposing a penalty, the term "person" as applied to associations, shall
mean the partners or members thereof, and as applied to corporations,
the officers thereof.
SPOIL — Any and all waste materials, composition, concrete, asphalt,
base or other fill or paving materials removed from the ground during
the course of work performed under a street opening permit that it not
intended for reuse at the excavation site.
STREET — Includes a public street, public easement, public right-ofway,
public highway, public alley, public way, or public road accepted
or maintained by the Borough, and shall include existing pavements,
curbs, sidewalks and drainage structures.
B. In this article, any reference in the singular shall also be deemed to
include the plural and references in the masculine, shall be deemed to
include the feminine and neutral terms.
A. Street opening permit. From and after the date of passage of this
article, it shall be unlawful for any person or persons, firm, company,
corporation or authority to cut, excavate or tear up any portion of any
street, lane or alley of Tarentum Borough for any purpose whatsoever
without first procuring a street opening permit from Tarentum Borough
Department of Streets as same shall be issued through the Borough
Manager of Tarentum Borough.
B. Form and execution. Application for a street opening permit shall be in
writing and on forms to be supplied by the Borough. Such form shall be
completed, signed and verified by the person requesting such permit or,
in the alternative, by a person duly authorized to act for and on behalf
of a person, firm, corporation or authority for whose use and benefit the
excavation or opening is to be made.
C. Emergency openings. Any person, utility, corporation, firm or authority
maintaining pipes, lines or other underground facilities in or under the
surface of any street may proceed with an opening without a permit
when emergency circumstances would pose a threat to the public
health, safety and welfare, would demand that work be done
immediately and that the permit could not reasonably and practically
have been obtained beforehand. In the event an emergency opening
occurs, the person, firm, company, corporation or authority making
such excavation shall thereafter apply for a permit on the first regular
§ 216-21 TARENTUM CODE § 216-22
207:274
§ 216-23. Permit fees.
business day upon which Tarentum Borough conducts business and said
permit shall be retroactive to the date that the work was commenced.
D. Applicability to state roads. To the extent possible, the provisions of this
article shall apply to Borough streets and highways within the limits of
Tarentum Borough over which the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation exercises maintenance and/or control by
virtue of the operation of statutes and regulations associated with
same.
A. Amount of fee. The charge, or fee, for street opening permits under this
article shall be determined in accordance with the permit fee schedule
duly ordained and adopted by the Council of Tarentum Borough and
attached hereto as Exhibit A. The Borough Manager, or their authorized
agent, shall, upon receipt of the properly completed application,
determine the amount of the fee to be paid by the permittee, such fee
never being less than $250. In the event the nature and extent of the
work to be performed requires, a reasonable permit fee shall be set by
the Borough Engineer based upon the nature and extent of the work to
be performed. The fees set forth by this section may hereafter be
amended by resolution of the Tarentum Borough Council.
B. Payment. The payment of any permit fee shall be made in certified
funds to the Treasurer of Tarentum Borough at the time the permit is
received. The permit fee may be paid in the form of cash, certified
check, treasurer's check or cashier's check in the amount of such
permit fee, made payable to Tarentum Borough.
C. Deficient payments/violation of ordinance. If any payment made is less
than sufficient to pay all fees and costs, the permittee shall, upon
demand, pay to the Borough an amount equal to the deficiency. No
permit shall be issued to the applicant until such time as the entire
permit fee is paid. The failure to pay all or part of any permit fee shall
be deemed a violation of this article and be subject to punishment as set
forth hereafter. In addition, any person who causes a street opening
permit to issue without the payment of all or a portion of such permit
fee, or the posting of any bond or insurance certificate as hereafter
required, shall likewise be deemed to be in violation of this article and
subject to the penalties set forth herein.
D. Inspection charges. In addition to the aforesaid permit fee, the Borough
hereby establish and adopt that schedule of charges for inspections as
may be incurred by the Borough in meeting the objectives and
requirements of this article, a copy of such schedule being attached
hereto as Exhibit B. The attached schedule shall be open to public
inspection in the Office of the Borough Manager of Tarentum Borough
and shall be made available upon demand.
§ 216-22 SIGNS § 216-23
207:275
§ 216-24. Conditions and issuance of street opening permits.
E. Fees set by Borough Engineer. In the event the nature and scope of
work requires the Borough Engineer to set a permit fee, the decision of
the Borough Engineer as to the cost of work to be performed, or repairs
made under their direction pursuant to the provisions of this article,
shall be final and conclusive as to such cost.
A. Issuance by Borough Manager. All Street Opening Permits required in
§ 216-22A of this article shall be issued by the Borough Manager of
Tarentum Borough or their deputy or authorized agent and shall be
subject to those conditions set forth hereafter.
B. Applicant responsible for all costs, expenses and fees. In addition to the
payment of the permit fee set forth above, the applicant shall pay the
cost and expense of all work, including the cost of labor, materials,
equipment, engineering costs and inspection costs incurred by
Tarentum Borough associated with the operation of this article.
C. Submission of bonds and plans of proposed improvements. As a
condition to the issuance of the permit, the Borough may require the
applicant to file a bond in accordance with § 216-30 of this article in an
amount prescribed in such section, the form of which has been
approved by the Borough Solicitor. The application for a street opening
permit to excavate for the laying, relaying or repair of any gas, sewage
and/or water mains, conduits or other such lines, shall include a plan or
sketch indicating the street proposed to be excavated and the location,
kind and size of pipes to be laid, relayed or repaired. Plans and
specifications for new mains and conduits shall be subject to the review
and approval of the Borough Engineer at the time application for a
permit is made. No plan shall be approved nor will backfill be
authorized to proceed unless all lines have a minimum of two feet of
cover for main lines and 18 inches of cover for customer service lines as
measured from the top of the pipes or conduit to the subgrade of the
paved or to be improved street. On all other streets, the amount of
cover to be provided will be subject to approval by the Borough
Engineer.
D. Approval by Borough Engineer. If the application for permit involves the
excavation for the purpose of laying sanitary or storm sewer laterals,
the applicant, or person duly authorized to act upon their or its behalf,
shall first secure approval of same by the Borough Engineer and the
Upper Allegheny Joint Sanitary Authority as the case may be.
E. Work to commence. Work for which a street opening permit has been
issued shall commence within 10 days following the issuance of such
permit. If not commenced within the ten-day time period, the Borough
reserves the right to terminate such permit. Permits thus terminated
may be renewed upon the payment of an additional permit fee in an
amount equal to the original permit fee required.
§ 216-23 TARENTUM CODE § 216-24
207:276
F. Completion of work within required time periods/extensions. Every
permit shall contain a statement of the time period upon which the
work is anticipated to be completed and the street opening permit shall
expire on the completion date. If the permittee is unable to complete
the work described in such permit within the specified time, the
permittee shall, prior to expiration of the permit, present a written
request for an extension of time setting forth the reasons for the
requested extension to the Borough Manager. If in the opinion of the
Borough Manager such an extension is necessary and not contrary to
the public interest, the permittee may be granted additional time for
the completion of the work.
G. Revocation of permit; notice of violation; no notice for failure to obtain
permit. Any permit may be revoked at any time by the Borough
Manager, after notice to the permittee, for:
(1) Violation of any condition of the permit or of any provision of this
article;
(2) Violation of any provision of any other applicable ordinance or law
relating to the work; and/or
(3) The existence of any condition or the doing of any act constituting
or creating a nuisance, endangering the lives or property of others
or otherwise creating a threat to the public health, safety and wellbeing.
H. With the exception of violations for failure to obtain a street opening
permit where no such notice shall be given, a permittee may, at the sole
discretion of the Borough Manager, be granted a period of three days
from the date of the notice of violation to correct the violation and to
proceed with the diligent completion of the work originally authorized
by the permit. Written notice of such violation containing an
explanation of the nature and extent of the violation, shall be served
upon the permittee or their representative or agent engaged in the
work at the site of same. The notice shall contain a brief statement of
the grounds relied upon for revoking the permit. Such notice may be
given either by personal delivery to the person or agent of the permittee
engaged in the work at the site or by certified or registered United
States mail addressed to the permittee. When any permit has been
revoked and the work authorized by the permit has not been completed,
the Borough may, at its discretion, elect to do such work as may be
necessary to restore the street or part thereof to as good a condition as
before the opening was made. In the event of such election, all expenses
incurred by Tarentum Borough shall be recovered from the permittee,
or their surety set forth hereafter, or other party who may be
responsible for making such repairs as the case may be.
I. Record keeping by Borough. The Borough Manager, their deputy or
authorized agent, shall keep a record of the permit application, the date
of issuing such permit and of the place, character and extent of the
§ 216-24 SIGNS § 216-24
207:277
§ 216-25. Limits of work.
excavation to be performed. Upon issuing any permit, the Borough
Manager shall forthwith notify the Borough Foreman, the Chief of
Police, and any other appropriate emergency service provider of the
place, character and extent of the proposed excavations.
J. Opening pavement less than five years old; additional fees. No permit
shall be issued by the Borough Manager which would allow an
excavation or opening to be cut in a pavement less than five years old
unless the applicant can clearly demonstrate that public health or
safety require that the contemplated work be permitted or unless an
emergency condition exists. If by special action of the Borough
Manager a permit is issued to a person to open any pavement less than
five years old, an additional charge or penalty will be made for such
opening, provided, however, that no such charge or penalty will be
assessed in the event it is determined that the work is of an emergency
nature. The additional charge or penalty shall be assessed in
accordance with the schedule of permit fees attached hereto.
A. Size of openings. When excavating in any street, lane or alley for the
purpose of laying relaying, taking up or repairing any gas, water, sewer,
or other pipes, mains or conduits, not more than 100 feet lineal
measure or more than one Borough block shall be opened at one time.
B. Timely repair of openings. All streets, lanes and alleys excavated or torn
up for the purpose of laying, relaying, taking up or repairing any water,
sewer, gas, conduit or other pipes and appurtenances, and all test holes
relating thereto, shall be immediately properly backfilled in accordance
with the terms and conditions of this article.
C. Tunneling under streets. Tunneling under paved streets is prohibited
unless specially authorized in the permit issued by the Borough
Manager. The foregoing notwithstanding, however, service lines,
casings or conduits may be jacked or driven between openings provided
the permittee meets the following requirements:
(1) The permittee has submitted a detailed plan for review by the
Borough Engineer providing information as to how such jacking or
driving operation is to be performed;
(2) The Borough Engineer approves such plan and such plan becomes
part of the applicant's permit; and
(3) The permittee agrees to assume full responsibility for damage to
existing underground facilities and agrees to defend and hold
Tarentum Borough harmless thereupon.
D. Display of permit at site. Every person making or supervising any
excavation shall keep the street opening permit at the excavation site
and exhibit same to any policemen or any other authorized
representative of the Borough upon request. It shall be the duty of any
§ 216-24 TARENTUM CODE § 216-25
207:278
such officer or other authorized representative to report to the Borough
Manager the name of any person, firm, company, corporation or
authority manning any excavation without such permit or who is
violating or who has violated any of the provisions of this article. Upon
receiving a report that a person or entity has made a street opening
provided for in this article without obtaining such permit, the Borough
Manager, Chief of Police, or their duly designated deputy or agent, shall
immediately issue a citation for violation of this article and shall cause
the work to be stopped until such time that a permit under this article
is obtained.
E. Identification of person performing work. During the progress of any
work taking place under this article, a sign shall be maintained at the
excavation site bearing the name of the public utility or contractor
physically performing the work.
F. Daily work stoppages. During the course of any given day within which
work under this article is being performed, the permittee, its agent and/
or the contractor performing such work shall engage in daily work
stoppages. Daily stoppage of work shall occur as follows:
(1) Except for emergency repairs of utility facilities, work within the
pavement or shoulder shall be stopped prior to peak traffic hours
that may exist on a particular highway on a particular day and as
specified in the permit;
(2) At the end of each work day, an opening in the right-of-way shall be
closed in one of the following manners:
(a) By covering such opening with steel plates or bridging which
are less than six feet in either length or width. The plates or
bridging shall be extended a minimum of 18 inches from each
edge of the opening and shall be secured in a safe manner.
(b) Such opening may be backfilled consistent with the terms of
this article to the bottom elevation of the pavement or base
course, or to the original surface elevation if outside the
pavement and shoulder, provided, however, that said openings
have the required protection under § 216-27D (relating to work
zone traffic control) and an approved traffic control plan until
the surface is restored to its former condition.
(c) At all times, the permittee shall protect and secure its openings
to provide for the safety of the travelling public, including
motorists, bicyclist and pedestrians.
G. Storage of excavation materials. Materials either removed from the
excavation site, including spoil, or materials used in conjunction with
the work, shall be the responsibility of the permittee, and shall be
disposed of as follows:
§ 216-25 SIGNS § 216-25
207:279
§ 216-26. Restoration of openings.
(1) The permittee shall keep the improved area free of material which
may be deposited by vehicles travelling upon or entering onto the
highway during the performance of work authorized by the permit.
(2) The permittee is responsible for controlling dust conditions created
by its own operations.
(3) Excess material, spoil and material that is not suitable for backfill
shall be promptly removed and properly disposed of outside the
right-of-way as the work progresses.
(4) Other materials shall be stored so that there is no interference with
the flow of highway traffic or drainage.
(5) The permittee shall not close any portion of the pavement or
shoulder to vehicular or pedestrian traffic for the primary purpose
of storing material. If the permittee stores material on a sidewalk,
pavement or shoulder, the permittee thereby acknowledges its
obligation and commitment to repair or reconstruct the pavement
and the shoulder, if damaged, to its former condition in a manner
approved by the Borough Engineer. Under no circumstances shall
delivered materials be stored overnight on the pavement.
(6) In the event materials are stored on a sidewalk, the shoulder or
pavement, the Borough Engineer may authorize the permittee to
restore the sidewalk, pavement or shoulder from superficial
surface damage by using a seal coat or service treatment.
A. Backfilling. An opening shall be backfilled by the permittee in
accordance with the following:
(1) The opening may first be backfilled with fine aggregate material, or
granular material to protect the facility, placed to a height not to
exceed one foot over the top of the facility, if the material is
compacted in not more than four-inch loose layers or as authorized
by the Borough Engineer. To help protect its facility from future
excavations, the permittee is encouraged to place a permanent
colored ribbon at least one foot above its facility. If the facility is
nonmetallic, the permittee is also encouraged to place a metallic
ribbon at a depth from which the ribbon can be sensed by typical
metal locating instruments.
(2) The opening shall then be backfilled with select granular material,
unless retained suitable material is authorized by the Borough
Engineer, or other coarse aggregate material that may be specified
in the permit. All backfilling shall be in compliance with the
backfilling design specifications set forth by the Borough Engineer.
Select granular material or other aggregate material will be
required for use as backfill of openings in pavements, paved
shoulders and improved (i.e. oil and chip) shoulders as well as
§ 216-25 TARENTUM CODE § 216-26
207:280
unimproved (i.e. stabilized or earth surface) shoulders within three
feet of the edge of the pavement. Retained suitable material will
normally be authorized for use as backfill of openings outside
shoulders and in unimproved shoulders more than three feet
outside the edge of pavement and up to within three feet of the
surface.
(3) Backfill shall be compacted as follows:
(a) General rule. Except as provided in Subsection A(3)(b)
material shall be placed in loose layers not to exceed eight
inches if vibratory compaction equipment is used or as
authorized by the Borough Engineer. Each layer shall be
thoroughly compacted to preclude subsidence.
(b) Compaction outside pavement and shoulders. At least 15 days
prior to the start of work, the applicant may submit its written
compaction plan to the Borough Engineer requesting backfill
in an opening outside the pavement and shoulder to be placed
in layers thicker than eight inches prior to compaction.
(c) The compaction plan shall include full details on equipment,
materials and work methods as well as the permittee's
acknowledgment of its obligation and commitment to regularly
monitor the restored surface until two years after the
acknowledged completion of the permitted work and to
promptly correct failure or subsidence of the highway. The
Borough Engineer may condition their approval of a
compaction plan on the execution of a bond, if a part of the
opening is within the approved area.
(d) Existing pavement elevation. Compaction shall be completed
to the bottom elevation of the existing pavement.
(4) The Borough Engineer may require the permittee to have material
proposed for use as backfill and compacted material tested, at the
expense of the permittee, for conformance to applicable gradation
and compaction requirements.
(5) Openings in the pavement or shoulder that are made as the result
of emergency work may be immediately backfilled with excavated
material that is treated with a recognized chemical soil stabilizer at
a minimum rate of 100 pounds stabilizer per cubic yard of backfill,
if the stabilized backfill is compacted under Subsection A(3)(c).
(6) Test holes shall be backfilled, as soon as safely possible, with
existing type material or other material authorized by the Borough
Engineer and sealed under this article. The Borough Engineer may
authorize test holes in the pavement or shoulder to be restored
without a one foot cutback of the surrounding surface.
§ 216-26 SIGNS § 216-26
207:281
B. Restoration of brick or unique surfaces. In the event the scope of work
calls for excavation of a brick, cobblestone or other unique surface,
then backfilling and the restoration of that surface shall be
accomplished as follows:
(1) At the time of application for a permit, the permittee shall submit a
restoration plan for approval by the Borough Engineer;
(2) Restoration of the surface shall be accomplished by the reuse of as
much of the existing brick, cobblestone or original surface material
as possible;
(3) The restoration plan shall include the manner in which subsurface
restoration and backfilling shall occur;
(4) The Borough Engineer shall review the restoration plan prior to the
issuance of the street opening permit and may modify the proposed
restoration plan to ensure that the surface is properly restored;
(5) No permit shall be issued for opening a brick, cobblestone or other
unique surface without the prior approval of the applicant's
restoration plan by the Borough Engineer.
C. Restoration of flexible base pavements. Base and surface restoration of
flexible base pavements shall be performed under this subsection and
as specified in the permit. Prior to replacement of the base course, one
foot outside of each edge of the opening shall be sawed, in a neat
straight line, to the top elevation of the existing aggregate subbase or
stone base course, and the detached material shall be removed. Other
surface opening methods such as cutting may be authorized if the
methods result in the opened pavement having a neat straight vertical
line.
(1) Exposed vertical and horizontal surfaces shall be prepared under
current PennDOT specifications.
(2) The base course shall consist of bituminous concrete meeting the
requirements of current PennDOT specifications or other base
course material authorized by the Borough Engineer. The base
course material shall have a minimum depth of five inches or a
depth equal to the existing base course, whichever is greater.
(3) If required, the binder course shall consist of ID-2 material meeting
the requirements of current PennDOT specifications. The binder
course shall have a minimum depth of two inches or a depth equal
to the existing binder course, whichever is greater.
(4) The wearing course shall consist of ID-2 material or FJ-1 material
meeting the requirements of current PennDOT specifications. The
wearing course shall have a minimum depth of 1 1/2 inch ID-2, or
one inch FJ-1, or a depth equal to the existing wearing course,
whichever is greater.
§ 216-26 TARENTUM CODE § 216-26
207:282
D. Restoration of plan or reinforced cement concrete pavements. Base and
surface restoration of plain or reinforced cement concrete pavements
shall be performed under this subsection and as specified in the permit.
Drilling is not permitted where sawing or cutting is required.
(1) Prior to replacement of the pavement, one foot outside of each
edge of the opening shall be sawed the full depth of pavement in a
neat straight line. The detached material shall be removed without
damaging the adjacent pavement. The use of a pavement breaker is
prohibited. The permittee may partially saw cut the pavement to a
depth of at least three inches and cut the remaining pavement with
a jackhammer weighing no more than 90 pounds, if:
(a) The restored opening does not exceed six feet in either length
or width.
(b) The restored opening is at least two feet from a pavement edge
or joint.
(c) The highway average daily traffic (ADT) does not exceed 5,000
vehicles per twenty-four-hour period.
(2) The replacement pavement shall consist of high early strength
concrete equal in depth to the original concrete pavement or to a
depth of eight inches, whichever is greater.
(3) On existing reinforced cement concrete pavements that are opened
for more than six feet in either length or width, reinforcing steel,
expansion tie bolts and load transfer devices shall be placed in
accordance with current PennDOT specifications (relating to
concrete pavement maintenance).
(4) The permittee may be required to restore the structural integrity of
a damaged cement concrete pavement by:
(a) Replacing the opened pavement transversely the full lane
width.
(b) Replacing the opened pavement longitudinally to a transverse
joint or opening within six linear feet of the opening.
(5) The surface shall be restored as follows:
(a) After surface corrections have been completed and before the
concrete becomes nonplastic, the surface shall be given a
textured finish that matches the existing adjacent surface. The
surface shall be cured under current PennDOT specifications.
(b) Restoration of the binder and wearing courses of a cement
concrete pavement which has a bituminous surface shall be
done under Subsection C (relating to the restoration of flexible
base pavements).
§ 216-26 SIGNS § 216-26
207:283
E. Shoulder restoration. Shoulder restoration shall be performed under
this subsection and as specified in the permit.
(1) Paved shoulders. Paved shoulders shall be reconstructed and
restored to a serviceable condition, of the same type as existed
before the start of work, under current PennDOT specifications,
and PennDOT roadway construction standards.
(2) Other shoulders. Other shoulders shall be restored as follows:
(a) The surface shall be restored with at least two inches of select
granular material, or as authorized by the Borough Engineer.
(b) If the length of the open shoulder exceeds 100 linear feet, the
shoulder shall be graded, rolled and unless excused penetrated
with bituminous material specified by current PennDOT
specifications, at a minimum rate of .20 gallon per square yard
and chipped or lightly sanded to prevent tracking of oil onto
the pavement.
(3) Outside existing shoulder. If the disturbed area extends outside the
existing shoulder, the disturbed area outside the restored shoulder
shall be properly graded and a ditch line shall be constructed
wherever necessary to maintain highway drainage.
F. Temporary pavement restoration. Permanent restoration of a pavement
or paved shoulder shall be required immediately upon completion of the
work specified in the permit. However, temporary restoration of a
pavement or paved shoulder may be permitted by the Borough
Engineer prior to permanent restoration, under and subject to the
following:
(1) The base shall consist of compacted select granular material with a
surface of two-inch bituminous material. If the existing pavement
structure includes a course of subbase material, it shall be replaced
to a depth equal to the existing course depth with material meeting
the requirements of current PennDOT specifications.
(2) Temporary pavement restoration shall be completed before traffic
is allowed to travel on the disturbed area. The temporary pavement
may be kept in place for up to six months or as specified in the
permit, if it is properly maintained.
(3) The temporary pavement shall be removed and permanent
restoration performed under Subsection C, D or E.
G. Appurtenances to underground installations. Requirements relating to
appurtenances to underground installations shall include:
(1) The top of every manhole, valve box or other access to the facility
shall be at the same elevation as the surface in which it is located.
§ 216-26 TARENTUM CODE § 216-26
207:284
(2) The surface surrounding manhole covers located in paved
shoulders shall be paved with four inches bituminous concrete base
course a distance of at least one foot around the structure to
prevent washouts.
(3) A manhole, including those cast-in-place, shall be constructed in
compliance with current industry standards and/or current
PennDOT specifications.
H. Additional restoration. Additional restoration shall be required as
follows:
(1) Disturbed portions of the highway, including, but not limited to,
slopes and appurtenances and structures such as guide rails,
curbs, signs, markings, drain pipes, driveways and vegetation, shall
be restored by the permittee to a condition at least equal to that
which existed before the start of work authorized by the permit, if
the restoration is consistent with the "roadway construction
standards" set forth herein. Additional restoration may also be
required, upon written notification, to restore the structural
integrity of the pavement or shoulder.
(2) If the permittee opens pavement having a bituminous concrete
surface and the wearing course for such road surface is less than
five years old, the permittee shall, in addition to the restoration
conditions outlined in the permit and in this section, overlay the
pavement in accordance with the following conditions:
(a) When a longitudinal opening longer than 100 linear feet has
been made in the pavement, the permittee shall overlay the
lanes in which the opening was made, for the entire length of
highway that was opened, in a manner authorized by the
Borough Engineer.
(b) When two or more transverse openings have been made within
100 linear feet of pavement, the permittee shall overlay lanes
in which the openings were made, for the entire length of
highway between the openings, in a manner authorized by the
Borough Engineer.
(c) When four or more emergency openings have been made by
the same permittee within 100 linear feet of pavement, the
permittee shall overlay lanes in which the openings were
made, for the entire length of highway between the openings,
in a manner authorized by the Borough Engineer.
(d) If disturbed lanes adjacent to undisturbed lanes are overlaid,
the edge of the disturbed lane shall be saw cut or milled to a
depth of 1 1/2 inch or the depth of the existing surface course,
whichever is less, for the length of the opening to insure a
smooth joint, with proper elevation and cross section. A full
§ 216-26 SIGNS § 216-26
207:285
width overlay may be authorized on various highways instead
of saw cutting or milling the disturbed lane.
(e) If disturbed lanes adjacent to shoulders are overlaid, the
shoulder shall be raised, with material and in a manner
authorized by the Borough Engineer for the type of existing
shoulder, so that the overlaid pavement and shoulder edges are
at the same elevation.
(3) Regardless of the age of the wearing course:
(a) If more than 100 linear feet of longitudinal or transverse
openings, or both, are made in the pavement, the Borough
Engineer may require the permittee to overlay lanes in which
the openings were made, for the entire length of highway that
was opened, if the Borough Engineer determines that the
rideability or structural integrity of the pavement has been
impaired by the openings.
(b) If four or more openings are made by the same permittee
within 100 linear feet of pavement, the district office may
require the permittee to restore the entire disturbed pavement
between the openings by milling, planing or other authorized
method and overlaying the entire disturbed pavement.
(4) Aggregate used in a bituminous overlay wearing course shall
comply with skid resistance level (SRL) criteria specified by current
PennDOT specifications.
(5) If an opening is made in a bituminous concrete pavement within
three feet from the edge of pavement or other longitudinal joint or
opening, the surface restoration shall be extended to the edge of
pavement or other longitudinal joint or opening.
(6) At each end of an overlay, the permittee shall install a paving notch,
under current PennDOT specifications, by milling, planing or other
authorized method and provide a minimum ten-foot transition.
(7) The transition areas at each end of an overlay shall follow the
contour of the surrounding surface.
(8) When pavement markings on more than 100 linear feet of highway
are covered or destroyed by the permitted work, including
overlays, they shall be replaced with temporary pavement
markings, under 67 Pa. Code § 203.72 (relating to temporary
pavement markings) before opening the disturbed pavement to
traffic. When the pavement surface is restored, pavement markings
that were covered or destroyed shall be replaced in their former
location.
§ 216-26 TARENTUM CODE § 216-26
207:286
§ 216-27. Street closings.
I. Sealing. Restored openings in the pavement or paved shoulder shall be
sealed under current PennDOT specifications relative to bituminous
concrete or cement concrete, as the case may be.
J. Multiple openings by more than one permittee. In the event more than
one utility company, permittee or contractor is excavating separately,
and any portion of those excavations or patches resulting therefrom are
within 100 feet of one another, then the road surface between such
patches shall be milled and repaved under the direction of the Borough
Engineer, with the costs of same prorated among the utility companies
or permittees performing such excavation work.
K. Notice to commence backfilling. The permittee shall notify the Borough
Foreman of their intentions to backfill at least 24 hours in advance of
starting. The Borough Foreman shall be present during the backfilling
operation and the pouring of any concrete slab or surface course.
Failure to provide such notice, or the failure of the permittee to have
the backfilling and pouring of the concrete slab or permanent surface
performed under the supervision of the Borough Foreman is a violation
of this article, subject to the penalties prescribed herein. In addition,
the failure to provide such notice and to obtain the supervision of the
Borough Foreman may result in the removal of the backfill and slab and
the performance of such work over to the satisfaction of the Borough
Foreman. In the event it is necessary to remove and replace the
improperly installed surface or backfill, all other street opening permits
for such permittee shall be immediately suspended and no further
permits shall be issued to such permittee until the backfilling and
permanent surface restoration work has been properly completed.
L. Settlement within five years of backfilling. Where an opening has been
closed and a settlement occurs within five years from the date of the
work, such settlement shall be considered to have been caused by faulty
backfilling and shall constitute a violation of this article.
A. Closings for general excavation; notice of closing. No portion of any
street, lane or alley shall be or remain impassable for vehicular or
pedestrian traffic by reason of any excavation for more than one week
from the beginning of any work on same. The permittee shall notify
Tarentum Borough Police Department, Street Department and, at the
discretion of the Borough, the several fire departments and E.M.S.
provider(s) in the Borough, of such closing at least 48 hours in advance
of such proposed closing. Any extension of the street closing time
without penalty must first be approved by the Borough Manager or
their authorized deputy or representative.
B. Closing for repairing mains, conduits, etc.; notice of closing. No portion
of any street, lane or alley shall be or remain impassable for vehicular
or pedestrian traffic by reason of any excavation for repairing mains,
conduits or other pipes or appurtenances, or for laying or relaying new
§ 216-26 SIGNS § 216-27
207:287
house connections for more than two days from the beginning of any
work on same unless such approval is set forth in the street opening
permit. The permittee shall notify the Tarentum Borough Police
Department, Street Department and, at the discretion of the Borough,
the several fire departments and E.M.S. provider(s) in the Borough,
at least 48 hours in advance of such proposed street closing. Any
extension of the street closing time without penalty must first be
approved by the Borough Manager or their authorized representative.
C. Closing affecting intersections. No intersection of the streets, lanes or
alleys of the Borough shall be or remain impassable for vehicular or
pedestrian traffic for more than five hours during the work upon any
excavation mentioned in this article. The Permittee shall notify the
Tarentum Borough Police Department, Street Department and, at the
discretion of the Borough, the several fire departments and E.M.S.
provide(s) in the Borough, at least 48 hours in advance of such
proposed street closing. Any extension of the street closing time
mentioned in this article without penalty must first be approved by the
Borough Manager, their deputy, or their authorized representative.
D. Work zone traffic controls. Traffic in the work area subject to the street
opening permit shall be controlled consistent with the general terms,
conditions, requirements and provisions of 67 Pa. Code § 203 relating to
work zone traffic controls and meet the approval of the Chief of Police,
their deputy, or their authorized representative. The failure to employ
work zone traffic controls consistent with 67 Pa. Code § 203 or obtain
approval of same by the Chief of Police, their deputy, or their authorized
representative, shall be a violation of this article and subject to
punishment hereunder.
E. Storage of material on roadways. Material or spoil removed from
excavations should be placed so as to occupy a minimum width of
roadway. At street intersections, all spoils should be hauled away if
possible and any surplus not later needed shall be removed from the
work site immediately. When excavation takes place in an outer lane,
the permittee shall confine excavation and spoil within the outer lane by
use of bin construction or toe boards so as to prevent spoil from
spreading into and blocking another traffic lane. The permittee shall
also provide a guardrail on the traffic side of any trench. When
excavation is in the curb lane, the spoil shall be placed on the curb side
after first covering any gutter to permit free flow of drainage. Boxing of
any spoil placed on the sidewalk is essential. Under those
circumstances, a guardrail shall be placed on the traffic side of the
trench as well.
F. Closing full width of street; detours. In the event it becomes necessary
to close any portion of a street for the full width of travel thereby
excluding all traffic from the area, the permittee shall obtain approval
at least 24 hours in advance of the closing from the Chief of Police their
deputy, or their authorized representative and the permittee shall set
up proper detours at the direction of the Chief of Police. Length of
§ 216-27 TARENTUM CODE § 216-27
207:288
§ 216-28. Effect upon utilities.
§ 216-29. Certificate of insurance.
closing a street to all traffic shall be subject to the limits of time
specified in § 216-27A, B and C.
A. Utility repair or replacement as part of overall improvement project. In
the event of an overall street improvement, the Borough Foreman shall
give reasonable notice to all public utility companies operating in the
Borough of the intention of the Borough to pave or improve a certain
street and notify the utility company that they will have 30 days from
the mailing date of such notice to lay, renew, repair or extend all
underground facilities. The time for such laying, renewing, repair or
extension of facilities may be extended upon written request to the
Borough Engineer and the approval by the Borough Engineer of same.
The extension or repair of service lines to a point outside the line of the
proposed pavement is required to be available for structures which may
be built on lots vacant as well as service lines to structures already in
existence. The Borough may, after notice to all companies affected, and
in the event that an affected company fails or refuses to comply with
such notice, refuse a future permit to such company to open the
affected street except in the case of emergency openings to make
repairs. At the time of the emergency opening, if an investigation by the
Borough Engineer indicates that the existing condition of the pipes or
conduits needing repairs is due to such company's failure to lay, renew,
repair or extend its underground facilities, then same shall constitute a
violation of this article and be subject to punishment hereunder.
B. Enlargements or improvements to existing systems. In adopting this
article, the Borough recognizes that due to land use changes certain
enlargements or improvements of the underground systems may
become necessary on both improved and unimproved streets. Proposed
changes to existing underground systems or proposed new lines or
conduits shall be submitted to the Borough Engineer for approval.
C. Abandoned facilities or systems. Whenever any pipe, conduit, duct,
tunnel or other structure located under the surface of any street or the
use thereof, is abandoned, the person or company owning, using,
controlling or having any interest therein shall notify the Borough
Engineer in writing of the intent to abandon. Such notice shall give in
detail the location, depth and size of the structure to be abandoned. If
the facts warrant the removal of the abandoned structure the person
owning such structure shall be notified by the Borough Engineer and
such person shall remove such structure at their expense within a time
period to be prescribed by the Borough Engineer. The failure to remove
such structure within the time limitation imposed by the Borough
Engineer shall constitute a violation of this article and be punishable
hereunder.
§ 216-27 SIGNS § 216-29
207:289
§ 216-30. Bonds.
A. Worker's compensation and liability insurance required. Along with its
application for a street opening permit, the applicant shall submit a
certificate of insurance indicating that it carries workers' compensation
insurance and is otherwise insured against claims for damages for
personal injury and property loss which may arise from or out of the
performance of the work, whether such performance is by the
applicant, their subcontractor or any one directly or indirectly
employed by the applicant. Such insurance shall include protection
against liability arising from completed operations. The amount of
coverage shall be prescribed by the Borough Engineer in accordance
with the nature of the risks involved; provided, however, that the
liability insurance for bodily injury in effect shall be in an amount not
less than $100,000 for each person and $300,000 for each accident and
for property damage in an amount not less than $50,000. The failure of
the applicant to provide such certifications shall be grounds for denying
any permit.
B. Annual insurance certificates for certain public entities. Local
Municipal Authorities and Public Utilities who regularly perform work
within the Borough may file with the Borough Manager, on or before the
15th day of January each year, a certificate of insurance providing the
minimum coverages set forth above. The Borough shall accept such
certificate as proof of coverage for all regular work performed by such
authority or utility during the calendar year, provided the local
municipal authority or public utility shall certify that such insurance
shall be in place for the calendar year in which it is given. Nothing in
this paragraph shall be deemed or construed to limit the ability of the
Borough Engineer to require higher coverage limits if the scope of the
work performed warrants same.
A. Bonds required. Each applicant, at the time of issuance of a street
opening permit, shall provide the Borough with the following bonds:
(1) When the permittee is a franchised utility, a Corporate Continuing
Bond from year to year in a minimum amount of $50,000; and
(2) When the permittee is not a franchised utility or government
agency, a Cash Bond in an amount to be determined by the Borough
Engineer, said amount to be equivalent to the Borough Engineer's
estimate of all costs, fees and expenses necessary for the
performance of the work and in meeting compliance requirements
with the provisions of this article.
B. The Borough Engineer may require a higher bond of a franchised utility
in the event he determines that the scope of the work requires same.
C. Failure to perform; notice; execution on bonds by Borough. Whenever
the Borough Manager shall find that a permittee has failed to perform
any term or condition of any permit, he shall give written notice of such
§ 216-29 TARENTUM CODE § 216-30
207:290
§ 216-31. Fines and remedies.
failure to the permittee and to the surety of the bond posted. Such
notice shall state the failure of performance, the work necessary to
be done, the estimated cost thereof and the period of time deemed by
the Borough Manager to be reasonably necessary for the completion
of such work and when such work shall recommence. In the event the
nonperformance has not been cured within the time period set forth in
such notice, then the Borough may perform such work at the expense
of the permittee and surety and may execute upon the surety's bond to
recover the costs and expenses of same. Any payment by the surety's
bond shall not absolve the surety or the permittee from any further
liability resulting from the permittee's failure to perform the work. If
a cash bond has been posted, notice of nonperformance as provided
above shall be given to the permittee and if compliance is not had
within the time specified, the Borough Manager shall proceed without
delay, and without further notice or proceedings whatsoever, to use the
cash deposited, or any portion of such deposit, to cause the required
work to be performed. In the event the cash deposit is insufficient to
cover the costs of the completion of the work, the Borough may, at its
option, pursue any remedy at law or in equity to collect the balance of
completion costs from the permittee or any other person responsible
for the work. In the event the balance of such cash deposit is sufficient
to cover the cost of the completion of the work, any remaining balance
shall be returned to the permittee, or to its successors or assigns, after
deducting the cost of the work.
D. Interference with work or work sites; penalties. No person shall
interfere with or obstruct the ingress or egress to or from any such
premises by an authorized representative or agent of any surety or of
the Borough when engaged in completing the work required to be
performed under the permit or in complying with the terms or
conditions thereof. Any attempt by any person or entity to interfere with
or obstruct work performed under this article shall be in violation
thereof and subject to those penalties set forth herein.
A. Fines. Whoever violates any of the provisions of this article shall be
guilty of a summary offense and, upon conviction thereof, be subject to
the payment of a fine of not less than $300 nor greater than $1,000
together with any costs of suit. Each day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate summary offense. Failure to pay any fine imposed
for a violation of this article shall result in the incarceration of the
failing party for a period of not less than 30 days.
B. All remedies cumulative. Any and all remedies set forth herein for
violations of this article are cumulative. Nothing contained herein shall
be deemed or construed to limit or restrict the ability of the Borough to
pursue any action, act law or in equity, to enforce the terms of this
article, remedy violations thereof, or correct deficient work or
conditions at its discretion.
§ 216-30 SIGNS § 216-32
207:291
§ 216-32. Severability.
No effect on remaining provisions. If any section, subsection, sentence,
clause, phrase or a portion of this article is for any reason held invalid
or unconstitutional by any Court of competent jurisdiction, such portion
shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision, and such
holdings shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof.
§ 216-33. Repealer.
Specific ordinances repealed; construction. This article specifically repeals
Tarentum Borough ordinance No. 98-03 and all other ordinances, or parts
of ordinances, inconsistent herewith. In the event the terms and provisions
of this article are inconsistent with any other ordinance within Tarentum
Borough, the provisions of this article shall be deemed to be controlling.
§ 216-34. (Reserved)
§ 216-32 TARENTUM CODE § 216-34
207:292
ARTICLE V
Trees and Vegetation
[Adopted 3-19-2007 by Ord. No. 07-04]
§ 216-35. Poplar and willow trees.
Every poplar tree and/or every willow tree now or hereafter growing or
planted along any street, alley or cartway abutting an owner's real property
must be removed within six months of the passage of this article.
§ 216-36. Dangerous vegetation; interference with utilities and
travel; damage to sidewalks and roadways.
§ 216-37. Types of violations; abatement.
§ 216-38. Notice of violation; failure to respond; issuance of
citations.
A. Any vegetation abutting any street, alley, cartway or right-of-way or on
an owner's real property which poses an imminent and clear and
present danger to persons, real property, or personalty or the likelihood
of same violates this article.
B. Any vegetation abutting any street, alley, cartway or right-of-way or on
an owner's real property that interferes with or is likely to interfere
with electricity lines or communication lines violates this article.
C. Any vegetation abutting any street, alley, cartway or right-of-way or on
an owner's real property that interferes with pedestrian or motor
vehicle travel or which is causing damage to sidewalks, streets, alleys
and/or Borough cartway or right-of-way violates this article.
A. Emergency. Whenever any vegetation abutting any street, alley,
cartway or right-of-way or on an owner's real property which has
caused an emergency, the property owner must take immediate, safe
and clean abatement measures or the Borough may cause the
abatement to be done.
B. Imminent danger. Whenever any vegetation abutting any Borough
street, alley, cartway or right-of-way or on an owner's real property
presents an imminent clear and present danger of causing damage to
persons, real property or personalty, the real property owner will have
48 hours to remove or abate the hazard in a manner acceptable to the
Borough of Tarentum.
C. Obvious danger. Whenever any vegetation abutting any Borough street,
alley, cartway or right-of-way or on an owner's real property presents an
obvious or potential danger of causing damage to persons, real
property or personalty, the real property owner shall have 45 days to
remove or abate the potential hazard in a manner acceptable to the
Borough of Tarentum.
§ 216-35 SIGNS § 216-38
207:293
§ 216-39. Violations and penalties; liens; collection.
A. Notice of violation.
(1) The Tarentum Borough Police, Fire Department, Code Enforcement
Officer or Electric Department will attempt to notify the land owner
by telephone and/or in person of any violation of § 216-36A above.
(2) Upon his own observation or having received an opinion from an
arborist or upon information received from the Tarentum Borough
Electric Department, the Borough of Tarentum Code Enforcement
Officer shall notify the offending property owner by phone and
overnight certified mail of any violation of § 216-36B above.
(3) Upon his own observation, or having received an opinion from an
arborist or upon information received from the Tarentum Borough
Electric Department, the Tarentum Borough Code Enforcement
Officer shall notify the offending property owner by certified mail of
any violation of § 216-36C above.
B. Failure of owner to respond.
(1) When the property owner does not immediately or timely respond
or is not available under a violation of § 216-36A and B above, the
Borough of Tarentum may take appropriate abatement measures,
including pruning, removal and cleaning using Tarentum Borough
employees or contracted services.
(2) Violation under § 216-36C.
(a) If the property owner does not respond under § 216-36C in a
manner acceptable to the Borough of Tarentum within 45 days,
the Tarentum Borough Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a
nontraffic citation to the real property owner.
(b) Upon final judicial determination, if guilty, the owner shall
have 10 days to abate the violation.
C. A nontraffic citation may be issued under § 216-36B and C.
A. Any person convicted of violating any section of this article shall pay a
fine not exceeding $600.
B. Fines and costs of abatement, including wages, costs and contracts to
third parties, shall be a lien on the owner's real property as well as
collectable jointly and severally against owners by civil suit in addition
to actions for collections by the judicial system.
§ 216-38 TARENTUM CODE § 216-39
207:294
Chapter 220
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Municipal Authorities — See Ch. 8.
Joint Zoning and Code Enforcement
Officer — See Ch. 35, Art. I.
Planning Commission — See Ch. 50.
Building construction — See Ch. 95.
Mobile homes — See Ch. 159.
Sewers — See Ch. 204.
Zoning — See Ch. 265.
§ 220-1. Adoption of county standards.
Chapter 225
TAXATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Municipal claims and liens — See Ch. 97.
A. The Borough Council of the Borough of Tarentum hereby agrees upon a
mandatory referral of all subdivision plans for evaluation and
recommendation to the Allegheny County Planning Commission before
being approved locally; and
B. In the absence of local subdivision rules and regulations, the rules and
regulations of the Allegheny County Planning Commission will apply.
§ 216-39 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 220-1
220:295

ARTICLE I
List of Residents
[Adopted 12-12-1955 by Ord. No. 1633]
§ 225-1. Preparation of list.
The Council of the Borough of Tarentum shall appoint employees in such
number as the Council may determine necessary, said employees to prepare
during the month of January 1956, and each year thereafter, lists of
residents or inhabitants of the Borough of Tarentum over 21 years of age,
said lists to be presented to the Council of the Borough of Tarentum on or
before February 1 of each year.
§ 225-2. Compensation.
The Council of the Borough of Tarentum shall fix the compensation of said
employees and after the lists have been presented to the Council of the
Borough of Tarentum and approved by it, a warrant shall be issued to each
employee in payment for his or her services.
§ 225-3. Copy to Tax Assessor.
A copy of this article shall be given to the Tax Assessor who under existing
law makes and furnishes the tax assessments for the Borough of Tarentum.
§ 225-4. Official list of taxables.
The lists so prepared by the employees and approved by the Council of
the Borough of Tarentum shall be in all respects considered as the official
assessment lists of taxables for the Borough of Tarentum.
§ 225-5. Copy to Tax Collector.
After the preparation of said lists and after the same are delivered to the
Council of the Borough of Tarentum and approved by it, the Secretary of
the Borough is hereby ordered and directed to deliver said lists to the Tax
Collector of the Borough of Tarentum, which lists shall be used by him in the
preparation of notices to be mailed to the taxables thereon in accordance
with the law in such cases made and provided.
§ 225-1 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 225-5
220:297

ARTICLE II
Local Services Tax
[Adopted 10-7-1968 by Ord. No. 1936; amended in its entirety
11-19-2007 by Ord. No. 07-08102]
§ 225-6. Title.
This Article II shall be known and may be cited as the "Borough of Tarentum
Local Services Tax Ordinance."
§ 225-7. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context or
language clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
BOROUGH OF TARENTUM or BOROUGH — The area within the corporate
limits of the Borough of Tarentum.
COLLECTOR — The person, public employee or private agency designated
by the Borough of Tarentum to collect and administer the tax herein
imposed.
DCED — The Department of Community and Economic Development of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
EARNED INCOME — Compensation as this term is defined in Section 13
(relating to earned income taxes) of the Local Tax Enabling Act, the Act
of Dec. 31, 1965, P.L. 1257, Section 13, as amended, 53 P.S. § 6913, as
amended.
EMPLOYER — An individual, partnership, association, limited liability
corporation, limited liability partnership, corporation, governmental body,
agency or other entity employing one or more persons on a salary, wage,
commission or other compensation basis, including a self-employed person.
HE, HIS or HIM — Indicates the singular and plural number, as well as
male, female and neuter genders.
INDIVIDUAL — Any person, male or female, engaged in any occupation,
trade or profession within the corporate limits of the Borough of Tarentum.
NET PROFITS — The net income from the operation of a business,
profession, or other activity, as this term is defined in Section 13 (relating
to earned income taxes) of the Local Tax Enabling Act, the Act of Dec. 31,
1965, P.L. 1257, Section 13, as amended, 53 P.S. § 6913, as amended.
OCCUPATION — Any trade, profession, business or undertaking of any
type, kind or character, including services, domestic or other, carried on or
performed within the corporate limits of the Borough of Tarentum for which
102. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided that nothing within the ordinance shall be
construed to repeal the imposition and collection of an occupational privilege tax, plus
applicable penalties and interest, for calendar year 2006 and all prior calendar years, or of
an emergency and municipal services tax for calendar year 2007, as the same existed prior
to this amendment.
§ 225-6 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 225-7
220:299
compensation is charged or received, whether by means of salary, wages,
commission or fees for services rendered.
TAX — The local services tax at the rate fixed in § 225-8 of this part.
TAX YEAR — The period from January 1 until December 31 in any year; a
calendar year.
§ 225-8. Levy of tax.
§ 225-9. Exemptions and refunds.
A. For specific revenue purposes, an annual tax is hereby levied and
assessed, commencing January 1, 2008, upon the privilege of engaging
in an occupation with a primary place of employment within the
Borough of Tarentum during the tax year. Each natural person who
exercises such privilege for any length of time during any tax year shall
pay the tax for that year in the amount of $52, assessed on a pro rata
basis, in accordance with the provisions of this article. This tax may be
allocated by the Borough Council from time to time for:
(1) Emergency services, which shall include emergency medical
services, police services and/or fire services;
(2) Road construction and/or maintenance;
(3) Reduction of property taxes;
(4) Property tax relief through implementation of a homestead and
farmstead exclusion in accordance with 53 Pa.C.S.A. Ch. 85, Subch.
F (relating to homestead property exclusion).
B. The Borough shall use no less than 25% of the funds derived from the
tax for emergency services. This tax is in addition to all other taxes of
any kind or nature heretofore levied by the Borough of Tarentum. The
tax shall be no more that $52 on each person for each calendar year,
irrespective of the number of political subdivisions within which a
person may be employed.
A. Exemption. Any person whose total earned income and net profits from
all sources within the Borough is less than $12,000 for any calendar
year in which the tax is levied is exempt from the payment of the tax for
that calendar year. In addition, the following persons are exempt from
payment of the tax:
(1) Any person who has served in any war or armed conflict in which
the United States was engaged and is honorably discharged or
released under honorable circumstances from active service if, as a
result of military service, the person is blind, paraplegic or a double
or quadruple amputee or has a service-connected disability
declared by the United States Veterans' Administration or its
successor to be a total one-hundred-percent disability.
§ 225-7 TARENTUM CODE § 225-9
220:300
(2) Any person who serves as a member of a reserve component of the
armed forces and is called to active duty at any time during the
taxable year. For the purposes of this subsection, "reserve
component of the armed forces" shall mean the United States Army
Reserve, United States Navy Reserve, United States Marine Corps
Reserve, United States Coast Guard Reserve, United States Air
Force Reserve, the Pennsylvania Army National Guard or the
Pennsylvania Air National Guard.
B. Procedure to claim exemption.
(1) A person seeking to claim an exemption from the local services tax
shall annually file an exemption certificate with the Borough and
with the person's employer affirming that the person reasonably
expects to receive earned income and net profits from all sources
within the Borough of less than $12,000 in the calendar year for
which the exemption certificate is filed. In the event the Borough
utilizes a tax collection officer, it shall provide a copy of the
exemption certificate to that officer. The exemption certificate shall
have attached to it a copy of all the employee's last pay stubs or W-2
forms from employment within the Borough for the year prior to
the fiscal year for which the employee is requesting to be exempted
from the tax. Upon receipt of the exemption certificate and until
otherwise instructed by the Borough or except as required by
Subsection B(2), the employer shall not withhold the tax from the
person during the calendar year or the remainder of the calendar
year for which the exemption certificate applies. Employers shall
ensure that the exemption certificate forms are readily available to
employees at all times and shall furnish each new employee with a
form at the time of hiring.
(2) With respect to a person who claimed an exemption for a given
calendar year from the tax, upon notification to an employer by the
person or by the Borough that the person has received earned
income and net profits from all sources within the Borough equal to
or in excess of $12,000 in that calendar year or that the person is
otherwise ineligible for the tax exemption for that calendar year, or
upon an employer's payment to the person of earned income within
the Borough in an amount equal to or in excess of $12,000 in that
calendar year, an employer shall withhold the local services tax
from the person under Subsection B(3).
(3) If a person who claimed an exemption for a given calendar year
from the tax becomes subject to the tax for the calendar year under
Subsection B(2), the employer shall withhold the tax for the
remainder of that calendar year. The employer shall withhold from
the person, for the first payroll period after receipt of the
notification under Subsection B(2), a lump sum equal to the amount
of tax that was not withheld from the person due to the exemption
claimed by the person under this subsection, plus the per-payroll
amount due for that first payroll period. The amount of tax withheld
§ 225-9 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 225-9
220:301
§ 225-10. Duty of employers to collect.
per payroll period for the remaining payroll periods in that
calendar year shall be the same amount withheld for other
employees. In the event the employment of a person subject to
withholding of the tax under this subsection is subsequently
severed in that calendar year, the person shall be liable for any
outstanding balance of tax due, and the Borough may pursue
collection under this act.
(4) Except as provided in Subsection B(2), it is the intent of this
subsection that employers shall not be responsible for investigating
exemption certificates, monitoring tax exemption eligibility or
exempting any employee from a local services tax.
C. Refunds. The Borough Manager, in consultation with the Collector and
DCED, shall establish procedures for the processing of refund claims
for any tax paid by any person who is eligible for exemption, which
procedures shall be in accord with provisions of the general municipal
law relating to refunds of overpayment and interest on overpayment.
(NOTE: With respect to refunds, see 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 8425; with respect
to interest, see 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 8426.) Refunds made within 75 days of a
refund request or 75 days after the last day the employer is required to
remit the tax for the last quarter of the calendar year, whichever is
later, shall not be subject to interest. No refunds shall be made for
amounts overpaid in a calendar year that do not exceed $1. The
Borough Manager or the Collector shall determine eligibility for
refunds to exempt persons and provide refunds.
A. Each employer within the Borough of Tarentum, as well as those
employers situated outside the Borough of Tarentum but who engage in
business within the Borough of Tarentum, is hereby charged with the
duty of collecting the tax from each of his employees engaged by him or
performing for him within the Borough of Tarentum and making a
return and payment thereof to the Collector. Further, each employer is
hereby authorized to deduct this tax from each employee in his or her
employ, whether said employee is paid by salary, wage or commission
and whether or not all such services are performed within the Borough
of Tarentum.
B. A person subject to the tax shall be assessed by the employer a pro rata
share of the tax for each payroll period in which the person is engaging
in an occupation. The pro rata share of the tax assessed on the person
for a payroll period shall be determined by dividing the combined rate
of the tax levied for the calendar year by the number of payroll periods
established by the employer for the calendar year. For purposes of
determining the pro rata share, an employer shall round down the
amount of the tax collected each payroll period to the nearest 1/100 of a
dollar. Collection of the tax shall be made on a payroll period basis for
each payroll period in which the person is engaging in an occupation,
except as provided in Subsection D of this section. For purposes of this
§ 225-9 TARENTUM CODE § 225-10
220:302
§ 225-11. Returns.
Each employer shall prepare and file a return showing a computation of the
tax on forms to be supplied to the employer by the Collector. If an employer
fails to file the return and pay the tax, whether or not the employer makes
collection thereof from the salary, wages or commissions paid by him or her
to an employee, except as provided hereafter in this article, the employer
shall be responsible for the payment of the tax in full as though the tax had
been originally levied against the employer.
§ 225-12. Dates for determining tax liability and payment.
In each tax year, each employer shall use his or her employment records to
determine the number of employees from whom such tax shall be deducted
and paid over to the Collector on or before the 30th day following the end
of each calendar quarter of each such tax year.
subsection, "combined rate" shall mean the aggregate annual rate of
the tax levied by the school district and the Borough.
C. No person shall be subject to the payment of the local services tax by
more than one political subdivision during each payroll period.
D. In the case of concurrent employment, an employer shall refrain from
withholding the tax if the employee provides a recent pay statement
from a principal employer that includes the name of the employer, the
length of the payroll period and the amount of the tax withheld and a
statement from the employee that the pay statement is from the
employee's principle employer and the employee will notify other
employers of a change in principal place of employment within two
weeks of its occurrence. The employee's statement shall be provided on
the form approved by DCED.
E. The tax shall be no more than $52 on each person for each calendar
year, irrespective of the number of political subdivisions within which a
person may be employed. The Borough shall provide a taxpayer a
receipt of payment upon request by the taxpayer.
F. No employer shall be held liable for failure to withhold the tax or for the
payment of the withheld tax money to the Borough if the failure to
withhold taxes arises from incorrect information submitted by the
employee as to the employee's place or places of employment, the
employee's principal office or where the employee is principally
employed. Further, an employer shall not be liable for payment of the
local services tax in an amount exceeding the amount withheld by the
employer if the employer complies with the provisions of Subsection B
of § 225-9 this article and this section and remits the amount so
withheld in accordance with this article.
G. Employers shall be required to remit the local services taxes 30 days
after the end of each quarter of a calendar year.
§ 225-10 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 225-13
220:303
§ 225-13. Self-employed individuals.
Each self-employed individual who performs services of any type or kind
or engages in any occupation or profession within a primary place of
employment within the Borough of Tarentum shall be required to comply
with this article and pay the pro rata portion of the tax due to the Collector
on or before the 30th day following the end of each quarter.
§ 225-14. Individuals engaged in more than one occupation or
employed in more than one political subdivision.
§ 225-15. Nonresidents subject to tax.
All employers and self-employed individuals residing or having their places
of business outside of the Borough of Tarentum but who perform services
of any type or kind or engage in any occupation or profession within the
Borough of Tarentum do, by virtue thereof, agree to be bound by and
subject themselves to the provisions, penalties and regulations promulgated
under this article with the same force and effect as though they were
residents of the Borough of Tarentum. Further, any individual engaged
in an occupation within the Borough of Tarentum and an employee of a
nonresidential employer may, for the purpose of this article, be considered
a self-employed person, and in the event his or her tax is not paid, the
Borough shall have the option of proceeding against either the employer or
employee for the collection of this tax as hereinafter provided.
§ 225-15.1. Tax Collector; powers and duties.
A. The situs of the tax shall be the place of employment on the first day the
person becomes subject to the tax during each payroll period. In the
event a person is engaged in more than one occupation, that is,
concurrent employment, or an occupation which requires the person
working in more that one political subdivision during a payroll period,
the priority of claim to collect the local services tax shall be in the
following order:
(1) First, the political subdivision in which a person maintains his or
her principal office or is principally employed;
(2) Second, the political subdivision in which the person resides and
works if the tax is levied by that political subdivision;
(3) Third, the political subdivision in which a person is employed and
which imposes the tax located nearest in miles to the person's
home.
B. In case of dispute, a tax receipt of the taxing authority for that calendar
year declaring that the taxpayer has made prior payment constitutes
prima facia certification of payment to all other political subdivisions.
A. The Collector shall be appointed by resolution of the Borough Council.
It shall be the duty of the Collector to accept and receive payments of
§ 225-13 TARENTUM CODE § 225-15.1
220:304
§ 225-15.2. Failure to pay tax.
§ 225-15.3. Violations and penalties.
Whoever makes any false or untrue statement on any return required by
this article, or whoever refuses inspection of the books, records or accounts
in his or her custody and control setting forth the number of employees
subject to this tax who are in his or her employment, or whoever fails or
refuses to file any return required by this article shall be guilty of a violation
and, upon conviction thereof, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $600 and costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such
fine and costs, to imprisonment for not more that 30 days. The action to
enforce the penalty herein prescribed may be instituted against any person
in charge of the business or any employer who shall have failed or who
refuses to file a return required by this article.
this tax and to keep a record thereof showing the amount received by
him from each employer or self-employed person, together with the
date the tax was received.
B. The Collector is hereby charged with the administration and
enforcement of this article and is hereby charged and empowered,
subject to Borough Council approval, to prescribe, adopt and
promulgate rules and regulations relating to any matter pertaining to
the administration and enforcement of this article, including provisions
for the examination of payroll records of any employer subject to this
article, the examination and correction of any return made in
compliance with this article and any payment alleged or found to be
incorrect or as to which overpayment is claimed or found to have
occurred. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Collector shall
have the right to appeal to the Court of Common Pleas of Allegheny
County as in other cases provided.
C. The Collector is hereby authorized to examine the books and payroll
records of any employer in order to verify the accuracy of any return
made by an employer or, if no return was made, to ascertain the tax
due. Each employer is hereby directed and required to give the
Collector the means, facilities and opportunity for such examination.
A. In the event that any tax under this article remains due or unpaid 30
days after the due dates above set forth, the Collector may sue for the
recovery of any such tax due or unpaid under this article together with
interest and penalty.
B. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6%
on the amount of such tax shall be calculated beginning with the due
date of the tax and a penalty of 5% shall be added to the flat rate of such
tax for nonpayment thereof. Where suit is brought for the recovery of
this tax or other appropriate remedy undertaken, the individual liable
therefor shall, in addition, be responsible and liable for the costs of
collection.
§ 225-15.1 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 225-15.4
220:305
§ 225-15.4. Interpretation of provisions.
A. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to empower the
Borough of Tarentum to levy and collect the tax hereby imposed on any
occupation not within the taxing power of the Borough under the
Constitution of the United States and the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
B. If the tax hereby imposed under the provisions of this article shall be
held by any court of competent jurisdiction to be in violation of the
Constitution of the United States or of the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania as to any individual, the decision of the court shall not
affect or impair the right to impose or collect said tax or the validity of
the tax so imposed on other persons or individuals as herein provided.
§ 225-15.4 TARENTUM CODE § 225-15.4
220:306
ARTICLE III
Earned Income Tax
[Adopted 12-27-1999 by Ord. No. 99-2]
§ 225-16. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Earned Income and Net
Profits Tax Code," herein referred to as the "code."
§ 225-17. Definitions.
The following terms, words or phrases as used in this article shall have the
meanings set forth below unless the context clearly indicates a different
meaning:
ASSOCIATION — A partnership, limited partnership or any other
unincorporated group of two or more persons.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Tarentum.
BUSINESS — An enterprise, activity, profession or any other undertaking of
an unincorporated nature conducted for profit or ordinarily conducted for
profit, whether by a person, partnership, association or any other entity.
CORPORATION — A corporation or joint-stock association organized under
the laws of the United States, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any
other state, territory, foreign country or dependency.
CURRENT YEAR — The calendar year for which the tax is levied.
DOMICILE — The place where a person lives and has his or her permanent
home and to which he or she has the intention of returning whenever
absent. Actual residence is not necessarily domicile, for domicile is the
fixed place of abode which, in the intention of the taxpayer, is permanent
rather than transitory. Domicile is the voluntary fixed place of habitation of
a person, not for a mere special or limited purpose but with the present
intention of making a permanent home, until some event occurs to induce
him or her to adopt some other permanent home. In the case of businesses
or associations, the domicile is that place considered as the center of
business affairs and the place where its functions are discharged.
EARNED INCOME — Salaries, wages, commissions, bonuses, incentive
payments, fees, tips and other compensation received by a person or his
personal representative for services rendered, whether directly or through
an agent and whether in cash or in property; not including, however,
wages or compensation paid to persons on active military service, periodic
payments for sickness and disability other than regular wages received
during a period of sickness, disability or retirement or payments arising
under worker's compensation acts, occupational disease acts and similar
legislation or payments commonly recognized as old age benefits,
retirement pay or pensions paid to persons retired from service after
reaching a specific age or after a stated period of employment or payments
commonly known as "public assistance" or "unemployment compensation
§ 225-16 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 225-17
220:307
payments" made by any governmental agency or payments to reimburse
expenses or payments made by employers or labor unions for wage and
salary supplemental programs, including but not limited to programs
covering hospitalization, sickness, disability or death, supplemental
unemployment benefits, strike benefits, social security and retirement.
EMPLOYEE — Any person who renders service to another for consideration
and who is under the control of the employer, including temporary,
provisional, casual or part-time employment.
EMPLOYER — A person, partnership, association, corporation, institution,
governmental body or unit or agency or any other entity employing one or
more persons for salary, wage, commission or other compensation.
INCOME TAX OFFICER OR OFFICER — The Finance Officer elected to
collect and administer the tax on earned income and net profits.
NET PROFITS — The net income from the operation of a business,
profession or other activity, except corporations, after provision for all costs
and expenses incurred in the conduct thereof, determined either on a cash
or accrual basis in accordance with the accounting system used in such
business, profession or other activity, but without deduction of taxes based
on income.
NONRESIDENT — A person, partnership, association or other entity
domiciled outside the Borough of Tarentum.
PERSON OR INDIVIDUAL — A natural person.
PRECEDING YEAR — The calendar year before the current year.
RESIDENT — A person, partnership, association or other entity having a
domicile in the Borough.
SUCCEEDING YEAR — The calendar year following the current year.
TAXPAYER — A person, partnership, association or other entity required
hereunder to file a return of earned income or net profits or to pay a tax
thereon.
§ 225-18. Rate of tax.
A. Residents. A tax at the rate of 1/2 of 1% is hereby imposed on each
dollar of earned income received and net profits earned by residents of
the Borough.
B. Nonresidents. A tax at the rate of 1% is hereby imposed on each dollar
of earned income received and net profits earned by nonresidents of the
Borough for work done or services performed or rendered in the
Borough.
C. Minimum income. All persons whose total earned income or net profits
as defined herein is less than $3,000 per year shall be exempt from the
imposition of the tax imposed by this article.
§ 225-17 TARENTUM CODE § 225-18
220:308
§ 225-19. Net profits; estimated tax; returns.
D. Tax year. The tax levied under this article shall be applicable to earned
income received and to net profits earned by residents and
nonresidents for the period beginning January 1, and ending December
31, or for the taxpayer's fiscal year or portion thereof extending into the
calendar year commencing January 1. The tax shall continue in force
thereafter on a calendar-year basis, without annual reenactment,
unless the rate of the tax is subsequently changed. The Borough of
Tarentum may, by ordinance, change the rate and such changes shall
become effective on the date specified in the amending ordinance.
A. Beginning with the calendar year January 1, 1999, every taxpayer shall,
on or before April 15 of such year and each year thereafter, make and
file with the Officer a declaration of his estimated net profits during the
period beginning January 1 and ending December 31 of the thencurrent
year on declaration forms provided by the Officer. The term
"estimated net profit" shall mean the net profit determined under this
article for the preceding taxable year. The taxpayer shall pay to the
Officer the total amount of estimated tax determined to be due on such
estimated net profits, in four equal installments, as follows:
(1) First payment on or before April 30 of the current year.
(2) Second payment on or before July 31 of the current year.
(3) Third payment on or before October 31 of the current year.
(4) Fourth payment on or before January 31 of the succeeding year.
B. If a taxpayer, during the calendar year 1999 or any year thereafter,
anticipates net profits after March 31 of the calendar year, then he shall
make and file a declaration on or before July 31, October 31 of the thencurrent
year or January 31 of the succeeding year, whichever of these
dates next follows the date on which the taxpayer first anticipates net
profits. If a taxpayer anticipates net profits after May 31 or August 31 of
the current year, then he shall file a declaration and make the estimated
tax payments in equal installments on the remaining payment dates.
The taxpayer shall pay to the Officer in equal installments the amount of
tax due thereon on or before the quarterly payment dates which remain
after the filing of his declaration.
C. Beginning with the calendar year 2000 or before April 15 of each
calendar year and each succeeding year thereafter, every taxpayer shall
file with the Officer a final income tax return, showing the amount of the
net profits earned for the preceding year, the total amount of tax due
thereon and the total amount of estimated tax theretofore paid with the
declaration of estimated tax. At the time of filing a final return, the
taxpayer shall pay to the Officer the balance of tax due or may make
demand for a refund or credit in the case of any overpayment. Any
taxpayer may, in lieu of paying the fourth quarterly installment of his
§ 225-18 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 225-19
220:309
§ 225-20. Earned income.
§ 225-21. Due date of return or payment.
If any return or payment is due on a weekend or national or state holiday,
such return or payment shall be considered timely if postmarked the first
estimated tax, elect to make and file with the Officer his final return on
or before January 31 of the succeeding year and to pay the tax in full at
that time.
D. Each final return shall be substantiated by attaching a copy of the
taxpayer's Schedule C or E or Form 1099 or other appropriate schedule
from his United States income tax return for the same year.
E. The taxpayer may file an amended declaration of estimated net profits
and make adjustments for payment of the estimated tax in cases where
a taxpayer who has filed the declaration thereafter anticipates
additional net profits not previously declared or finds that he has
overestimated his anticipated net profits. The Tax Officer may provide
for such underpayments or overpayments by appropriate regulations.
F. Every taxpayer who discontinues his business before December 31 of
the current year shall, within 30 days after the discontinuance of the
business, file his final return as hereinabove required and pay the tax
due or make demand for a refund or credit in the case of an
overpayment.
A. Beginning with the calendar year 1999 and each succeeding year
thereafter, every taxpayer who is employed for salary, wage,
commission or other compensation and who receives any earned
income not subject to the provisions relating to collection at the source
shall make and file with the Officer, on a form prescribed, prepared and
supplied by the Officer, a quarterly return on or before April 30 of the
current year, July 31 of the current year, October 31 of the current year
and January 31 of the succeeding year, setting forth the aggregate
amount of earned income not subject to withholding by him during the
three-month period ending March 31 of the current year, June 30 of the
current year, September 30 of the current year and December 31 of the
current year, respectively, and subject to the earned income tax,
together with such other information as the Officer shall require. Every
taxpayer who makes such a return shall, at the time of the filing of the
return with the Officer, pay to the Officer the amount of tax shown as
due thereon. On or before April 15 of the succeeding year, the taxpayer
shall make and file a final return showing the amount of earned income
for the preceding year, the total amount of tax withheld thereon and the
balance due, if any.
B. Each final return reporting earned income shall be substantiated by
attaching a copy of the employer's W-2 statement, Form 1099 or other
appropriate schedule to reflect such earned income.
§ 225-19 TARENTUM CODE § 225-21
220:310
business day immediately thereafter. Any return or payment shall be
considered timely if postmarked on or before 12:00 noon on the due date as
provided herein.
§ 225-22. Registration.
§ 225-23. Withholding.
Every employer, as hereinbefore described and defined, shall be obligated
from January 1, and thereafter so long as this article is in effect, to withhold
from wages of employees subject to the tax imposed by this article the
amount of earned income tax due, in accordance with the withholding
procedures set forth hereinafter.
§ 225-24. Registration of employer.
Every employer having an office, factory, workshop, branch, warehouse or
other place of business within the Borough of Tarentum who employs one or
more persons, other than domestic servants, for salary, wage, commission
or other compensation, who has not previously registered, shall, within
15 days after becoming an employer, register with the Tax Collector his
name and address, the name and form of entity to which such business is
conducted and such other information as the Tax Collector may require in
order to administer and collect the tax herein imposed.
A. Individual registration.
(1) Each individual resident who earns in excess of $3,000 of earned
income or net profits per calendar year shall register with the Tax
Officer on forms provided by said Officer.
(2) The registration form shall include the name, address, social
security number, current occupation, employer, employer's address
and any additional information required by the Tax Collector.
B. Registration of occupants of rental units. The owner of any apartment
house or rental unit located in the Borough or the authorized
representative of the owner, shall submit to the Borough a list of the
occupants, consisting of the names and apartment designations, of all
persons 18 years of age and older residing in the apartment house or
rental unit and who are not transient occupants. The list shall be
submitted within 60 days from January 1, and shall be updated
quarterly thereafter every April 1, July 1, October 1 and January 1 in
each succeeding year.
C. Penalties. The failure to register by any individual resident or the
failure of an owner of any apartment or rental unit to register as
provided in this article shall constitute a summary offense and shall be
subject to the penalties as are provided for in this article.
§ 225-21 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 225-25
220:311
§ 225-25. Quarterly returns.
Every employer having an office, factory, workshop, branch, warehouse
or other place of business within the Borough, who employs one or more
persons, other than domestic servants, for salary, wages, commission or
other compensation, shall deduct at the time of payment thereof the tax
imposed by this article from the earned income due to his employee or
employees and shall, on or before April 30 of the current year, July 31 of
the current year, October 31 of the current year and January 31 of the
succeeding year, file a return and pay to the Tax Officer the amount of
earned income taxes deducted during the preceding three-month periods
ending March 31 of the current year, June 30 of the current year, September
30 of the current year and December 31 of the current year, respectively.
Such returns shall show the name and social security number or tax
identification number of each such employee, the earned income of such
employee during such preceding three-month period, the earned income tax
deducted therefrom, the street address of the employee and the Borough
where he resides, the political subdivision imposing such earned income
tax, the total earned income of all such employees during the preceding
three-month collection period and the total earned income tax deducted
therefrom.
§ 225-26. Monthly reporting.
Any employer who, for two of the preceding four reporting periods, has
failed to deduct the proper tax or any part thereof or has failed to pay over
the proper amount of tax to the Borough may be required by the Tax Officer
to file his return and pay the tax monthly. In such cases, payments of tax
shall be made to the Tax Officer on or before the last day of the month
succeeding the month for which the tax was withheld.
§ 225-27. Annual return.
On or before February 28 of the succeeding year, every employer shall file
with the Tax Officer:
A. An annual return showing the total amount of earned income deducted,
the total amount of tax paid to the Tax Officer for the period beginning
January 1 of the current year and ending December 31 of the current
year.
B. A withholding statement for each employee employed during all or part
of the period beginning January 1 of the current year and ending
December 31 of the current year, setting forth the employee's name,
address, social security number, the amount of earned income paid to
the employee during said period, the amount of tax deducted, the
political subdivisions imposing the tax upon such employee and the
amount of tax paid to the Tax Officer. Every employer shall furnish at
least two copies of the withholding statement to the employee for whom
it is filed.
§ 225-25 TARENTUM CODE § 225-28
220:312
§ 225-28. Termination of business.
Every employer who discontinues business for any reason on or prior to
December 31 of the current year shall, within 30 days after the
discontinuance of business, file the returns and withholding statement
hereinabove required and pay the tax due.
§ 225-29. Liability of employer.
Every employer or responsible officer of such employer who willfully or
negligently fails or omits to make the deductions required by this section
and who fails to remit the earned income taxes withheld shall be personally
liable, as a fiduciary, in an amount equal to 100% of the taxes which he was
required to deduct and withhold under this article. The term "responsible
officer" shall include any person who would be a responsible officer for
purposes of remitting federal income tax withholding at the source to the
federal government.
§ 225-30. Liability of employee.
The failure or omission of any employer to make the deductions required
by this section shall not relieve any employee from the payment of the tax
or from complying with the requirements of this article as to the filing of
declarations and returns.
§ 225-31. Designation; powers and duties of Tax Officer.
A. Designation of Tax Officer. The Finance Officer of the Borough is hereby
designated the Tax Officer for purposes of administering this article and
any amendments thereto or such private agency or deputy as he may
designate. The Tax Officer is empowered to collect and receive the
taxes, interest, fines, penalties and other payments authorized by this
article and to administer terms of this article.
B. Bond. The Tax Officer, before entering upon his official duties, shall give
and acknowledge a bond to the Borough. If the Borough Council shall,
by resolution, designate any bond previously given by the Tax Officer as
adequate, such bond shall be sufficient to satisfy the requirements of
this subsection.
(1) Each such bond shall be joint and several, with one or more
corporate sureties which shall be surety companies authorized to
do business in this commonwealth and duly licensed by the
Insurance Commissioner of this commonwealth.
(2) Each bond shall be conditioned upon the faithful discharge by the
Tax Officer, his agents, assistants and appointees of all trusts
confided in him by virtue of his office, upon the faithful execution of
all duties required by him according to law of all moneys and all
balances thereof paid to, received or held by him by virtue of his
office and upon the delivery to his successor or successors in office
§ 225-28 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 225-31
220:313
of all books, papers, documents or other official things held in right
of his office.
(3) Each such bond shall be taken in the name of the appointing
authority or authorities and shall be for the use of the political
subdivision or political subdivisions appointing the officer and for
the use of such other person or persons for whom money shall
otherwise appear, in the case of a breach of any of the conditions
thereof by the acts or neglect of the principal on the bond.
(4) The Borough of Tarentum or any person may sue upon said bond in
its or his own name for its or his own use.
(5) Each such bond shall contain the name or names of the surety
company or companies bound thereon. The Borough of Tarentum
shall fix the amount of the bond at an amount equal to the
maximum amount of taxes which may be in the possession of the
officer at any given time.
(6) The Borough of Tarentum may, at any time, upon cause shown and
due notice to the officer and his surety or sureties, require or allow
the substitution or the addition of a surety company acceptable to
the Borough for the purpose of making the bond sufficient in
amount, without releasing the surety or sureties first approved
from any accrued liability or previous action on such bond.
(7) The Borough of Tarentum shall designate the custodian of the bond
required to be given by the Officer.
C. Tax Officer's records. The Tax Officer shall collect and receive all such
taxes, shall furnish a receipt for payment when requested to do so by a
taxpayer and shall keep a record showing the amount received by him
for each taxpayer under this article, together with the date of the
receipt of such payment.
D. Regulations. The Tax Officer is hereby empowered to prescribe, adopt,
promulgate and enforce rules and regulations relating to any matter or
procedure pertaining to the administration and enforcement of the
provisions of this article, subject, however, to the approval of the
Borough Council of the Borough. Such rules and regulations shall be
inscribed by the Tax Officer into a book kept for that purpose and open
to inspection by the public and thereupon shall have the same force and
effect as if they had been incorporated into this article.
E. Audits. The Tax Officer or any other person designated by the Borough
of Tarentum is hereby authorized to examine any of the books, papers
and records of any employer, supposed employer, taxpayer or supposed
taxpayer in order to verify the accuracy of any return made or, if no
return was made, to ascertain the amount of tax due by any person
under this article. Every such employer, supposed employer, taxpayer
or supposed taxpayer is required to forward to the Tax Officer or such
§ 225-31 TARENTUM CODE § 225-31
220:314
other authorized person the means, facilities and opportunities for such
examination and investigations hereby authorized.
F. Copies of United States returns. The Tax Officer is authorized to
examine any person under oath concerning any income which should
have been reported for purposes of collecting the earned income tax
imposed by this article and shall have the power and is hereby
authorized to request, examine and obtain from any taxpayer or person
in the employ of the taxpayer legible copies of books, records, federal
and state income tax statements and other papers relevant to
determining the amount of such tax verifying the accuracy of the return
and the liability therefor.
G. Power to make return. The Tax Officer or any other official or agent so
designated by the Borough shall have the power to examine returns,
correct erroneous returns and prepare tax returns on behalf of
taxpayers who refuse to file returns.
H. Confidential information. Any information gained by the Tax Officer or
any other official or agent of the Borough as a result of any return,
investigation, hearing or examination required or authorized by this
article shall become confidential, except for official purposes or except
for purposes of collection of the tax imposed hereunder in accordance
with proper judicial procedures or as otherwise provided by law. Any
disclosure of any such information contrary to the provisions of this
subsection shall constitute a violation of this article.
I. Power to pay refunds. The Tax Officer shall have the power to make
refunds of overpayments and authorize the refunding of taxes
erroneously or improperly collected from or paid by the taxpayer for
any period of time not to exceed three years subsequent to the date of
payment of the sum involved. The Tax Officer shall refund, on petition of
and proof by the taxpayer, any earned income tax paid on the taxpayer's
ordinary and necessary expenses allowable under relevant provisions of
the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, to the extent that such
expenses are not paid by the taxpayer's employer.
J. Penalty for wrongful disclosure. Any person who, except as permitted
by the provisions of the foregoing Subsection H of this section, divulges
any information which is confidential under the provisions of this article
shall, upon conviction thereof before any District Justice or court of
competent jurisdiction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than
$500 for each offense and costs and, in default thereof, shall be
imprisoned for a period not exceeding 30 days.
K. Fiscal year taxpayer. The Tax Officer is authorized, in his discretion, to
establish different filing, reporting and payment dates for taxpayers
whose fiscal years do not coincide with the calendar year.
L. Payment to other political subdivisions. The Tax Officer shall, at least
quarterly, distribute earned income taxes to the appropriate
subdivisions. The political subdivisions shall not be required to request
§ 225-31 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 225-31
220:315
§ 225-32. Suit for collection.
§ 225-33. Interest; fines; violations and penalties.
the Officer to distribute the funds collected but shall at least annually
reconcile their receipts with the records of the Tax Officer and return
to or credit the Officer with any overpayment. If the Tax Officer, within
one year after receiving a tax payment, cannot identify the taxing
jurisdiction entitled to a tax payment, he shall make payment to the
municipality in which the tax was collected.
A. Civil suit. The Tax Officer may sue in the name of the Borough for the
recovery of taxes, interest and penalties due and unpaid under this
article in accordance with the provisions of the Local Tax Enabling Act
of the General Assembly of the commonwealth (Act of December 31,
1965, P.L. 1257, No. 511, Section 1 et seq., 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq., as
amended, herein the "Local Tax Enabling Act").
B. Limitations period to recover taxes. Any suit brought to recover the tax
imposed by this article shall be begun within three years after such tax
is due or within three years after the declaration or return has been
filed, whichever date is later; provided, however, that this taxation shall
not prevent the institution of a suit for the collection of any tax due or
determined to be due in the following cases:
(1) Where no declaration or return was filed by any person, although a
declaration or return was required to be filed by him under the
provisions of this article, there shall be no limitation.
(2) Where an examination of the declaration or return filed by any
person or of other evidence relating to such declaration or return in
the possession of the Tax Collector reveals a fraudulent evasion of
taxes, there shall be no limitation.
(3) In the case of substantial understatement of earned income tax
liability of 25% or more and there is no fraudulent evasion of the
tax, suit shall be begun within six years.
(4) Where any employer has deducted taxes under the provisions of
this article and has failed to pay the amount so deducted to the Tax
Collector or where any person has willfully failed or omitted to
make the deductions required by this article, there shall be no
limitation.
C. Period to recover erroneous refunds. The Tax Officer may sue for
recovery of an erroneous refund, provided that such suit is begun two
years after making such refund, except that the suit may be brought
within five years if it appears that any part of the refund was induced by
fraud or misrepresentation of material fact.
A. Interest and penalty. If, for any reason, the tax or estimated tax is not
paid when due, interest at the rate of 1/2 of 1% per month or fractional
§ 225-31 TARENTUM CODE § 225-33
220:316
§ 225-34. Credit for payment of like tax.
Credit for payment of a tax like the tax imposed by § 225-18 of this article
to other political subdivisions of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania (except
for a like tax paid to the School District of Tarentum Borough coterminous
with the Borough) or to any political subdivision located outside the
boundaries of the commonwealth shall be allowed in accordance with
Section 14 of the Local Tax Enabling Act.103
§ 225-35. Construal of provisions; headings.
part of a month on the amount of said unpaid tax shall be added and
collected. An additional penalty of 1/2 of 1% per month or fractional
part of a month on the amount of said unpaid tax shall be added and
collected.
B. Fine. Any person who fails, neglects or refuses to make any declaration
or return required by this article; any employer or responsible officer of
an employer who fails, neglects or refuses to register or to pay the taxes
deducted from his employees or fails, neglects or refuses to deduct
withholding taxes from his employees; any person who refuses to
permit the Tax Officer or any agent designated by him to examine his
books, records, federal and state income tax returns and other papers;
and any person who knowingly makes any incomplete, false or
fraudulent return or does anything whatsoever to avoid the full
disclosure of the amount of his net profits or earned income in order to
avoid the payment of the whole or any part of the tax imposed by this
article shall, upon conviction thereof before any District Justice or court
of competent jurisdiction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than
$600 for each offense and costs. In default of payment of such fine and
costs, such person shall be imprisoned for a period not exceeding 30
days.
C. Interest and fines cumulative. The interest, penalties and fines imposed
under this article shall be in addition to any other charges imposed by
any other section of this article.
D. Failure to receive forms no defense. The failure of any person to receive
or procure forms required for making the declaration or returns
required by this article shall not excuse him from making such
declaration or return or relieve such person from liability for the taxes,
interest and fines prescribed in this article.
E. Payment of taxes, etc., over to Borough. All taxes, interest, fines and
costs of suit and necessary attorney's fees received, collected or
recovered by the Collector under the provisions hereof shall be payable
into the treasury of the Borough.
103. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6914.
§ 225-33 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 225-35
220:317
§ 225-36. Statutory authority.
This article has been enacted under the authority of the Local Tax Enabling
Act.104
A. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to empower the
Borough to assess, levy and collect the taxes hereby imposed on any
person or any business or any portion of any business not within the
taxing power of the Borough under the Constitution of the United
States and the Constitution and Laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
B. The headings of this article are solely for convenience and are not part
of this article.
104. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.
§ 225-35 TARENTUM CODE § 225-36
220:318
ARTICLE IV
Business Privilege Tax
[Adopted 4-3-1978 by Ord. No. 78-2]
§ 225-37. Title.
This article shall be known as and may be cited as the "Tarentum Borough
Business Privilege Tax Ordinance."
§ 225-38. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context and
language clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
ACTUAL PLACE OF BUSINESS OR PLACE OF BUSINESS — Any location
where a business, trade, occupation or profession is conducted for a period
in excess of five days.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Tarentum.
BUSINESS — The carrying on or exercising for gain or profit within the
Borough of Tarentum of any occupation, trade, profession, business,
vocation or commercial activity and shall include but not be limited to
those enterprises engaged in by retail and wholesale dealers and vendors
in goods, wares and merchandise, restaurant operators, processors, hotel
operators, motel operators, warehousemen, upholsterers, doctors, lawyers,
dentists, engineers, architects, chemists, chiropractors, pharmacists,
chiropodists, certified public accountants, public accountants, public
relations counselors, advertising counselors, employment counselors and
agents, promoters, factors, real estate brokers, barbershop operators and
beauty shop operators, cleaning, pressing and dyeing establishment
operators, laundry and launderette operators, shoe repair shop operators,
tailors, seamstresses, electrical, plastering, bricklaying, carpentry, heat,
ventilating, plumbing and painting contractors, contractors engaged in the
class of heavy building or other construction of any kind or in the alteration,
maintenance or repair thereof, demolition contractors, repairers of
electrical, electronic and automotive machinery or equipment or other
machinery and equipment, owners, keepers or operators of public garages
and outdoor or open-air parking lots for the storage of motor vehicles and
other wares and merchandise and all other businesses, trades, occupations
and professions in which there is offered any service or services to the
general public or a limited number thereof.
HOME OCCUPATION — Any lawful occupation customarily conducted in a
dwelling by the occupants only as an incidental use; provided, however, that
the conduct of any business, trade, occupation and profession as defined in
"person" or "business" hereof shall not be deemed to be a home occupation.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, limited partnership, association or
corporation, profit or nonprofit, foreign or domestic; whenever used in any
clause prescribing or imposing a penalty, the term "person" as applied to
§ 225-37 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 225-38
220:319
partnerships and associations shall mean the partners or members thereof
and as applied to corporations, the officers thereof.
SERVICE — Any act or instance of helping or benefiting another for a
consideration.
TAX COLLECTOR — The person, public employee or private agency
designated by resolution of the Borough Council of the Borough of Tarentum
to administer and collect the tax levied by this article.
TAX YEAR — The twelve-month period from January 1 to December 31,
inclusive, except for the year 1978.
TEMPORARY, SEASONAL OR ITINERANT BUSINESS — Any business that
is conducted at one location for less than 60 consecutive calendar days.
§ 225-39. Imposition of tax; continuance.
For the tax year beginning January 1, 1978, and each tax year thereafter,
the Borough hereby imposes an annual business privilege tax and licensing
requirements in the manner and at the fees and rates hereinafter set
forth. Such a tax shall continue in force on a tax-year basis without annual
reenactment unless the rate of the tax is subsequently changed.
§ 225-40. Business privilege license; application.
Every person desiring to engage in or hereafter to continue to engage in
a business, trade, occupation, profession, vocation or commercial activity
at an actual place of business in the Borough shall on or before the first
day of January or prior to the first day of commencing business in such tax
year make application with the Borough Secretary for a business privilege
license for each place of business in the Borough, upon an application
furnished by the Borough Secretary. Each application for a business
privilege license shall be signed by the applicant if a natural person and,
in the case of an association or a partnership, by a member or partner
thereof and, in the case of a corporation, by an officer thereof, and upon
payment of a fee as set forth from time to time by resolution of the Borough
Council, each applicant shall receive a business privilege license from the
Borough Secretary, which license shall not be assignable. In the case of loss,
defacement or destruction of such business privilege license, the person to
whom the business privilege license was issued shall apply to the Borough
Secretary for a new license for which a fee as set forth from time to time
by resolution of the Borough Council shall be charged. Such licenses shall
be conspicuously posted in the place of business of every such person at all
times. For the year 1978, the application shall be made on or before 60 days
from the passage of this article or prior to the first day of commencing a
new business.
§ 225-41. Rate of tax.
Beginning with the effective date of this article, every person engaging in a
business, trade, occupation, profession, vocation or commercial activity in
§ 225-38 TARENTUM CODE § 225-41
220:320
the Borough of Tarentum who maintains a place of business therein shall
pay an annual business privilege tax for the tax year at the rate of $25.
§ 225-42. Exemptions.
Persons employed for a wage or salary, agencies of the government of
the United States or of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, nonprofit
corporations or associations organized solely and exclusively for religious,
educational or charitable purposes and not conducting any regular or
established business competing commercially with any other person subject
to the tax herein imposed, any home occupation or any temporary, seasonal
or itinerant business are exempt from the provisions of this article.
§ 225-43. Payment of tax and returns.
§ 225-44. Duties of Tax Collector and Borough Secretary.
A. Every person subject to the payment of the tax hereby imposed shall file
a return as required by this section, which return shall be made upon a
form furnished by the Tax Collector, Every person making such return
shall certify the correctness thereof.
B. Every person subject to the payment of the tax hereby imposed, who
has commenced business prior to the beginning of the tax year, shall, on
or before February 1 following the commencement of said tax year, file
with the Tax Collector a return setting forth his name, his business and
business address and such other information as may be required.
C. Every person subject to the tax hereby imposed who commences
business subsequent to the beginning of the tax year shall within 40
days from the date of commencing such business file a return with the
Tax Collector setting forth his name, his business and business address
and such other information as may be required.
D. For the year 1978, the tax return shall be filed on or before 60 days
from the passage of this article.
E. At the time of the filing of the return the person making the same shall
pay the tax hereby imposed in the amount of $25 to the Tax Collector.
A. The Tax Collector, on behalf of the Borough, shall collect and receive
the taxes, interest, fines and penalties imposed by this article. It shall
be his duty to keep a record showing the amount received by him from
each person paying the tax and the date of such receipt.
B. The Borough Secretary and the Tax Collector are hereby charged with
the administration and enforcement of this article and are hereby
charged and empowered to prescribe and issue all forms necessary for
the administration of the tax and the issuance of business privilege
licenses and may adopt and promulgate with the approval of the
Council of the Borough of Tarentum rules and regulations relating to
any matter pertaining to the administration and enforcement of this
§ 225-41 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 225-44
220:321
§ 225-45. Collection. [Amended 12-27-1999 by Ord. No. 99-2]
The Tax Collector shall collect, by suit or otherwise, all taxes, license fees,
interest, costs, fines and penalties under this article remaining due or
unpaid. If for any reason any tax or license fee hereby imposed is not paid
when due in each tax year, interest at the rate of 10% per annum on the
amount of the unpaid tax or license fee and an additional penalty of 1/2 of
one 1% of the amount of the unpaid tax or license fee for each month or
fraction thereof during which the tax or license fee remains unpaid shall
be added and collected whenever suit is brought for recovery of the unpaid
tax or license fee. The taxpayer shall, in addition, be liable for the costs of
collection as well as for interest and penalties. The Tax Collector may accept
payment under protest of the tax claimed by the Borough in any case where
a dispute arises as to the Borough's claim for the tax. If a court of competent
jurisdiction thereafter decides that there has been overpayment to the Tax
Collector, the Tax Collector shall refund to the taxpayer the amount of said
overpayment made under protest.
§ 225-46. Violations and penalties.
§ 225-47. Other taxes.
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Council that the taxes and
license fees imposed under this article shall be in addition to any and all
other taxes and license fees imposed by the Borough of Tarentum.
§ 225-48. Saving clause.
article, including provisions for the examination and correction of
returns and payments alleged or found to be incorrect or as to which an
overpayment is claimed or found to have occurred and any rules and/or
regulations promulgated pursuant hereto.
A. Any person who fails or refuses to procure a business privilege license
when so required under the terms and provisions of this article or who
fails to pay the tax or license fee required herein or who fails to keep his
license conspicuously posted at his place of business as required herein
shall, upon conviction before any District Justice or court of competent
jurisdiction in the County of Allegheny, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $600 for each offense and costs and, in default of payment of
said fine and costs, be imprisoned for a period not exceeding 30 days
for each such offense. [Amended 12-27-1999 by Ord. No. 99-2]
B. The failure of any person to receive or procure the necessary forms for
making any application or return required by this article shall not
excuse him from making any such application or return or paying the
tax herein levied.
A. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to empower the
Borough of Tarentum to levy or collect the tax or license fee hereby
imposed on any person or any business or any privilege or any portion
§ 225-44 TARENTUM CODE § 225-48
220:322
of any business not within the taxing power of the Borough of Tarentum
under the Constitution of the United States or the Constitution or Laws
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. If the tax or license fee or any portion thereof imposed upon any person
under the provisions of this article shall be held by any court of
competent jurisdiction to be in violation of the Constitution of the
United States or the Constitution or Laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, the decision of the court shall not affect or impair the
right to impose the tax or license fee or the validity of the tax or license
fee imposed on other persons as herein provided, it being hereby
declared as the intent of the Borough Council that this article would
have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid
sentence, clause, section or portion thereof not have been included
herein.
§ 225-48 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 225-48
220:323

ARTICLE V
Interest on Delinquent Taxes
[Adopted 12-29-1980 by Ord. No. 80-38]
§ 225-49. Penalty on unpaid tax.
From and after the passage of this article there is imposed a penalty of 10%
on any taxes remaining unpaid for four months after the date of the tax
notice and for any taxes under the Local Tax Collection Law.105
§ 225-50. Interest. [Amended 4-19-1982 by Ord. No. 82-3]
§ 225-51. Collection.
The Tax Collector shall add the penalty and the interest as herein provided
to all taxes collected by her under the Local Tax Collection Law,107 and she
shall collect the same.
§ 225-52. Copy to Tax Collector.
The Secretary of the Borough of Tarentum is hereby ordered and directed
to send a true and correct copy of this article to the Tax Collector.
A. From and after the passage of this article, there is imposed interest at
the rate of 10% per annum, or 5/6 of 1% per month, on all municipal
claims from the day of the completion of the work after it has been filed
as a lien and/or on claims for taxes, water rents or rates, lighting rates
or sewer rates from the date of the filing of the lien therefor.
B. The Tax Collector shall add the interest as herein provided to all claims,
liens and taxes collected by her under the Local Tax Collection Law,106
and she shall collect the same.
105. Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 5511.1 et seq.
106. Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 5511.1 et seq.
107. Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 5511.1 et seq.
§ 225-49 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 225-52
220:325

ARTICLE VI
(Reserved)108
[Adopted 2-1-1982 by Ord. No. 82-1]
§ 225-53. (Reserved)
§ 225-54. (Reserved)
108. Editor's Note: Former Art. VI, Solicitor's Fees on Liens and Delinquent Taxes, adopted
2-1-1982 by Ord. No. 82-1, was superseded 3-19-2007 by Ord. No. 07-05. For current
provisions, see Ch. 97, Claims and Liens, Municipal, Art. I, Attorney Fees.
§ 225-53 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 225-54
220:327

ARTICLE VII
Per Capita Tax
[Adopted 3-9-1987 by Ord. No. 87-8]
§ 225-55. Levy of tax.
In accordance with the provisions of the Act of General Assembly of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, The Local Tax Enabling Act, Act of
December 31, 1965, P.L. 1257, No. 511 (53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.), as amended,
there is hereby levied and assessed for general revenue purposes for the
year beginning January 1, 1987, a tax as hereinafter set forth upon all
residents of the Borough of Tarentum of the age of 18 years or older, a per
capita tax in the amount of $5 upon each of such persons.
§ 225-56. Payment schedule.
§ 225-57. Interest.
An interest of 5/6 of 1% per month or 10% per annum shall be due on said
per capita tax after the fourth month after the date of notice of per capita
tax sent by the Tax Collector.
§ 225-58. Penalty for late payment.
In addition, a ten-percent penalty shall be charged after the fourth month
after the date of notice.
A. Said tax shall be payable to the Tax Collector of the Borough at a twopercent
discount for the first two months after a notice of tax due is sent
by the Tax Collector.
B. The tax shall be paid at face for the third and fourth months after the
notice of due date sent by the Tax Collector.
§ 225-55 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 225-58
220:329

ARTICLE VIII
Amusement Tax
[Adopted 12-23-1991 by Ord. No. 91-9]
§ 225-59. Levy of tax.
In accordance with the provisions of the Act of General Assembly of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, The Local Tax Enabling Act, Act of
December 31, 1965, P.L. 1257, 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq., as amended, there
is hereby levied and assessed for general revenue purposes a tax as
hereinafter set forth on all places and forms of amusement, including but
not limited to exhibitions, public dances, concerts and circuses charging
admission. Such taxes shall be uniform and based upon admission charges
as herein set forth; beginning January 1, 1992, upon all admission charges
exceeding $0.85, a tax of 10% of such charge.
§ 225-60. Payment of tax.
Such tax shall be payable monthly to the Borough Secretary or other
authorized officers, Borough Building, Tarentum, Pennsylvania, on or before
the 10th day of the month following the month for which such taxes are
collected, between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., at which time the
manager or director of any such activity shall, under oath, make return of
all tickets and charges therefor, certified by the ticket seller, and shall at
said time pay the amount due thereon, provided that fractional parts of a
cent less than 1/2 cent shall be disregarded in computing said tax on each
admission and fractional parts of 1/2 cent or more shall increase the tax to
the next full cent.
§ 225-61. License required.
Each of said activities shall secure from the Borough Secretary or other
authorized officers a license to operate said activity within the Borough, for
which no additional charge shall be made, but such license shall continue
only so long as the returns are made in accordance with this article and
shall become null and void upon failure to make said returns and pay the
amount due.
§ 225-62. Specific taxes.
There is hereby levied and assessed for general revenue purposes, in
accordance with said Act of General Assembly of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, The Local Tax Enabling Act, Act of December 31, 1965,
P.L. 1257 (53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.), as amended, a tax upon the following
occupations and privileges within the Borough of Tarentum, operated as a
business of amusement and for profit:
A. Operating bowling alleys, an annual tax of $50 per alley; operating pool
rooms, $50 per pool or billiard table; owning, operating, managing,
running or leasing taverns, bars, clubs, etc., which are licensed to sell
§ 225-59 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 225-62
220:331
§ 225-63. Licensing.
malt beverages, liquor and wine by the State of Pennsylvania, which
has a pool or billiard table for which a fee is charged, $50 for pool or
billiard table.
B. Operating of music boxes and jukeboxes, an annual tax of $50 for each
music box or jukebox operated.
C. Operating of pinball machines, electronic or mechanical devices such
as PAC Man, Donkey Kong, etc., which are coin operated and used for
amusement, $150 for any said machine or device. This section shall also
apply to machines, devices, etc., operated by tokens.
D. Operating of electronic slot machines, electronic poker machines or like
mechanical or electronic devices which are coin operated and used for
amusement or gambling, $300 for any said machine or device. This
section shall also apply to machines, devices, etc,. operated by tokens.
E. If one machine or device is substituted for another during the course of
a calendar year, a fee or charge shall be made in the amount of $5 for
transfer of said license to a substitute machine.
F. Upon the exhibition by a circus within the Borough, $100 for each
performance.
A. The owner or operator of any such activities set forth in § 225-62 shall
secure a license for such operation within the Borough by application to
the Borough Secretary or other authorized officers before beginning
operation, and the operation of any such activity without such license
(which shall be posted in the place of business in a conspicuous part
thereof) is hereby declared to be illegal.
B. There shall be no license fee charged, but the annual tax hereby levied
shall be paid at the time such license is issued. Such license, if granted,
may be issued by the Secretary or other authorized officer for a full year
or a portion thereof, upon payment of the full annual tax, and the entire
tax shall be charged for a lesser period of operation.
C. The operation of any such activity within the Borough without first
securing such license and paying to the Borough Secretary or other
authorized officer the tax levied shall be considered a public nuisance
and shall be abated by the Borough as provided by law.
D. Whenever any person, firm or corporation has acquired a license for the
operation of any mechanical device for amusement, operated by the
depositing of coins or tokens therein in a specific location, and wishes
to replace the mechanical device by another, he may do so upon
application to the Borough Secretary for transfer of license to another
mechanical device to be operated in the same location. Upon the
granting of the transfer, the person, firm or corporation shall pay the
§ 225-62 TARENTUM CODE § 225-63
220:332
§ 225-64. Violations and penalties; enforcement.
sum as set forth from time to time by resolution of the Borough Council
for said transfer.
A. Any person violating the provisions of this article shall, upon summary
conviction before a District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine of $300
and the cost of prosecution and/or undergo imprisonment for not more
than 30 days in the county jail at discretion of the District Justice.
B. Further, the following sanctions shall be imposed upon anyone violating
any section of this article dealing with the licensing of machines:
(1) The privilege of operating any machines in this article shall be
revoked in the following manner upon summary conviction before a
District Justice: privileges denied for 30 days on first conviction,
privileges denied for 90 days upon second conviction, privileges
denied for six months upon third conviction, privileges of operating
any machines covered by this article (machines, devices, pool
tables, etc., covered in this article) shall be permanently denied
upon a fourth conviction.
(2) Upon conviction and the sanction of privilege being denied, the
machines must be removed upon the same day of conviction.
§ 225-63 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 225-64
220:333

ARTICLE IX
Tax Assessment Limitation Program
[Adopted 3-17-2003 by Ord. No. 03-3109 ]
§ 225-65. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACT 77 — The Act of December 22, 1993, Public Law 529, No. 77, codified
as the Allegheny Regional Asset District law, 16 P.S. § 6101-B et seq.
ALLEGHENY REGIONAL ASSET DISTRICT LAW — See the definition of
"Act 77" above.
ASSESSMENT — The fair market value of property as determined by the
Board of Property Assessment, Appeals and Review of Allegheny County.
DEPARTMENT OF PROPERTY ASSESSMENT — The Department of
Property Assessment, Appeals, Review and Registry of Allegheny County.
ELIGIBLE TAXPAYER — A longtime owner/occupant of a principal residence
in the Borough of Tarentum who is a single person aged 65 or older during
a calendar year in which county real property taxes are due and assessed;
or married persons if either spouse is 65 or older during a calendar year in
which the Borough of Tarentum real property taxes are due and assessed.
HOUSEHOLD INCOME — All income received by an eligible taxpayer while
residing in his or her principal residence during a calendar year.
INCOME — All income from whatever source derived, including but not
limited to, salaries, wages, bonuses, commissions, income from selfemployment,
alimony, support money, cash public assistance and relief, the
gross amount of any pensions or annuities including railroad retirement
benefits, all benefits received under the Federal Social Security Act (except
Medicare benefits), all benefits received under state unemployment
insurance laws and veterans' disability payments, all interest received from
the federal or any state government or any instrumentality or political
subdivision hereof, realized capital gains, rentals, workmens' compensation
and the gross amount of loss of time, insurance benefits, life insurance
benefits and proceeds (except the first $5,000 of the total of death benefit
payments), and gifts of cash or property (other than transfers by gift
between members of a household) in excess of a total value of $300,
but shall not include surplus food or other relief in kind supplied by a
governmental agency or property tax or rent rebate or inflation dividend.
LONGTIME OWNER/OCCUPANT — Any person who for at least 10
continuous years has owned or has occupied the same dwelling place as a
principal residence and domicile, or any person who for at least five years
has owned and occupied the same dwelling as a principal residence and
109. Editor's Note: This ordinance superseded former Art. IX, Tax Assessment Limitation
Program, adopted 12-12-1994 by Ord. No. 94-9.
§ 225-65 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 225-65
220:335
domicile if that person received assistance in the acquisition of the property
as part of a government or nonprofit housing program.
PERSON — A natural person.
PRINCIPAL RESIDENCE — The dwelling place of a person, including the
principal house and lot, and such lots as are used in connection therewith
which contribute to its enjoyment, comfort and convenience; or a building
with a maximum of one commercial establishment and a maximum of three
residential units of which one residential unit must be a principal residence
of the longtime owner/occupant.
SENIOR CITIZENS REBATE AND ASSISTANCE ACT — The Act of March
11, 1971, Public Law 104, No. 3, as amended, codified at 72 P.S. § 4751-1 et
seq.
§ 225-66. Tax rebate.
Eligible taxpayers shall be entitled to a tax rebate in the form of a total
annual credit of $20 for a taxable principal resident. The real estate tax
collector is hereby authorized and directed to issue such regulations, rules,
and guidelines to implement and afford such tax credit in coordination with
the Borough Manager and the Allegheny County Department of Property
Assessment.
§ 225-67. Participation in program.
§ 225-68. Rules and regulations.
The Department of Property Assessment and the Borough's Manager shall
have the authority to issue rules and regulations with respect to the
administration of the limitation of tax assessment program established
A. Any qualified person paying property taxes in the Borough of Tarentum
may apply to participate in the tax rebate program authorized under
this article. In order to be eligible to participate in the program, the
person must meet the following conditions:
(1) The person must be a single person aged 65 or older; or be married
persons with either spouse being 65 years of age or older.
(2) The person must be a longtime owner/occupant.
(3) The property owned by the person must be the principal residence
and domicile of the resident.
(4) The person's household income must qualify him or her to receive
any amount of property tax rebate under the Senior Citizens
Rebate and Assistance Act.
B. Determinations as to eligibility made by the Department of Property
Assessment shall be accepted by the Borough of Tarentum for the
purposes of administering this program of tax relief.
§ 225-65 TARENTUM CODE § 225-68
220:336
under this article. Such rules and regulations shall include, but not be
limited to, reasonable proof of household income, proof of residence, proof
of qualification for or receipt of a property tax rebate under the Senior
Citizens Rebate and Assistance Act and any other reasonable requirements
and conditions as may be necessary to operate the tax assessment limitation
program.
§ 225-69. Effective date.
This article shall enter into effect on January 1, 2003.
§ 225-68 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 225-69
220:337

ARTICLE X
Realty Transfer Tax
[Adopted 11-20-2006 by Ord. No. 06-08]
§ 225-70. Levy of tax.
Any tax imposed under this section shall be at the rate of 1/2 of 1% of the
fair market value of real estate.
§ 225-71. Administration.
The tax imposed under § 225-70 and all applicable interest and penalties
shall be administered, collected and enforced under the Act of December
31, 1965 (P.L. 1257, No. 511), as amended, known as "The Local Tax
Enabling Act,"110 provided that if the correct amount of the tax is not paid
by the last date prescribed for timely payment, the Borough, pursuant
to Section 1102-D of the Tax Reform Code of 1971 (72 P.S. § 8102-D),
authorizes and directs the Department of Revenue of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania to determine, collect and enforce the tax, interest and
penalties.
§ 225-72. Interest.
Any tax imposed under § 225-70 that is not paid by the date the tax is
due shall bear interest as prescribed for interest on delinquent municipal
claims under the Act of May 16, 1923 (P.L. 207, No. 153) (53 P.S. § 7101 et
seq.), as amended, known as "The Municipal Claims and Tax Liens Act." The
interest rate shall be the lessor of the interest rate imposed upon delinquent
commonwealth taxes as provided in Section 806 of the Act of April 9, 1929
(P.L. 343, No. 176) (72 P.S. § 806), as amended, known as "The Fiscal Code,"
or the maximum interest rate permitted under the Municipal Claims and Tax
Liens Act for tax claims.
§ 225-73. Repealer.
§ 225-74. Effective date.
The provisions of this article shall become effective on and be applicable
to any document made, executed, delivered, accepted or presented for
recording on or after October 5, 2005.
A. As of the effective date of this article, all ordinances and resolutions in
conflict are hereby repealed.
B. The repealed ordinances remain effective for documents that became
subject to tax prior to the effective date of this article.
110. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.
§ 225-70 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 225-74
220:339

ARTICLE XI
Local Economic Revitalization Tax Assistance (LERTA) Exemption
[Adopted 8-18-2008 by Ord. No. 08-05]
§ 225-75. Qualified zones under LERTA.
Certain designated zones of the Borough, as described in Exhibit A attached
hereto,111 qualify as deteriorated properties under the provisions of
LERTA.112
§ 225-76. Exemption granted.
The Borough hereby exempts property within the designated deteriorated
areas described in Exhibit A from real property taxes, as more fully set forth
in this article, based on the assessment attributable to new construction, as
limited or defined more completely in 72 P.S. § 4722 et seq.
§ 225-77. Amount of exemption.
A. The exemption granted shall be the following percentages of real
property tax upon the assessed valuation attributable to new
construction or renovation of an existing building according to the
following schedule:
Year Percentage of Real Property Tax
One 100%
Two 90%
Three 80%
Four 70%
Five 60%
Six 50%
Seven 40%
Eight 30%
Nine 20%
Ten 10%
B. The provisions hereof shall become effective on September 1, 2008, and
their terms shall continue in effect without annual reenactment for a
period of 10 years from the effective date and shall apply to any
building permitted for construction or renovation at any time during
that ten-year period.
111. Editor's Note: Exhibit A (LERTA) is included at the end of this chapter.
112. Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 4722, Local Economic Revitalization Tax Assistance Act.
§ 225-75 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 225-78
220:341
§ 225-78. Exception.
There is no exemption granted upon the assessed valuation attributable to
land.
§ 225-78 TARENTUM CODE § 225-78
220:342
Chapter 228
THEFT OF SERVICES
§ 228-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and cited as the "Theft of Services Ordinance."
§ 228-2. Intent and purpose.
It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to prohibit any person from
misappropriating certain services provided in the Borough.
§ 228-3. Legal basis.
This chapter is enacted pursuant to Pennsylvania Act 37 of 2014, as
amended.
§ 228-4. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
FACILITIES — Any apparatus used by a person in furnishing services to the
public, including but not limited to electric power lines and poles, wires,
cables, pipes, mains or other conductors or conduits used for the supplying
and/or transmission of such services to the public.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, corporation or other legal entity.
SERVICES — The furnishing to the public, by either a private or public
person, any of the following: water, steam, sanitary sewer, electricity, gas,
cable, radio, internet or television communications/transmissions or
telephone or telegraph communications/transmissions.
§ 228-5. Misappropriation of services.
It shall be unlawful for any person to appropriate for its own use any
services, without paying for said services such fees, costs, rates or charge
to the person furnishing such services.
§ 228-6. Utilizing facilities without consent.
It shall be unlawful for any person to utilize the facilities of a person
furnishing services to the public unless prior consent from the owner of
such facilities, or its authorized agent, has been obtained.
§ 228-7. Damaging or altering facilities.
It shall be unlawful for any person to damage, tamper with, connect to, or
otherwise alter any facilities of a person furnishing services to the public,
§ 225-78 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 228-7
220:343
unless prior consent from the owner of such facilities, or his authorized
agent, has been obtained.
§ 228-8. Unauthorized use of facilities.
It shall be unlawful for any person to damage, tamper with, connect to, or
otherwise alter any facilities of a person receiving services, unless prior
consent from the provider of such facilities, or his authorized agent, has
been obtained.
§ 228-9. Violations and penalties.
§ 228-10. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct
and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of
the remaining portions hereof.
§ 228-11. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect on the 30th day following adoption as required
by law.
Chapter 231
TRAINS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 216. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 250.
§ 231-1. Speed limits; violations and penalties.
On and after the passage of this chapter it shall not be lawful for any
person or persons, individuals or corporations, its agents or employees
to use, operate, drive, run or cause to be used, operated, driven or run
any locomotive or railroad train upon any railroad within the limits of the
Borough of Tarentum at a speed greater than one mile in six minutes; or to
use, operate, drive, run or cause to be used, operated, driven or run upon
the street railway within the limits of the Borough of Tarentum any street
A. Any person who violates any section of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment for not more than 90 days or
a fine of not more than $1,000 or both in the discretion of the court.
B. Each and every day on which a violation of this chapter continues shall
constitute a distinct and separately punishable violation.
§ 228-7 TARENTUM CODE § 231-1
231:344
car at a speed greater than one mile in six minutes; or to use, operate, drive
or run or cause to be used, operated, driven or run upon any of the streets
of said borough any automobiles or other mechanically propelled vehicle of
any kind at a speed greater than one mile in six minutes.
§ 231-2. Obstructions of streets and crossings; violations and
penalties.
A. If any engineer, conductor, motorman, driver, chauffeur or operator or
other agent of such person, persons, individuals, or corporations, or the
owner thereof, or any other person then in possession of or operating
said locomotive, railroad train, street car or other vehicle, as aforesaid,
shall use, operate, drive, run or cause to be used, operated, driven or
run this said locomotive, railroad train, street car or other vehicle, as
aforesaid, at a speed greater than that limit in this chapter, he or they,
upon conviction thereof, before the Mayor of said borough, be subject
to a penalty of $10 for the first offense and $25 for the second offense,
for each and every offense, and in the event of said persons being
unable to pay the penalty, he shall be committed to the borough lockup
for a period of not less than three days nor more than 30 days, at the
discretion of the Borough of Tarentum Mayor or committing District
Justice.
B. If any user, chauffeur, operator or driver of any automobile or other
mechanically propelled vehicle shall use, operate, drive or run or cause
to be used, operated, driven or run any automobile or other vehicle, as
aforesaid, at a speed greater than that limited by the terms of this
chapter, he shall, upon conviction thereof before the District Justice, be
subject to a penalty or fine of not less than $10 nor more than $25, to be
collected by summary conviction before said District Justice as like
fines and penalties are now by the law collectible or, in case of
nonpayment of the fine within 48 hours, to undergo imprisonment in the
county jail for a period of not exceeding 10 days.
A. It shall not be lawful for any person, persons, individuals or corporation
to block the passage of any public street or highway in the Borough of
Tarentum or to obstruct said crossings with their locomotives or cars
except as hereinafter provided, and if any engineer, conductor,
motorman, driver, user or operator of said locomotive or car or other
persons or agent of any such persons, person, individual or corporation
shall obstruct on block said crossings, he or they shall be subject to a
penalty of $10 for each and every offense, to be to be recovered by due
process of law.
B. In the event of said engineer, conductor, motorman, driver, operator or
other person or agent of said person, persons, individual or corporation
being unable to pay said penalty, then and in this case, said person,
persons, individuals or corporations employing the engineer, conductor,
motorman, driver, operator or other agent shall pay the penalty as
aforesaid; and in case of default of payment of said penalty, said
engineer, motorman, conductor, driver, operator or other agent or the
§ 231-1 TRAINS § 231-2
231:345
Chapter 239
(RESERVED)
Chapter 246
VEHICLES, ABANDONED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 190.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 216.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 250.
§ 246-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABANDONED VEHICLE —
§ 246-2. Declaration of nuisance.
The parking, standing or storage of abandoned or junked vehicles on public
or private property within the municipal limits of the Borough of Tarentum
is hereby declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited.
person so employing them shall be committed to the borough lockup or
county jail for a period of not less than five days, nor more than 30 days,
at the discretion of the committing District Justice; provided, however,
that at the crossing at Lock Street in said borough, when the length of
passenger train makes it necessary, said street may be blocked by such
passenger trains for the purpose of loading and unloading passengers
at the Tarentum station.
A. Any vehicle which is parked or permitted to stand on any public street
or alley for a continuous period exceeding 48 hours unattended and not
bearing one of the following: a valid registration plate, a certificate of
inspection and an ascertainable vehicle identification number; and
B. Any vehicle which shall stand or be parked on a public street or alley for
a period of 48 hours without the consent of the owner or person in
control.
JUNKED AUTOMOBILE — Any vehicle which has no valid registration
or certificate of inspection and has been stripped or partially
disassembled so that it is inoperable or immovable and is parked or
permitted to stand on a public street or alley for 48 hours and on private
property for a continuous period in excess of 30 days.
§ 231-2 TARENTUM CODE § 246-3
239:346
§ 246-3. Parking or storing of abandoned vehicles.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons, firm, company, partnership
or corporation, whether by principle or agent, to park, store or permit to be
parked or stored any abandoned vehicle on the public streets or alleys of
the Borough of Tarentum.
§ 246-4. Parking or storing of junked vehicles.
It shall unlawful for any person or persons, firm, company, partnership or
corporation, whether by principle or agent, to park, store or permit to be
parked or stored any junked vehicle on public or private property within the
Borough of Tarentum.
§ 246-5. Investigation of complaint; notice of violation.
It shall be the duty of the Tarentum Police Department, upon the presence
of abandoned or junked vehicles within the borough, to investigate said
vehicles. If the investigation reveals the presence of vehicles in violation
of this chapter, the officer shall immediately transmit written notice to the
owner in person or by registered mail. Such written notice shall contain a
description of the vehicle, its location, notice of violation of this chapter and
directions to remove the vehicle from on the street or on private property
within 10 days.
§ 246-6. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 250
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parking Authority — See Ch. 8, Art. I.
Mobile homes — See Ch. 159.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 180.
Signs — See Ch. 207.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 216.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 246.
A. Any person or persons, firm, company, partnership or corporation
violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction
before the District Justice, pay a fine of not more than $600 for each
offense and cost of prosecution and, upon default in payment thereof,
shall be imprisoned in the county jail for a period of not to exceed 30
days.
B. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist after notice in writing
shall have been served shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 246-3 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 246-6
246:347

ARTICLE I
Repair of Vehicles
[Adopted 5-17-1971 by Ord. No. 2000]
§ 250-1. Prohibited acts; exceptions.
From and after the enactment of this article, it shall be unlawful for any
person, firm or corporation to repair a motor vehicle while the same is
parked on the streets of the Borough; provided, however, that this article
does not apply to the changing of a tire or doing some work on the motor
vehicle so that the same may be moved to a place for repair.
§ 250-2. Deposit of substances on streets prohibited.
From and after the enactment of this article, it shall be unlawful for any
person, firm or corporation to permit to be deposited any antifreeze,
gasoline, grease or oil on the streets of the Borough either in connection
with the moving of the motor vehicle or otherwise.
§ 250-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-27-1999 by Ord. No.
99-2]
Any person or persons or firm or corporation violating the provisions of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof before the District Justice, be fined a
sum not exceeding $600 and, upon default in payment of said fine, may be
committed to imprisonment in the Allegheny County Jail for a period not
exceeding 30 days.
§ 250-1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-3
246:349

ARTICLE II
Tow-Away Zones
[Adopted 5-5-1981 by Ord. No. 81-5]
§ 250-4. Designation of zones.
The Council of the Borough of Tarentum is hereby authorized and
empowered to designate tow-away zones within the Borough of Tarentum,
for the purpose of removing illegally parked vehicles.
§ 250-5. Signage and pavement markings.
Said tow-away zones shall be designated by signs or, where appropriate,
yellow curblines, informing those who park their vehicles in the Borough of
Tarentum that illegally parking in the aforementioned tow-away zones will
lead to the removal of said vehicles.
§ 250-6. Zones established by resolution.
The tow-away zones shall be established by resolution or resolutions
adopted by the Council of the Borough of Tarentum, establishing such zones
on an ad hoc basis, as the need for those zones arise.
§ 250-7. Designated areas. [Added 10-8-1994 by Ord. No. 94-4;
amended 4-21-2008 by Ord. No. 08-03]
The Council of the Borough of Tarentum does hereby designate the
following areas within the Borough of Tarentum as tow-away zones:
§ 250-8. Additional zones. [Added 10-8-1994 by Ord. No. 84-4;
amended 4-21-2008 by Ord. No. 08-03113]
The Council of the Borough of Tarentum does hereby reserve the right to
designate additional tow-away zones and change or alter existing zones, as
the need for such zones arises.
A. Corbet Street, west and east sides, from Fourth Avenue to Fifth Avenue.
B. Gummert Alley, from Henry Street to South Ormond Street; and
C. All emergency areas, specifically, but not limited to, the following:
(1) All areas in front of and immediately adjacent to fire company and
ambulance facilities; and
(2) All areas in front of and immediately adjacent to the Professional
Center on Fourth Avenue.
D. Section 250-25 et seq. of the Code of the Borough of Tarentum.
113. Editor's Note: This ordinance also specifically repealed Ord. No. 84-4 and Res. No. 81-11.
§ 250-4 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-9
246:351
§ 250-9. Removal and impoundment of vehicles. [Added 10-8-1994
by Ord. No. 84-4; amended 4-21-2008 by Ord. No. 08-03]
The Chief of Police, or his designated representative or representatives,
is hereby authorized to remove and impound or to order the removal and
impounding of any vehicle parked in violation of the tow-away zones, as
established in this article.
§ 250-10. Approved towing and storage facility. [Added 10-8-1994
by Ord. No. 84-4; amended 4-21-2008 by Ord. No. 08-03]
The following is hereby designated as the only approved facility for the
towing and storage of such impounded vehicles:
Terry's Service
962 Ninth Avenue
Brackenridge, Pennsylvania 15014
and
151 West Fourth Avenue
Tarentum, Pennsylvania 15084
§ 250-11. Liability insurance. [Added 10-8-1994 by Ord. No. 84-4;
amended 4-21-2008 by Ord. No. 08-03]
The above-named facility shall provide a liability insurance policy in the
amount of $500,000, a copy of which is to be filed with the Borough
Manager, for the purpose of indemnifying the owner of any such impounded
vehicle against any loss thereof or injury or damage thereto while in the
custody of said facilities.
§ 250-12. Charges for towing and storage. [Added 10-8-1994 by
Ord. No. 84-4; amended 4-21-2008 by Ord. No. 08-03]
The Council of the Borough of Tarentum shall from time to time fix and
establish charges due and payable from the owner or owners of impounded
vehicles for towing and storage. Such impounded vehicle shall not be
released from the control of the storage facility until payment of the above
charges has been made in full. Said payment is to be made at the Tarentum
Borough Building desk during normal business hours. The check is to be
made payable to the Borough of Tarentum.
§ 250-13. Notification of owner. [Added 10-8-1994 by Ord. No. 84-4;
amended 4-21-2008 by Ord. No. 08-03]
Within 12 hours from the time of removal of any vehicle under authority
granted by this article, the Chief of Police, or his designated representative,
shall notify by telephone the owner of record of said vehicle that said
vehicle has been impounded. Such notice shall designate the place from
§ 250-9 TARENTUM CODE § 250-13
246:352
which said vehicle was removed, the time it was removed, the reason for its
removal and impounding and the facility where said vehicle is being stored.
A written notice, setting forth the information above, shall be forwarded,
by certified mail, by the Chief of Police, or his designated representative,
within 24 hours of said removal, to the owner of record of said vehicle.
§ 250-14. Record of impounded vehicles. [Added 10-8-1994 by Ord.
No. 84-4; amended 4-21-2008 by Ord. No. 08-03]
The Chief of Police shall keep a record of all vehicles impounded.
§ 250-15. Liability of vehicle owners. [Added 10-8-1994 by Ord. No.
84-4; amended 4-21-2008 by Ord. No. 08-03]
The payment of towing and storage charges shall not relieve the owner
or operator of any vehicle from liability for any fine or penalty for the
violation of any law or ordinance, the violation of which caused removal and
impounding.
§ 250-13 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-15
246:353

ARTICLE III
Traffic and Parking Regulations
[Adopted 9-8-1986 by Ord. No. 86-5]
§ 250-16. Definitions and interpretations.
Words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in the Vehicle Code of Pennsylvania, as now in force, or as
hereafter amended, enacted or reenacted, except in those instances where
the context clearly indicates a different meaning. The singular shall include
the plural, and the masculine shall include the feminine.
§ 250-17. Special powers of the Mayor.
§ 250-18. Traffic signals at certain intersections.
At the following intersections, official traffic signals shall be erected (and, if
already erected, are hereby ratified), and traffic at such intersections may
be directed by such signals as follows:
Intersection
East Sixth Avenue and Ross Street
East Seventh Avenue and Mill Street
East Seventh Avenue and Ross Street
West Seventh Avenue and Center Street
West Seventh Avenue and Grantham Street
West Seventh Avenue and Western Street
East Tenth Avenue and Corbet Street
A. The Mayor shall have the following powers to regulate traffic and
parking temporarily and in times of emergencies outlined as follows:
(1) In the case of fire, flood, storm or other emergency, to establish
temporary traffic and parking regulations.
(2) In the case of emergency or in order to facilitate public works or in
order to facilitate the conduct of processions and public events, to
restrict or prohibit parking or traffic in limited areas for periods
until said emergency abates or the public work is completed.
B. Such temporary and emergency regulations shall be enforced by the
Mayor and the police of the Borough in the same manner as permanent
regulations. Any person who shall operate a vehicle in violation of any
such regulations shall be liable to the penalty set forth in the law for
such violation and, in case of any violation for which no specific penalty
is set forth in the law, to a fine of not more than $50 and, in default of
payment of such fine and cost of prosecution, to imprisonment in the
county jail for not more than 10 days.
§ 250-16 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-18
246:355
Intersection
East Tenth Avenue and Ross Street
§ 250-19. Authority of police officers.
The police officers of the Borough are hereby given authority to direct
traffic on the streets and highways of the Borough and at intersections
thereof.
§ 250-20. One-way streets established.
The following are established as one-way streets:
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Limits
Third Avenue West From Allegheny Street to Corbet
Street
Third Avenue West From Bridge Street to Allegheny
Street
Fourth Avenue East From Lock Street to Allegheny
Street
Fifth Avenue West From Allegheny Street to Bridge
Street
Fifth Avenue West From Corbet Street to Lock Street
West Sixth Avenue East From Route 28 to Grantham
Street Railroad Crossing
East Eighth Avenue East From Ross Street to Ormond
Street
West Eighth Avenue East From Grantham Street to East
Street
East Ninth Avenue West From Ormond Street to Ross
Street
West Ninth Avenue West From East Street to Grantham
Street
Adam Street [Added
3-28-1998 by Ord.
No. 88-1]
North From Second Avenue to First
Avenue, with entrance from First
Avenue only
East Street North From West Seventh Avenue to
West Ninth Avenue
Conroy Way West From East Street to Grantham
Street
Grantham Street South From West Eleventh Street to
Britton Alley
§ 250-18 TARENTUM CODE § 250-20
246:356
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Limits
Heuser Way West From East Street to Western
Street
McKee Street South From Fourth Avenue to Second
Avenue
§ 250-21. Speed limits.
§ 250-22. Stop intersections established.
The following intersections located in the Borough are hereby declared
to be stop intersections, and official stop signs shall be erected (or are
hereby confirmed if heretofore erected) in such a position as to face traffic
approaching in the direction or directions hereby indicated. All vehicles
approaching the intersection from the direction or directions hereby
indicated in each case shall come to a full stop, within a reasonable
distance, before entering said intersection.
Stop intersection Direction
First Avenue and Allegheny Street
[Amended 5-17-2004 by Ord. No.
04-04; 8-17-2009 by Ord. No.
09-05]
South, east and west
First Avenue and Bridge Street East and west
First Avenue and Bridge Street
[Added 1-23-1989 by Ord. No.
89-3]
South
First Avenue and Corbet Street East and west
First Avenue and Corbet Street
[Added 1-23-1989 by Ord. No.
89-3]
South
First Avenue and Lock Street
[Added 8-17-2009 by Ord. No.
09-05]
East and west
First Avenue and Ross Street
[Added 1-23-1989 by Ord. No.
89-3]
North from Marina
A. Except as otherwise provided within this section, a speed limit of 25
miles per hour is hereby established on all streets within the boundaries
of the Borough of Tarentum.
B. Exceptions.
(1) The speed limit on East Ninth Avenue between Corbet Street and
Ross Street shall be 15 miles per hour.
§ 250-20 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-22
246:357
Stop intersection Direction
First Avenue and Ross Street South
First Avenue and Ross Street
[Added 3-11-1991 by Ord. No.
91-4]
West on First Avenue
First Avenue and Wood Street South
Second Avenue and Adams Street South and north
Second Avenue and Allegheny Street
[Amended 7-12-1989 by Ord. No.
89-5]
East and west and north and south
Second Avenue and Boyd Street North and south
Second Avenue and Bridge Street East and west and north and south
Second Avenue and Corbet Street
[Amended 12-9-1996 by Ord. No.
96-9]
East and west on Second Avenue
Second Avenue and Lock Street North and south and east and west
Second Avenue and Main Street North and south and east and west
Second Avenue and McKee Street North and south
Second Avenue and Ross Street West
Second Avenue and Wood Street North and south and east and west
Second Avenue and Worth Street North and south
Third Avenue and Allegheny Street West
Third Avenue and Bridge Street West
Third Avenue and Corbet Street
[Amended 3-11-1996 by Ord. No.
96-5]
East, west and north
Third Avenue and Lock Street West
Third Avenue and Main Street West, north and south
Third Avenue and McKee Street South
Third Avenue and Worth Street North and south
Fourth Avenue and Allegheny Street East
Fourth Avenue and Corbet Street North, south and east
Fourth Avenue and Lock Street East and north
Fourth Avenue and Ross Street East and west
Fourth Avenue and Ross Street
[Added 3-11-1981 by Ord. No.
91-4]
North and south on Ross Street
Fourth Avenue and Wood Street East and west and north and south
§ 250-22 TARENTUM CODE § 250-22
246:358
Stop intersection Direction
West Fourth Avenue and Center
Street
East
Fifth Avenue and Main Street
[Added 8-14-1995 by Ord. No.
95-6]
East on Fifth Avenue
East Sixth Avenue and Bridge Street East and west
East Sixth Avenue and Corbet Street South, west and east
East Sixth Avenue and Henry Street South, west and east
East Sixth Avenue and Lock Street
[Amended 9-16-2013 by Ord. No.
13-05]
East, west and south
East Sixth Avenue and Wood Street South
West Sixth Avenue and Center
Street
East and west
West Sixth Avenue and Grantham
Street
East, west and south
West Sixth Avenue and Western
Street
East and west
East Seventh Avenue and Corbet
Street
East and west
East Seventh Avenue and Henry
Street [Added 9-9-1996 by Ord.
No. 96-8]
East and west on East Seventh
Avenue
East Seventh Avenue and Henry
Street
North
East Seventh Avenue and Lock
Street
East and west
East Seventh Avenue and Wood
Street
North and south and east and west
West Seventh Avenue and East
Street
North
East Eighth Avenue and Corbet
Street
East
East Eighth Avenue and Lock Street East
East Eighth Avenue and Ormond
Street
East
West Eighth Avenue and Center
Street
East
West Eighth Avenue and Grantham
Street
East
§ 250-22 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-22
246:359
Stop intersection Direction
West Eighth Avenue and Western
Street
East
East Ninth Avenue and Corbet
Street
West
East Ninth Avenue and Dicky Street North and south
East Ninth Avenue and Lock Street West
East Ninth Avenue and Ormond
Street
West, north and south
East Ninth Avenue and Ross Street East and west
West Ninth Avenue and Center
Street
West
West Ninth Avenue and Grantham
Street
East and west
West Ninth Avenue and Western
Street
West
East Tenth Avenue and Creek Street North
East Tenth Avenue and Dickey
Street
North
East Tenth Avenue and Garfield
Street
North and south
East Tenth Avenue and Lawton
Street
North and south
East Tenth Avenue and Lock Street North
East Tenth Avenue and Mill Street
[Amended 6-19-2007 by Ord. No.
07-07]
North and south and east and west
East Tenth Avenue and Ormond
Street
North
East Tenth Avenue and Porter Street North
East Tenth Avenue and Summit
Street
North and south
East Tenth Avenue and Wills Alley North
West Tenth Avenue and Center
Street
East and west
West Tenth Avenue and East Street East
West Tenth Avenue and Grantham
Street
East and west
West Tenth Avenue and Western
Street
East and west
§ 250-22 TARENTUM CODE § 250-22
246:360
Stop intersection Direction
East Eleventh Avenue and
Constitution Drive [Added
11-12-1991 by Ord. No. 91-8]
South on Constitution Drive
East Eleventh Avenue and Garfield
Street [Added 3-11-1991 by Ord.
No. 91-4]
North on Garfield Street
East Eleventh Avenue and Highland
Street [Added 1-24-2001 by Ord.
No. 01-1]
East
East Eleventh Street and Park Street
[Added 3-11-1991 by Ord. No.
91-4]
South on Park Street
West Eleventh Avenue and Western
Street [Added 9-25-1989 by Ord.
No. 89-6]
West
Cedar Alley and East Tenth Avenue
for traffic attempting to enter East
Tenth Avenue [Added 1-24-2001
by Ord. No. 01-1]
South
Chestnut Alley and Cedar Alley
[Added 1-24-2001 by Ord. No.
01-1]
East
Conroy Way and Center Street West
Conroy Way and Grantham Street West
Conroy Way and Western Street West
Constitution Drive and Hedge Alley
[Added 3-11-1991 by Ord. No.
91-4]
West on Hedge Alley
East Street and Bakerstown Road_ South
Grantham Street and P.R.R. North
Hedge Alley and Highland Street
[Added 1-24-2001 by Ord. No.
01-1]
East and west
Hedge Alley and Park Street [Added
1-24-2001 by Ord. No. 01-1]
East and west
Highland Street and Chestnut Alley
[Added 1-24-2001 by Ord. No.
01-1]
South
Lawton Street and East Eleventh
Avenue [Added 1-24-2001 by Ord.
No. 01-1]
North
§ 250-22 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-22
246:361
Stop intersection Direction
Oak Alley and Fentzel Alley [Added
3-17-2008 by Ord. No. 08-01]
West on Oak Alley
Oak Alley and Ormond Street
[Added 3-17-2008 by Ord. No.
08-01]
East on Oak Alley
Ormond Street and Roup Street
[Added 9-9-1996 by Ord. No.
96-8]
North and south on Roup Street
Roup Avenue and Wills Alley
[Added 8-8-1994 by Ord. No.
94-2]
North on Wills Alley
Roup Avenue and Wills Alley
[Added 8-8-1994 by Ord. No.
94-2]
South on Wills Alley
Roup Avenue and Summit Street
[Added 8-8-1994 by Ord. No.
94-2]
North on Summit Street
Roup Avenue and Summit Street
[Added 8-8-1994 by Ord. No.
94-2]
South on Summit Street
Roup Avenue and Fentzel Alley
[Added 8-8-1994 by Ord. No.
94-2]
North on Fentzel Alley
Roup Avenue and Fentzel Alley
[Added 8-8-1994 by Ord. No.
94-2]
South on Fentzel Alley
Station Drive and Lock Street West
The ramp coming down from the
Tarentum Bridge (also know as the
"Stuart Bridge") where it becomes
First Avenue and Ross Street
[Added 12-14-1987 by Ord. No.
87-10]
East
Western Street and Heuser Way West
§ 250-22.1. Prohibited turns. [Added 1-21-2013 by Ord. No. 13-02]
§ 250-23. Parking without lights authorized.
The boundary limits of the Borough of Tarentum are hereby established as
a zone in which motor vehicles may remain standing without lights, and
A. A left turn going north from Lock Street onto East Tenth Avenue is
prohibited.
§ 250-22 TARENTUM CODE § 250-23
246:362
all streets and alleys within such boundary limits are hereby designated as
streets where motor vehicles may remain standing without lights.
§ 250-24. Vehicles to park within marked spaces.
Wherever a space shall be marked off on any street or alley for the parking
of an individual vehicle, every vehicle there parked shall be parked within
the lines bounding such space.
§ 250-25. Parking prohibited at all times.
A. Parking shall be prohibited at all times in the following locations:
Name of Street Side Location
First Avenue South From Ross Street to the easterly
Borough line
Second Avenue
[Added 3-17-2008
by Ord. No. 08-01]
South From Bridge Street to the
Brackenridge Borough line
Third Avenue South From Bridge Street to Allegheny
Street
Third Avenue South From Corbet Street to Lock Street
East Fourth Avenue South From Corbet Street to North Street
West Fourth Avenue South From Ross Street to Center Street
East Fifth Avenue North From Allegheny Street to Bridge
Street
East Fifth Avenue North From Boyd Street to Ross Street
Adams Street East From Fourth Avenue to First
Avenue
Allegheny Street East From Second Avenue to Fourth
Avenue
Butler Street West From East Tenth Avenue to East
Ninth Avenue
Center Street East From West Sixth Avenue to West
Seventh Avenue
Corbet Street Both From Fourth Avenue to East Ninth
Avenue
Dickey Street East From Eighth Avenue to Tenth
Avenue
Hickory Alley West From Second Avenue to Fifth
Avenue
Lawton Street East From Eighth Avenue to Eleventh
Avenue
§ 250-23 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-25
246:363
§ 250-26. Parking prohibited certain hours. [Added 8-13-1990 by
Ord. No. 90-3; amended 7-13-1992 by Ord. No. 92-4]
Name of Street Side Location
Lock Street Both From Fourth Avenue to Fifth
Avenue
Lock Street East From First Avenue to Eleventh
Avenue
Mill Street West From West Seventh Avenue to
bridge over Bull Creek
Plum Alley Both From Second Avenue to Fourth
Avenue
Porter Street East From Eighth Avenue to Ninth
Avenue
Porter Street West From Ninth Avenue to Tenth
Avenue
Ross Street West From First Avenue to Fifth Avenue
School Alley [Added
1-23-1989 by Ord.
No. 89-3]
South 200 Block, to establish a fire lane
for emergency vehicles of all
natures
Walnut Street Both From Third Avenue to Fourth
Avenue
Wood Street Both From First Avenue to Harbor Line
of the Allegheny River
B. All parking is prohibited on streets moving in a north/south direction
between East Sixth Avenue and East Ninth Avenue in the First Ward of
the Borough and north of West Seventh Avenue in the Third Ward,
except parking is allowed on Grantham Street, Western Street and
Center Street.114
A. It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any vehicle to park
such vehicle for more than two hours at any one time upon the portion
of streets where parking is permitted by this article, designated as
follow:
114. Editor's Note: Original Section IV of Ord. No. 86-5, Penalty for Violation, which
immediately followed this section, was deleted 12-27-1999 by Ord. No. 99-2 (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I). For current penalty provisions, see § 250-29.
§ 250-25 TARENTUM CODE § 250-26
246:364
§ 250-26.1. Parking prohibited for street sweeping. [Added
6-1-1998 by Ord. No. 98-4]
Name of Street Side Days/Times Location
Third Avenue 2 hours; 8:00
a.m.to 8:00
p.m./Mon.-Sun.,
except legal
holidays
From Corbet
Street to Lock
Street
Fourth Avenue
[Amended
3-17-2008 by
Ord. No.
08-01]
2 hours; 8:00
a.m. to 8:00
p.m./Mon.-Sun.,
except legal
holidays
From the east
end of the
Borough parking
lot at Fourth
Avenue to Boyd
Street
Fifth Avenue 2 hours; 8:00
a.m. to 8:00
p.m./Mon.-Sun.,
except legal
holidays
From Corbet
Street to Wood
Street
Sixth Avenue 2 hours; 8:00
a.m. to 8:00
p.m./Mon.-Sun.,
except legal
holidays
From 125 feet
east of Corbet
Street to Ross
Street
West Seventh Street [Repealed 3-17-2008 by Ord. No. 08-01]
East Eighth Avenue [Repealed 3-17-2008 by Ord. No. 08-01]
Corbet Street 2 hours; 8:00
a.m. to 8:00
p.m./Mon.-Sun.,
except legal
holidays
From Second
Avenue to Fifth
Avenue
Wood Street 2 hours; 8:00
a.m. to 8:00
p.m./Mon.-Sun.,
except legal
holidays
From Fourth
Avenue to Fifth
Avenue
B. It shall be unlawful for any owner or operator of any vehicle to park
such vehicle on any one city block in the above-designated two-hour
parking limitation zones for more than four hours per day.115
115. Editor's Note: Section V, Penalty for Violation, of Ord. No. 90-3, which immediately
followed this section, was deleted 12-27-1999 by Ord. No. 99-2 (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I). For current penalty provisions, see § 250-29.
§ 250-26 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-26.1
246:365
§ 250-27. Time limit parking. [Added 5-14-1993 by Ord. No. 93-6;
amended 11-15-1994 by Ord. No. 94-4]
A. The following areas are designated as no parking areas for the purpose
of street sweeping on the days and during the hours indicated:
Name of Street Side Times/Days Location
West Seventh
Street
North 5:00 a.m. to 7:00
a.m./ first and third
Tuesday of each
month
From Center Street
to the East Deer
Township line
West Seventh
Street
South 5:00 a.m. to 7:00
a.m./ first and third
Wednesday of each
month
From Center Street
to the East Deer
Township line
B. The fine for violating Subsection A shall be $10 for each violation
thereof.
A. A fifteen-minute parking sign shall be installed in front of 208 West
Seventh Avenue.
B. A parking space reserved for MAC machine customers shall be placed
in front of 306 East Sixth Avenue reserved for MAC machine customers.
C. A fifteen-minute parking sign shall be installed in front of 208 West
Seventh Avenue.
D. The first three parking spaces on the westbound lane of East Sixth
Avenue from Corbet Street shall be marked and reserved for fifteenminute
parking.
E. A parking space shall be reserved for MAC machine customers and a
sign placed designating such on the westbound lane at 306 East Sixth
Avenue on the west side of the pedestrian crosswalk.116
F. A "No Parking/Loading" sign shall be installed directly behind the
Salvation Army building in Rose Alley. [Added 6-1-1998 by Ord. No.
98-5]
G. A ten-minute parking zone shall be created on the 1000 block and 900
of Lock Street, west side, direction downhill, between 8:00 a.m. and
9:00 a.m. and between 3:00 p.m. and 4:00 p.m. during the school year,
while school is in session, excluding school vacations and weekends.
[Added 1-29-2001 by Ord. No. 01-1]
116. Editor's Note: Original Section V, Penalty for Violation, of Ord. No. 94-4, which
immediately followed this section, was deleted 12-27-1999 by Ord. No. 99-2 (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I). For current penalty provisions, see § 250-29.
§ 250-26.1 TARENTUM CODE § 250-27
246:366
§ 250-27.1. Metered parking; other parking regulations. [Added
12-21-1998 by Ord. No. 98-7]
H. Parking shall be limited to 15 minutes from the crosswalk at First
National Bank on the north side of East Sixth Avenue to Lock Street.
[Added 3-17-2008 by Ord. No. 08-01]
I. Parking shall be limited to 30 minutes on both sides of Fifth Avenue
from Lock Street to 209 Fifth Avenue. [Added 3-17-2008 by Ord. No.
08-01]
A. It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any vehicle to park
such a vehicle between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m., Monday
through Sunday, excepting legal holidays, at any metered parking place
within the Borough of Tarentum without properly paying for the time on
the meter.
B. The fine for violating Subsection A, for not operating the meter or
continuing to park after the time rented has expired, shall be $25;
excepting, however: [Amended 5-15-2006 by Ord. No. 06-01]
(1) The fine shall be discounted to $5 if paid within 24 hours.
(2) The fine shall be discounted to $10 after 24 hours and before 30
days has lapsed. The Borough Police or appropriate designated
person shall be authorized to issue a violation citation up to six
times per day, or every two hours of violation.
C. It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any vehicle to park a
vehicle or allow his or her vehicle to be parked in the following
manners:
(1) In a restricted area.
(2) Near a fire plug.
(3) In a handicapped zone without authorization.
(4) Parking out of stall.
(5) In a bus stop.
(6) Against traffic.
(7) Beyond a two-hour time limit on designated on-street parking.
(8) Too near a corner.
(9) Too far from a curb.
(10) On the sidewalk.
(11) In a ten-minute zone.
(12) On a yellow line.
§ 250-27 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-27.1
246:367
§ 250-27.2. Reserving spaces. [Added 5-18-2015 by Ord. No. 15-03]
It is hereby declared to be unlawful for any person to place or cause to be
placed any item, whatsoever, for the purpose of reserving parking spaces on
any street in the Borough.
§ 250-28. Vehicle weight limits. [Amended 12-27-1999 by Ord. No.
99-2]
No person shall drive any vehicle having a gross weight in excess of that
prescribed below upon any of the streets or bridges or portions thereof
listed below:
Name of Street or
Bridge
Maximum
Gross Weight Location
Davidson Street
Bridge (also known
as "Mill Street
Bridge")
10 tons Entire length of bridge
East Seventh Street 2,200 pounds From Corbet Street to South Ormond
Street
East Street 2,200 pounds From West Tenth Avenue to West
Ninth Avenue
Plum Alley 2,200 pounds Entering from First Avenue, going
either forward or backward
§ 250-28.1. Prohibition of trailer parking within Borough limits.
[Added 2-17-2003 by Ord. No. 03-2]
(13) In front of a driveway or garage.
D. The fine for violating Subsection C shall be in the amount of $25;
excepting however, the fine shall be reduced to the amount of $10 if
paid within 30 days of the violation. [Amended 5-15-2006 by Ord.
No. 06-01]
E. Fines are cumulative, meaning violators will be subject to additional
fines and costs for every additional two-hour violation of this section.
A. It shall be unlawful for owners or operators, or anyone who has custody
or control over a trailer whether registered or unregistered, licensed or
unlicensed, designed to go over highways pulled behind a tractor, or
truck to park, other than to immediately unload or load, any
unmotorized trailer on any public street, parking lot, alleyway, or
cartway within the Borough of Tarentum.
B. The Tarentum Police are authorized to have towed any aforesaid
described trailer in violation of Subsection A.
§ 250-27.1 TARENTUM CODE § 250-28.1
246:368
§ 250-28.2. Limitation on parking of motorhomes, minihomes or
buses. [Added 2-17-2003 by Ord. No. 03-2]
§ 250-28.3. Parking in handicapped spaces. [Added 2-17-2003 by
Ord. No. 03-2]
§ 250-29. Violations and penalties. [Added 12-27-1999 by Ord. No.
99-2]
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by the Pennsylvania Motor
Vehicle Code (75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.), or except as herein specified,
every person convicted of a violation of provision of this article or any
supplement thereto shall be liable to a penalty of up to $50 and costs of
prosecution.
C. The fine for any person convicted of violation of Subsection A of this
section shall be liable to a penalty of $50 and costs of prosecution.
A. It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator or any other person in
custody or control of any motorhome, minihome, or bus other than a
Highlands Area school bus, or municipal bus to park in any space, on
any public street, parking lot, alleyway or cartway which would take the
space of more than one automobile parking area.
B. The owner, person in custody, care, or control of aforesaid motorhome,
minihome or bus, who violates Subsection A will be liable to a penalty of
$50 and costs of prosecution.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to park in the handicapped space
without proper state tags.
B. Any person violating Subsection A will be liable to a penalty of $100 and
costs of prosecution.
§ 250-28.1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-29
246:369

ARTICLE IV
Residential Parking Districts
[Adopted 7-13-1992 by Ord. No. 92-6]
§ 250-30. Findings.
§ 250-31. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, words and terms listed in this section, as
follows, shall have the following meanings:
COMMUTER VEHICLE — A motor vehicle parked in a residential area by a
person not a resident of that residential area.
PROPRIETOR — A person who owns or leases real estate within a
residential area of which he is not a resident, but who owns or manages
a business enterprise or professional office maintained at that address; for
the purpose of this section, a proprietor shall be entitled to one parking
permit for that business or professional office address.
RESIDENT — A person who owns or leases real property within a
residential area and who maintains either a voting residence or bona fide
occupancy, or both, at that address.
§ 250-32. Eligibility.
A. The Council finds that:
(1) Certain residential areas in the Borough are subjected to commuter
vehicle parkings, therefore depriving the residents of those areas
of spaces in which to park their own vehicles;
(2) Those residential streets are also subjected to a high degree of
commuter traffic which substantially reduces the quality of the
ambient air level; and
(3) The establishment of a parking permit program for certain affected
areas should facilitate efficient movement of traffic by providing for
parking preference during certain hours of the day and days of the
week.
B. Therefore, Council considers it to be in the interest of the people of the
Borough of Tarentum to provide for the establishment of a residential
permit parking program to ensure primary access to available parking
spaces by neighborhood residents and also to provide a cleaner
ambient air level.
A. Criteria. The residential areas designated in this article are those
deemed impacted and hence eligible for residential parking on the basis
of the following criteria:
(1) During any period between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.,
Monday through Sunday, except legal holidays, the number of
§ 250-30 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-32
246:371
§ 250-33. Designation of residential permit parking areas.
[Amended 3-17-2003 by Ord. No. 03-05]
vehicles parked (or standing), legally or illegally, on the streets in
the area is equal to 70% or more of the legal on-street parking
capacity of the area. For the purpose of this criterion, a legal
parking space shall be 20 linear feet.
(2) During the same period as specified in Subsection A directly above,
10% or more of the vehicles parked (or standing) on the streets in
the area are not registered in the name of a person residing in the
area. For the purpose of this criterion, the latest available
information from the Bureau of Motor Vehicles and Licensing of the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation regarding registration
of motor vehicles shall be used.
B. In determining that a specific area identified as impacted and eligible
for residential permit parking is designated as a residential permit
parking area, the following factors are taken into consideration:
(1) The local and metropolitan needs with respect to clean air and
environment;
(2) The possibility of a reduction in total vehicle miles driven in the
Township;
(3) The likelihood of alleviating traffic congestion, illegal parking and
related health and safety hazards;
(4) The proximity of public transportation to the residential area;
(5) The desire and need of the residents for residential permit parking
and their willingness to bear the administrative costs in connection
with it; and
(6) The need for parking in excess of the residential permit parking
program in proximity to establishments located in the residential
permit parking area and used by the general public for religious,
health or educational purposes.
A. The following are designated as residential permit parking areas:
(1) The south side of East Eighth Avenue from Ross Street to the
intersection of Wood Street.
(2) The west side of Allegheny Street from 3rd Avenue to 4th Avenue.
(3) No parking on the east side of Allegheny Street.
B. Permit holders must park between lines demarcating parking stalls.
Failure to park between the lines is a violation of this article and subject
to § 250-43 of this article.
§ 250-32 TARENTUM CODE § 250-34
246:372
§ 250-34. Signage.
Signs shall be erected along the streets in each residential permit parking
area which shall notice the days, hours, locations and conditions under
which parking shall be by permit only.
§ 250-35. Permit application.
§ 250-36. Permit fee and term.
The biannual permit fee for a residential parking district permit shall be
established by resolution of Borough Council; the fee shall be payable at
the time the application is submitted. The permit term for each residential
parking district shall be determined at the time the district is designated.
Residential parking permits may be renewed by qualified residents upon
the payment of the biannual fee on or before the anniversary date of the
term. In order to renew the permit, residents must present their short-term
visitors' passes. The fee shall not be prorated. No portion of any fee is
refundable.
§ 250-37. Display of permit.
The permit shall be affixed to a window on the driver's side of the vehicle.
Short-term visitors' passes shall be displayed on the dash of the vehicle.
§ 250-38. Expiration of permits.
A permit expires and is void when the owner or user of a permitted vehicle
no longer resides within the district, as defined in § 250-32. A resident
A. An application for a residential parking district permit shall be made by
a resident or proprietor of a district to the Police Department on forms
provided by the Police Department. The application for a permit shall
contain information to verify that the applicant is a bona fide resident of
the district for which application has been made and has legal title to or
the right to possession of the motor vehicle to be permitted. The
information shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
(1) Applicant's name, address, operator's permit number and date of
issuance.
(2) Vehicle owner's name, address, operator's permit number and date
of issuance.
(3) The make, model, color, state of registration and license number of
the vehicle to be registered.
B. A parking permit may not be issued for any motor vehicle for which one
or more unpaid citations have been issued by the Borough for parking
violations. The Police Department shall issue the parking permit upon
finding the applicant meets the requirements specified in this section
and has paid the required fee.
§ 250-34 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-38
246:373
shall remove a permit sticker from any permitted motor vehicle upon its
expiration or upon moving outside of the district. Furthermore, a resident
shall return short-term visitors' passes to the Police Department. Permits
shall be transferred from one vehicle to another during the permit period
solely in accordance with regulations governing such transfer.
§ 250-39. Permit transfers and replacements.
When a vehicle to which a permit is affixed is sold, transferred, demolished
or in any other manner rendered unusable to the resident, the resident shall
remove the permit from the motor vehicle and may request the issuance of
a replacement permit. The permittee shall notify the Police Department of
a change in status of the motor vehicle. The application for a replacement
permit shall be the same as the application for an original or renewal
permit. The replacement permit shall be issued and be valid for the
unexpired term of the original permit, except that a replacement permit
may not be issued for any motor vehicle for which one or more unpaid
citations have been issued by the Borough for parking violations. The fee
for a replacement permit shall be prorated as set forth in § 250-37.
§ 250-40. Temporary permits.
The Police Department shall issue a temporary residential parking permit
for use by a bona fide long-term visitor to a resident within a residential
parking district. An application for a long-term temporary permit shall be
made by a resident of a district on a form that shall be prescribed by the
Police Department. The long-term visitor parking permit shall be valid for a
seven-day period. The fee for a temporary permit, if any, shall be established
by resolution of Borough Council.
§ 250-41. Responsibility of permit holder.
A. Notwithstanding any provision of this section to the contrary, the holder
of a residential parking permit shall be permitted to stand or park a
motor vehicle operated by him in any designated residential parking
area during those times when parking of motor vehicles is permitted in
that area. While a vehicle for which a residential parking permit has
been issued is so parked, that permit shall be displayed so as to be
clearly visible through the windshield of the vehicle. A residential
parking permit shall not guarantee or reserve to the holder a parking
space within a designated residential permit parking area.
B. A residential parking permit shall not authorize its holder to stand or
park a motor vehicle in any place where or at any time when stopping,
standing or parking of motor vehicles is prohibited or set aside for other
specified types of vehicles, nor shall the permit exempt its holder from
the observance of any traffic or parking regulation other than
residential permit parking regulation or restriction.
C. No person other than the permit holder whose name appears on the
permit shall use a residential parking permit or display it on a vehicle
§ 250-38 TARENTUM CODE § 250-41
246:374
§ 250-42. Revocation of permits.
The Police Department shall have authority to revoke the residential
parking permit of any permit holder found to be in violation of any provision
of this section. Upon written notification to him of the revocation, the permit
holder shall surrender the permit to the Police Department. Failure to do so,
when so requested, shall constitute a violation of this section. Any person
receiving such a notice may, within 10 days after the date of the notice,
appeal to the Borough Council for a hearing on the revocation, and the
decision of the Council shall be final.
§ 250-43. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction,
be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $25 and costs, provided that it
shall be the duty of the police officer and of parking enforcement personnel
of the Borough to report to the appropriate official all violations of any
provision of this part, indicating, in each case, the section violated; the
license number of the vehicle involved in the violation; the location where
the violation took place; and any other facts that might be necessary in
order to secure a clear understanding of the circumstances attending the
violation. The police officer or other person making the report shall also
attach to or place upon every such vehicle a notice stating that the vehicle
was parked in violation of this section. The notice shall contain instructions
to the owner or driver of the vehicle to report to the office of the Chief of
Police and pay the fine so indicated within the allotted time to avoid further
prosecution.
operated; any such use or display by a person other than the permit
holder shall constitute a violation of this section by the permit holder
and by the person who so used or displayed the parking permit.
D. It shall constitute a violation of this section for any person falsely to
represent himself as eligible for a residential parking permit or to
furnish false information in an application to the Police Department in
order to obtain a residential parking permit.
§ 250-41 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-43
246:375

ARTICLE V
Brake Retarders
[Adopted 7-19-2004 by Ord. No. 04-07]
§ 250-44. Use on certain streets prohibited.
The use of brake retarders, also known as "jake brakes," within the Borough
of Tarentum at the following locations is absolutely prohibited:
§ 250-45. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating the prohibition against the use of brake retarders, also
known as "jake brakes," in the four aforementioned areas, upon conviction,
will be fined $100 and costs of prosecution upon first conviction and $300
and costs upon any subsequent conviction.
A. S.R. 1001-West Seventh Avenue from Grantham Street to East Street.
B. S.R. 1001-East Tenth Avenue from Lock Street to Ormond Street.
C. East Sixth Avenue from Ross Street to Bridge Street.
D. First Avenue from Ross Street to Bridge Street.
§ 250-44 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-45
246:377
Chapter 256
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Plumbing — See Ch. 185..
§ 250-45 TARENTUM CODE § 250-45
256:378
ARTICLE I
Cross-Connections
[Adopted 5-22-1989 by Ord. No. 89-4]
§ 256-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is:
§ 256-2. Applicability.
This article shall apply to all premises served by the public water supply
system of the Borough of Tarentum.
§ 256-3. Policy.
The public water supplier and the consumer have the joint responsibility
for protection of the public water supply system from contamination due to
backflow of contaminants through the water service connection. If in the
judgment of the public water supplier or his authorized representative an
approved backflow prevention device is required, the supplier shall give
notice to the consumer to install such approved backflow prevention device
at each service connection to his premises. The consumer shall immediately
install such approved device or devices at his own expense, and failure,
refusal or inability on the part of the consumer to install such device or
devices shall constitute grounds for discontinuing water service to the
premises until such device or devices have been installed.
§ 256-4. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following words shall have the meanings
indicated unless clearly indicated otherwise in the text:
AIR GAP SEPARATION — The unobstructed vertical distance through the
free atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet
supplying potable water to a tank, plumbing fixture or other device and the
flood level rim of the receptacle. The differential distance shall be at least
A. To protect the public water supply system from contamination or
pollution by isolating within the consumer's water system contaminants
or pollutants which could backflow through the service connection into
the public water supply system.
B. To promote the elimination or control of existing cross-connections,
actual or potential, between the public or consumer's potable water
system and non-potable water systems, plumbing fixtures and sources
or system containing process fluids.
C. To provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of crossconnection
control which will systematically and effectively prevent the
contamination or pollution of the public and consumer's potable water
system.
§ 256-1 WATER § 256-4
256:379
double the diameter (2 x D) of the supply pipe, measured vertically above
the top of the rim of the vessel. In no case shall the air gap be less than one
inch.
APPROVED — A backflow prevention device or method has been accepted
by the public water supplier as suitable for the proposed use.
ATMOSPHERIC VACUUM BREAKER (ALSO KNOWN AS THE "NONPRESSURE-
TYPE VACUUM BREAKER") — A device containing a shutoff
valve followed by a valve body containing a float-check, a check seat and an
air inlet port. When the shutoff valve is open, the flow of water causes the
float to close the air inlet port. When the shutoff valve is closed, the float
falls and forms a check valve against backsiphonage and at the same time
opens the air inlet port.
AUXILIARY WATER SYSTEM — Any water source or system on the premises
of or available to the customer except connections to other approved city
water supply system.
BACKFLOW — A flow condition, induced by a differential in pressure, that
causes the flow of water or mixtures of water and other liquids, gasses
or other substances into the distribution pipes of a potable water supply
system from a source other than its intended source.
BACKFLOW PREVENTER — A device or other means which will prevent the
backflow of water or liquids of questionable quality into the public water
supply system.
BACKSIPHONAGE — The backflow of water or mixture of water and other
liquids, gasses or other substances from a plumbing fixture or other
customer source into a public water supply system main due to a temporary
negative or subatmospheric pressure within the public water supply system.
CONSUMER — The owner or person in control of any premises supplied by
or in any manner connected to a public water supply system.
CONSUMER'S WATER SYSTEM — Any water system, located on the
consumer's premises, supplied by or in any manner connected to a public
water supply system. A household plumbing system is considered to be a
consumer's water system.
CONTAINMENT — Cross-connection control which isolates the customer's
entire facility from the public water supply system so as to provide the
protection necessary to prevent contamination of the public water supply in
the event of backflow from the customer's facility.
CONTAMINATION — The degradation of the quality of the drinking water
by wastewaters, processed fluids or any water of a quality less than
accepted drinking water quality to a degree which would create an actual
hazard to the public health through poisoning or through the spread of
disease.
CROSS-CONNECTION — An arrangement allowing either a direct or
indirect connection through which backflow, including backsiphonage, can
§ 256-4 TARENTUM CODE § 256-4
256:380
occur between the drinking water in a public water system and a system
containing a source or potential source of contamination.
DEGREE OF HAZARD — An evaluation of the potential risk to health and
the adverse effect upon the public water supply system.
DOUBLE-CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY — An assembly composed of two
single, independently acting, check valves, including tightly closing shutoff
valves located at each end of the assembly and suitable connections for
testing the water tightness of each check valve.
HEALTH HAZARD — Any condition, device or practice in a water system or
its operation that creates or may create a danger to the health and wellbeing
of its users. The word "severe" as used to qualify "health hazard"
means a hazard to the health of the user that could reasonably be expected
to result in the significant morbidity or death.
INTERCHANGEABLE CONNECTION — An arrangement or device that will
allow alternate, but not simultaneous, use of two sources of water.
NONPOTABLE WATER — Water not safe for drinking, personal or culinary
use.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, association, company, corporation,
municipality, municipal authority, political subdivision or any agency of
federal or state government. The term includes the officers, employees and
agents of any partnership, association, company, corporation, municipality,
municipal authority, political subdivision or any agency of federal or state
government.
POLLUTION — The presence in water of any foreign substance that tends
to degrade its quality so as to constitute a hazard or impair the usefulness
or quality of the water to a degree which does not create an actual hazard
to the public health but which does adversely and unreasonably affect such
waters for domestic use.
POTABLE WATER — Water which is satisfactory for drinking, culinary and
domestic purposes and meets the requirements of the Department of
Environmental Protection.
PROCESS FLUIDS — Any fluid or solution which may be chemically,
biologically or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or
concentration such as would constitute a health, pollutional or system
hazard if introduced into the public or a consumer's water system. This
includes, but is not limited to:
A. Polluted or contaminated waters.
B. Process waters.
Used waters originating from the public water system which may have
deteriorated in sanitary quality.
C.
D. Cooling waters.
§ 256-4 WATER § 256-4
256:381
PUBLIC WATER SUPPLIER — A person who owns or operates a public
water system.
PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM — A system which provides water to the
public for human consumption which has at least 15 service connections or
regularly serves an average of at least 25 individuals daily at least 60 days
out of the year. The term is either a community or noncommunity water
system and includes any collection, treatment, storage and distribution
facilities under control of the operator of the system and used in connection
with the system. The term includes collection or pretreatment storage
facilities not under such control which are used in connection with the
system. The term also includes a system which provides water for bottling
or bulk hauling for human consumption.
REDUCED PRESSURE ZONE (RPZ) DEVICE — A minimum of two
independently acting check valves, together with an automatically operated
pressure differential relief valve located between the two check valves.
During normal flow and at the cessation of normal flow, the pressure
between these two checks shall be less than the supply pressure. In case of
leakage of either check valve, the differential relief valve, by discharging to
the atmosphere, shall operate to maintain the pressure between the checks
at less than the supply pressure. The unit must include tightly closing
shutoff valves located at each end of the device, and each device shall be
fitted with properly located test cocks.
SERVICE CONNECTION — The terminal end of a service line from the
public water supply system. If a meter is installed at the end of the service,
then the "service connection" means the downstream end of the meter.
SYSTEM HAZARD — A condition posing an actual or potential threat of
damage to the physical properties of the public water system or the
consumer's potable water supply.
§ 256-5. Water system.
Contaminated natural waters taken from wells, lakes, streams or
irrigation systems.
E.
F. Chemicals in solution or suspension.
Oils, gasses, acids, alkalis and other liquid and gaseous fluids used in
industrial or other processes or for fire-fighting purposes.
G.
H. Heating system waters from boilers or heat pumps.
A. The water system shall be considered as made up of two parts: the
public water supply system and consumer's water system.
B. The public water system supply shall consist of the source facilities and
the distribution system and shall include all those facilities of the public
water supply system under the control of the public water supplier up
to the point where the consumer's water system begins.
§ 256-4 TARENTUM CODE § 256-5
256:382
§ 256-6. Cross-connections prohibited.
§ 256-7. Survey and investigations.
§ 256-8. Where protection is required.
C. The source shall include all components of the facilities utilized in the
production, treatment, storage and delivery of water to the public
distribution system.
D. The public distribution system shall include the network of conduits
used for delivery of water from the source to the consumer's water
system.
E. The consumer's water system shall include all facilities beyond the
service connection which are utilized in conveying water from the
public distribution system to points of use.
A. No water service connection shall be installed or maintained to any
premises where actual or potential cross-connections to the public
water supply system or consumer's water system may exist unless such
actual or potential cross-connections are abated or controlled to the
satisfaction of the public water supplier.
B. No connection shall be installed or maintained whereby water from an
auxiliary water supply may enter a public or consumer's water system
unless such auxiliary water supply and the method of connection use of
such supply shall have been approved.
A. The consumer's premises shall be open at all reasonable times to the
public water supplier or his authorized representative for the purposes
of conducting surveys and investigations of water use practices within
the consumer's premises to determine whether there are actual or
potential cross-connections to the consumer's water system through
which contaminants or pollutants could backflow into the public potable
water system.
B. On request by the public water supplier, the consumer shall furnish
information on water use practices within the premises.
C. It shall be the responsibility of the water consumer to conduct periodic
surveys of water use practices on his premises to determine whether
there are actual or potential cross-connections to his water system
through which contaminants or pollutants could backflow into the
public water supply system.
A. An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed prior to the
first branch line leading off each service line to a consumer's water
system where, in the judgment of the public water supplier, an actual or
potential hazard to the public water supply system exists.
§ 256-5 WATER § 256-8
256:383
B. An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each
service line to a consumer's water system where the following
conditions exist:
(1) System having an auxiliary water supply, unless such auxiliary
supply is accepted as an additional source by the public water
supplier and approved by the Department of Environmental
Protection.
(2) Systems where any substance is handled in such a fashion as to
create an actual or potential hazard to the public water supply
system. This shall include systems having sources or auxiliary
systems containing process fluids or waters originating from the
public water supply system which are no longer under the sanitary
control of the water purveyor.
(3) Systems having internal cross-connections that, in the judgment of
the public water supplier, are not correctable or intricate plumbing
arrangements which make it impractical to determine whether or
not cross-connections exist.
(4) Systems where, because of security requirements or other
prohibitions or restrictions, it is impossible or impractical to make
a complete cross-connection survey.
(5) Systems having a repeated history of cross-connections being
established or reestablished.
(6) Others specified by the public water supplier.
C. An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each
service line to a consumer's water system serving, but not necessarily
limited to, the following types of facilities unless the public water
supplier determines that no actual or potential hazard to the public
water supply system exists:
(1) Hospitals, mortuaries, clinics, nursing homes.
(2) Laboratories.
(3) Piers, docks, waterfront facilities.
(4) Sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping station or stormwater
pumping station.
(5) Food or beverage processing plants.
(6) Chemical plants.
(7) Metal plating industries.
(8) Petroleum processing or storage plants.
(9) Radioactive material processing plants.
§ 256-8 TARENTUM CODE § 256-8
256:384
§ 256-9. Type of protection required.
The type of protection required under § 256-8A, B and C of these
regulations shall depend on the degree of hazard which exists as follows:
§ 256-10. Backflow prevention devices.
(10) Car wash or truck wash.
(11) Others specified by the water purveyor.
A. An approved air gap separation shall be installed where the public
water supply system may be contaminated with substances that are
dangerous to the public health and could cause a severe health hazard.
B. An approved air gap separation or an approved reduced pressure zone
backflow prevention device shall be installed where the public water
supply system may be contaminated with a substance that could cause
a system or health hazard.
C. An approved air gap separation or an approved reduced pressure zone
backflow prevention device or an approved double-check valve
assembly shall be installed where the public water supply system may
be polluted with substances that would be objectionable but not
dangerous to health.
A. Any backflow prevention device required by this article shall be of a
model or construction approved by the public water supplier and shall
comply with the following:
(1) Air gap separation to be approved shall be at least twice the
diameter of the supply pipe, measured vertically above the top rim
of the vessel, but in no case less than one inch.
(2) American Water Works Association (AWWA) standards.
(a) A double-check valve assembly or a reduced pressure zone
backflow prevention device shall be approved by the public
water supplier and shall mean a device that has been
manufactured in full conformance with standards established
by the American Water Works Association entitled "AWWA
C506 Standards For Reduced Pressure Principle and Double
Check Valve Backflow Prevention Devices."
(b) Said AWWA standards are herein adopted by the public water
supplier. Final approval, however, of the reduced pressure
principle backflow preventer and the double-check valve
assembly shall be evidenced by a certificate of full approval
issued by an approved testing laboratory certifying full
compliance with said AWWA standards.
(3) An interchangeable connection to be approved shall be either a
swing-type connector or a four-way valve of the lubricated plug
§ 256-8 WATER § 256-10
256:385
§ 256-11. Installation.
§ 256-12. Inspection and maintenance.
type that operates through a mechanism which unseats the plug,
turns it 90° and reseats the plug. Four-way valves shall not be used
as stop valves but must have separate stop valves on each pipe
connected to the valve. The telltale port on the four-way valve shall
have no piping connected, and the threads or flange on this port
shall be destroyed so that a connection cannot be made.
B. Existing backflow prevention devices approved by the public water
supplier at the time of installation and properly maintained shall,
except for inspection and maintenance requirements, be excluded from
the requirement of Subsection A of this section, provided that the public
water supplier is assured that they will satisfactorily protect the public
potable supply system. Whenever the existing device is moved from the
present location or requires more than minimum maintenance or when
the public water supplier finds that the maintenance of the device
constitutes a hazard to health, the device shall be replaced by a
backflow prevention device meeting the requirements of these
regulations.
A. Backflow prevention devices required by this article shall be installed at
a location and in a manner approved by the public water supplier and
shall be installed by a person properly qualified and at the expense of
the water consumer.
B. Backflow prevention devices installed on the service line to a
consumer's water system shall be located on the consumer's side of the
water meter, as close to the meter as is reasonably practical and prior
to any other connection.
C. Pits or vaults shall be watertight construction, be so located and
constructed as to prevent flooding and shall be maintained free from
standing water by means of either a sump and pump or a suitable drain.
Such sump pump or drain shall not connect to a sanitary sewer nor
permit flooding of the pit or vault by reverse flow from its point of
discharge. An access ladder and adequate natural or artificial lighting
shall be provided to permit maintenance inspection and testing of the
backflow prevention device.
A. It shall be the duty of the consumer at any premises on which backflow
prevention devices required by this article are installed to have
inspections, tests and overhaul made in accordance with the following
schedule or more often where inspections indicate a need.
(1) Air separation shall be inspected at time of installation and at least
every 12 months thereafter.
§ 256-10 TARENTUM CODE § 256-12
256:386
§ 256-13. Booster pumps.
§ 256-14. Violations.
(2) Double-check valve assemblies shall be inspected and tested for
tightness at the time of installation and at least every 12 months
thereafter. They shall be dismantled, inspected internally, cleaned
and repaired whenever needed and at least every 30 months.
(3) Reduced pressure zone backflow prevention devices shall be
inspected and tested for tightness at the time of installation and at
least every 12 months thereafter. They shall be dismantled,
inspected internally, cleaned and repaired when ever needed and at
least every five years.
(4) Interchangeable connections shall be inspected at the time of
installation and at least every twelve months thereafter.
B. Inspections, tests and overhaul of backflow prevention devices shall be
made at the expense of the water consumer and shall be performed by
the public water supplier or a person certified to inspect, test and
overhaul backflow prevention devices.
C. Whenever backflow prevention devices required by these regulations
are found to be defective, they shall be repaired or replaced at the
expense of the consumer without delay.
D. The water consumer must maintain a complete record of each backflow
prevention device from purchase to retirement. This shall include a
comprehensive listing that includes a record of all tests, inspections
and repairs. Records of inspections, tests, repairs and overhaul shall be
submitted to the public water supplier.
E. Backflow prevention devices shall not be bypassed, made inoperative,
removed or otherwise made ineffective without specific authorization
by the water purveyor.
A. Where a booster pump has been installed on the service line to or
within any premises, such pump shall be equipped with a low-pressure
cutoff device designed to shut off the booster pump when the pressure
in the service line on the suction side of the pump drops to inch gauge
or less for a period of 30 seconds or longer.
B. It shall be the duty of the water consumer to maintain the low-pressure
cutoff device in proper working order and to certify to the public water
supplier, at least once a year, that the device is operating properly.
A. The public water supplier shall deny or discontinue, after reasonable
notice to the occupants thereof, the water service to any premises
wherein any backflow prevention device required by this article is not
installed, tested and maintained in a manner acceptable to the public
water supplier or if it is found that the backflow prevention device has
§ 256-12 WATER § 256-14
256:387
been removed or bypassed or if an unprotected cross-connection exists
on the premises or if a low-pressure cutoff device required by these
regulations is not installed and maintained in working order.
B. Water service to such premises shall not be restored until the consumer
has corrected or eliminated such conditions or defects in conformance
with these regulations and to the satisfaction of the public water
supplier.
§ 256-14 TARENTUM CODE § 256-14
256:388
ARTICLE II
Water Use
[Adopted 12-23-1991 by Ord. No. 91-10]
§ 256-15. Meters required.
All water furnished by the Municipal Water Works of the Borough of
Tarentum shall be by meter in accordance with the rates set forth herein.117
§ 256-16. Application for water service; contracts.
All persons, partnerships and corporations desiring to use water shall make
application to the Borough and enter into a contract to be signed by the
owner or lessee, or a duly authorized agent thereof, of the premises to
which water is to be furnished. Said contracts are in the office of the
Borough, together with the rules and regulations attached thereto and by
reference adopted as part of this article.
§ 256-17. Multiple customers per meter.
Water will be supplied to that specific premises noted in the application,
agreement or contract. In any case where more than one consumer is
receiving water through a single meter and a single contract (e.g., multiplefamily
units), the owner of the premises shall and is hereby required to
pay for such water at a rate to be computed upon the same basis as if
each of the multiple consumers were under separate contract with separate
meter. For the purposes of this article, "consumer" shall include, but not
be limited to, occupants of each separate apartment used as a dwelling
unit in any house, building or apartment building and, further, shall include
each separate storeroom or additional place of business in any building
supplied with water as aforesaid. In all such cases, however, the owners
of the premises shall have the right to install a separate meter for each
consumer. All expenses of furnishing and installing any such meter shall
be paid to the Borough by the owner of the premises. No more than one
service line shall be tapped into the main line to serve any consumer, except
a double dwelling where both sides are individually owned.
§ 256-18. Special service rates.
Rates for special services, such as installation of sprinkling systems in
buildings, will depend upon the size of sprinkler head and the size of
connections to mains and will be furnished upon application to the Borough
Secretary.
§ 256-19. Billing. [Amended 1-15-2007 by Ord. No. 07-02]
All bills shall be rendered monthly or quarterly and be payable at the
Borough office on or before the 14th day after the date thereof. A penalty
117. Editor's Note: Water rates, as set forth from time to time by resolution, are on file in the
Borough offices.
§ 256-15 WATER § 256-19
256:389
of 5% will be allowed each billing period if payment is made after the 14th
day after the date of the bill. In the event that the water charge is not paid
within 25 days of the billing date, a penalty of 10% per annum, or 5/6 of
1% per month, of the monthly water charge shall be assessed in addition to
the above-stated penalty. If a meter is found stopped at any reading, the bill
will be estimated from similar preceding or subsequent periods. If any bill
remains unpaid longer than 20 days after date of bill, the Borough reserves
the right to discontinue the service after due notice.
§ 256-20. Deposits.
Deposits placed at the time of turn-on of service shall be as set forth
from time to time by resolution of the Borough Council, and said deposit
shall be required of all non-owner-occupied structures. The deposit shall be
refundable to all nonowners of structures upon payment in full of the final
water bill.
§ 256-21. Purchase of meter and/or remote reader.
At the time of installation of new service, the consumer or property owner
shall purchase from the Borough a meter with remote reading for water
service or, in the event that the consumer or property owner already owns
a meter, the consumer or property owner shall purchase from the Borough
a remote reader only, if said reader is adaptable to the meter already
owned by the consumer or property owner. The cost for a water meter with
remote reader and the cost of a remote reader only for those meters that
are adaptable shall be established by Council upon motion at a regularly
scheduled Council meeting. Normal maintenance, repair and adjustment of
said meters or remote readers shall be at the expense of the Borough; all
maintenance and repair required, other than normal, shall be at the expense
of the consumer or property owner. Where it is not economical to repair the
meter or reader or where parts are unobtainable, the cost of a new meter
or reader shall be paid by the consumer or the property owner.
§ 256-22. Testing of meters; fees.
If any consumer or property owner is doubtful of the correctness of any
meter, he may, upon application to the Borough Secretary and upon making
a deposit as set forth from time to time by resolution of the Borough
Council, have such meter tested by the Borough. Should such test show the
meter to be correct within 4%, the consumer shall forfeit the deposit made.
Should such test show the meter to be registering incorrectly beyond the
4% of the accurate amount, such deposit shall be refunded to the consumer
and the cost of such test shall be paid by the Borough.
§ 256-23. Borough to supply meters.
Only meters or readers supplied through or approved by the Borough of
Tarentum shall be used or permitted on the water lines of the Borough of
Tarentum.
§ 256-19 TARENTUM CODE § 256-24
256:390
§ 256-24. Access to premises.
The Borough's meter reader, service personnel or other properly authorized
representative shall have access at all reasonable hours to the premises
supplied for the purpose of setting, reading, repairing or removing meters
or making necessary inspections.
§ 256-25. Water tap-in fees.
The cost of a water tap-in shall be as set forth from time to time by
resolution of the Borough Council, and said cost shall not be refundable.
The Borough shall be responsible for the installation of the water tap-in. In
the event of a water tap-in in excess of one inch, the cost for such a tap-in
shall be agreed to be the parties prior to installation.
§ 256-26. Service lines.
The property owner or the consumer must furnish and install all service
lines from the box at the curbline to the house and the pipe shall be of
copper or copper tubing. The same shall be kept in good repair at all times
at the expense of the property owner or consumer.
§ 256-27. Sewer tap-in fee.
The cost of a sewer tap-in shall be as set forth from time to time by
resolution of the Borough Council, and said cost shall not be refundable.
The property owner or consumer or its agent or contractor shall be
responsible for the installation of said sewer tap-in.
§ 256-28. Street openings; fees.
The cost of all street openings requested by a property owner or consumer
shall be as follows:
A. For each street opening of five feet by four feet, there shall be a
nonrefundable cost as set forth from time to time by resolution of the
Borough Council and a refundable deposit as set forth from time to time
by resolution of the Borough Council or an indemnity bond, deposited
and filed with the Borough Secretary, with approved corporate surety in
an amount not less than that set forth from time to time by resolution of
the Borough Council per running foot of Borough street, highway or
alley to be affected, such bond to guarantee against subsidence of the
Borough street, highway or alley for a period of one year from the date
of final restoration of the street, highway or alley and the bond to
guarantee against damage that might be done in the street, highway or
alley.
B. For street openings larger than five feet by four feet, the cost shall be as
set forth from time to time by resolution of the Borough Council and the
refundable deposit shall be as set forth from time to time by resolution
of the Borough Council or an indemnity bond, deposited and filed with
§ 256-24 WATER § 256-28
256:391
§ 256-29. Street openings requested by public utilities.
The cost of all street openings requested by a public utility shall be as
follows:
the Borough Secretary, with approved corporate surety in an amount
not less than that set forth from time to time by resolution of the
Borough Council per running foot of Borough street, highway or alley to
be affected, such bond to guarantee against subsidence of the Borough
street, highway or alley for a period of one year from the date of final
restoration of the street, highway or alley and the bond to guarantee
against damage that might be done in the street, highway or alley.
C. Said refundable deposit for street openings shall be refundable only
upon approval by the Public Works Director of the Borough of
Tarentum, and repairs to the street shall be of the same or comparable
material as that already existing in the street.
A. For each street opening of five feet by four feet, there shall be a cost as
set forth from time to time by resolution of the Borough Council and a
refundable deposit as set forth from time to time by resolution of the
Borough Council or an indemnity bond, deposited and filed with the
Borough Secretary, with approved corporate surety for an amount of
not less than that as set forth from time to time by resolution of the
Borough Council per running foot of Borough street, highway or alley to
be affected, such bond to guarantee against subsidence of the Borough
street, highway or alley for a period of one year from the date of final
restoration of the street, highway or alley and the bond to guarantee
against damage that might be done in the street, highway or alley.
B. For street openings larger than five feet by four feet, there shall be a
cost as set forth from time to time by resolution of the Borough Council
and for each street opening larger than five feet by four feet there shall
be a refundable deposit as set forth from time to time by resolution of
the Borough Council or an indemnity bond, deposited and filed with the
Borough Secretary, with approved corporate surety in the amount of
not less than that as set forth from time to time by resolution of the
Borough Council per running foot of Borough street, highway or alley to
be affected, such bond to guarantee against subsidence of the Borough
street, highway or alley for a period of one year from the date of final
restoration of the street, highway or alley and the bond to guarantee
against damage that might be done in the street, highway or alley.
C. Said refundable deposit and the partially refundable deposit for street
openings shall be refundable only upon approval by the Public Works
Director of the Borough of Tarentum, and repairs to the street shall be
of the same or comparable material as that already existing in that
street.
§ 256-28 TARENTUM CODE § 256-30
256:392
§ 256-30. Shutoff of service; charges.
In the event of the nonpayment of bills, the Borough Secretary is ordered
and directed to shut off the supply of water to the consumer. In the event of
a shutoff for the nonpayment of bills or for any violations of the rules and
regulations of the Borough, a service charge as set forth from time to time
by resolution of the Borough Council shall be made to cover the costs of the
shutoff and shall be paid before service is reinstated. Consumers requesting
temporary service termination shall be assessed a service charge as set
forth from time to time by resolution of the Borough Council when the
service is reinstated. Service is rendered from time the water is turned on. A
consumer desiring to discontinue the use of water shall give written notice
and pay all bills in full, up until the date of such notice. Turning on of water
into any premises for any purposes by anyone, excepting a representative
of the Borough, is prohibited.
§ 256-31. Notice of shutoff.
The Borough reserves the right to shut off the water in the mains at
any time for the purpose of making repairs or extensions or for other
necessary purposes and will give due notice, except in case of breaks and
emergencies.
§ 256-30 WATER § 256-31
256:393
Chapter 265
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Joint Zoning and Codes Enforcement
Officer — See Ch. 35, Art. I.
Planning Commission — See Ch. 50.
Building construction — See Ch. 95, Art. II.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 95, Art.
III.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 127.
Mobile homes — See Ch. 159.
Newsracks, signs and telephone booths — See
Ch. 170.
Registration of property — See Ch. 197.
Sewers — See Ch. 204.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
220.
§ 256-31 TARENTUM CODE § 256-31
256:394
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 265-101. Title.
This chapter shall be cited as the "Tarentum Borough Zoning Ordinance"
or the "Zoning Ordinance," which shall be deemed to include the "Zoning
District Map" as cited in this chapter.
§ 265-102. Statement of purpose.
This chapter is adopted and administered for the following purposes:
§ 265-103. Statement of consistency and community development
objectives.
This Zoning Ordinance promotes general consistency with the Borough
Comprehensive Plan through the following community development
objectives:
A. To promote, protect and facilitate the public health, safety, morals, and
the general welfare; coordinated and practical community
development; vehicle parking and loading space, transportation, water,
sewerage, schools, recreational facilities, public grounds, and the
provision of a safe, reliable and adequate water supply.
B. To promote the preservation of the natural, scenic and historic
resources in the Borough.
C. To prevent overcrowding of land, blight, danger and congestion in
travel and transportation, loss of health, life or property from fire, flood,
panic or other dangers.
D. To accommodate reasonable overall community growth, including
population and employment growth, and opportunities for development
of a variety of residential dwelling types and nonresidential uses.
E. To implement the objectives and policies outline in its Comprehensive
Plan.
A. Facilitate the redevelopment of the Third Ward and promote compatible
infill development in the Borough's traditional commercial center.
B. Provide for maintenance, replacement, and connection of the Borough's
sidewalks and pedestrian infrastructure, namely within the commercial
centers of the Borough.
C. Encourage rehabilitation of structures that is consistent with the
historic integrity and functionality of the neighborhood in which the
structure is located through traditional neighborhood development
design standards.
§ 265-101 WATER § 265-103
256:395
§ 265-104. Application of regulations.
§ 265-105. Interpretation.
D. Provide clear standards for nonconforming uses that protect property
rights while encouraging long term development and maintenance of
compatible uses.
E. Promote the maintenance and preservation of single-family detached
housing.
F. Promote reuse of vacant or abandoned properties in a manner
compatible with the surrounding neighborhood and uses.
G. Encourage development of varied but compatible residential and
nonresidential establishments, traditional neighborhood development,
and preservation of open spaces corridors within areas of land available
for development or redevelopment.
A. No building or land shall, after the effective date of this chapter, be
used or occupied, and no building or part thereof shall be erected,
moved, or altered unless in conformity with the regulations herein
specified for the district in which it is located, and then only after
applying for and securing all permits and licenses required by all laws
and ordinances, provided also that nonconforming uses, lots, and
structures shall be occupied, expanded, or continued in accordance
with the standards and processes set forth in this chapter.
B. No structure, use, or occupation of land that does not lawfully exist at
the time of adoption of this chapter shall be made legal solely through
the adoption of this chapter or subsequent amendments thereto.
A. Where any provisions of this chapter conflict with other applicable state
and federal laws, the stricter shall apply.
B. This chapter is not intended to annul or supersede any private
easements, covenants, or agreements, except where provisions of this
chapter are more restrictive. The Zoning Officer shall not be
responsible for the enforcement of the aforesaid agreements unless the
Borough is a party thereof.
C. The zoning classification of improved and unimproved rights-of-way
within the Borough boundaries shall be considered part of the adjacent
zoning district. In cases where these areas are bordered by more than
one district, the abutting zoning shall extend to the centerline of the
subject right-of-way.
D. Zoning classifications as initially determined generally follow existing
lot boundaries, where apparent, as defined by recorded deeds.
However, the revision, through subdivision, of current boundary lines
does not constitute any revision of zoning district boundaries, which
§ 265-103 TARENTUM CODE § 265-105
256:396
shall retain the boundary of the original lot line, unless an amendment
the Zoning Ordinance via the Zoning Map is approved.
E. In cases where a lot lies within multiple zoning districts, district
boundaries traversing the lot shall be determined as lines extending
from points originating at apparent known points on adjoining lot lines.
F. Borough land incorporated by the annexation process after adopted of
this chapter shall be zoned as R-1 until or unless the Zoning Map is
amended to indicate zoning of the property as another district set forth
in this chapter.
G. In interpreting the language of this chapter to determine the extent of
the restriction upon the use of property in the Borough, the language
shall be interpreted, where doubt exists as to the intended meaning of
the language written and enacted by the Borough, in favor of the
property owner and against any implied extension of the restriction.
§ 265-105 WATER § 265-105
256:397

ARTICLE II
Terminology
§ 265-201. Language interpretation.
§ 265-202. General definitions.
The following terms shall have the following meanings when used within
this chapter, unless otherwise specified in this chapter.
ACCESS DRIVES — Privately owned driveways that serve one or more
retail, personal service, office, or industrial uses; or that serve development
including townhouses, multifamily dwellings, or more than four dwelling
units; or drives serving mobile home lots in mobile home parks or uses in a
major traditional neighborhood development.
ACCESSORY BUILDING OR USE — A building or structure which houses a
use subordinate and incidental to principal use located on the same lot or
premises.
ACTIVE OPEN SPACE — Land legally accessible to residents or patrons
of a traditional neighborhood development that is improved for active use
A. Words used in the present tense shall include the future.
B. Words used in the singular shall include the plural and the plural shall
include the singular.
C. The word "person" includes a corporation, company, partnership, or
association as well as an individual.
D. The word "lot" includes the word plot or parcel.
E. The term "shall" is always mandatory.
F. The word "may" is permissive.
G. The word "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or building shall
be construed to include the words intended, arranged or designed to be
used or occupied.
H. The word "building" includes the word "structure."
I. The word "erected" shall include the word constructed. The word
"moved" shall include the word "relocated."
J. An establishment which includes activities defined as an "adult use" by
this article shall be entirely classified as an adult use as a principal use,
subject to all standards, limitations, and requirements imposed on adult
uses by this chapter.
K. Where a particular definition of a use or establishment is set forth
under § 265-203 of this chapter, Use definitions, it shall be interpreted
to be excluded from any use that is more generally or generically
defined in said section.
§ 265-201 WATER § 265-202
256:399
for authorized entertainment events, trails, recreational fields, courts, and
playgrounds.
ALLEY — A narrow service way providing secondary access to all of the
abutting properties on a particular block.
ANIMATED SIGN — Any sign that uses movement or change of lighting
to depict action or create a special effect or scene. The term "animated
sign" expressly includes multicolor electronic message center signs, video
screens, television screens, plasma screens and holographic displays, but
does not include single-color electronic message center signs.
ANTENNA HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from the base of the
antenna support structure at grade to the highest point of the structure. If
the support structure is on a sloped grade, then the average between the
highest and lowest grades shall be used in calculating the antenna height.
ANTENNA SITE — A tract or parcel of land that contains the antenna, its
support structure, necessary building(s), and parking and may include other
uses associated with and ancillary to the intended use of the antenna.
ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURE — Any pole, telescoping mast, tower,
tripod, or any other structure that supports a device used in the
transmitting or receiving of radio, television, telephone communications, or
any other telecommunications system signal.
APPLICANT — A landowner or developer, as hereinafter defined, who has
filed an application for development including his heirs, successors and
assigns.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — Every application, whether
preliminary, tentative or final, required to be filed and approved prior
to start of construction or development including but not limited to an
application for a building permit, for the approval of a subdivision plat or
plan or for the approval of a development plan.
AWNING — A roof-like structure typically made of cloth, metal, or other
material attached to a frame that extends from and is supported by a
building. Awnings are typically erected over a window, doorway, or building
front and they may be raised or retracted to a position adjacent to the
building.
BASEMENT — That portion or space of a building, the floor of which lies
upon the footer of the structure, extending from the floor to the ceiling,
housed by the foundation walls of the building such that 50% or more of
the cumulative area of the foundation walls lies below the grade of adjacent
ground.
BASE ZONING DISTRICT — Exclusive zoning districts or classifications
depicted on the Zoning Map where application of provisions is uniform for
each class of uses or structures, within each such district except where
modified by an Overlay Zoning District.
§ 265-202 TARENTUM CODE § 265-202
256:400
BILLBOARD — A sign, upon which advertising matter of any character is
printed, posted or lettered, which is erected upon a property bearing no
establishment or principal building.
BLOCK — Property abutting on one side of a street and lying between
the two nearest intersecting or intercepting streets or railroad right-of-way,
waterway, unsubdivided area or other definite barrier.
BOX SIGN (also known as CABINET SIGNS) — A sign with text or symbols
printed on a plastic or acrylic sheet that is mounted on a cabinet or box that
houses the lighting source and equipment.
BUILDING — A structure having a roof supported by columns or walls, for
housing, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or commercial
activities.
BUILDING, COMPLETELY ENCLOSED — A building designed and
constructed so that all exterior walls shall be solid from the ground to the
roof line, containing no openings except for windows and doors which are
designed so that they may be closed and any other small openings required
for the ventilation system.
BUILDING FACADE — The wall or walls of a building, the extensions of
which intersect the front lot line at an interior angle of less than 135°.
BUILDING HEIGHT or HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from the
average elevation of the finish grade at the front of the building to the
highest point of the roof for flat roofs, to the deck line of mansard roofs and
to the mean height between eaves and ridge on hip and gable roofs.
BUILDING LINE — The line of that face of the building nearest or most
parallel to the front line of the lot, or a line parallel to the front line of lot at
the location equal to the depth of the respective front yard required by this
chapter, whichever is greater. This face includes porches, whether enclosed
or not, patios and similar construction, but excludes steps and sidewalks.
BUILDING OF HISTORIC SIGNIFICANCE — Any structure designated as
a historic landmark by the Pennsylvania Historical Commission or any
structure over 50 years old that is deemed as such by Borough Council
via a study or studies commissioned by the Borough in conjunction with
conditional use, planned residential development or traditional
neighborhood development review processes and based upon specific
criteria as set forth in this chapter.
BUILD-TO LINE — The required location of any building on a building
line relative to and paralleling the lot line adjoining a specified street and
measured in the number of feet from said lot line.
CANOPY — A roof-like structure typically permanent in construction that
covers a doorway or entryway that extends from and is supported by the
building. A canopy may include a freestanding or projecting cover above an
outdoor service area, such as an automobile service station.
CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN, MANUAL — A sign with removable panels or
letters which may be changed, removed and replaced from time to time
§ 265-202 WATER § 265-202
256:401
without altering or reconstructing the sign structure itself, including a sign
on which message copy is changed through the use of electronic switching
of lamps or other illuminated devices.
CHANNEL LETTER — A fabricated or formed three-dimensional letter,
number or symbol.
CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE — An area of unobstructed vision at a street
intersection defined by lines of sight between points at a given distance
from the intersection of two street right-of-way lines adjoining a subject
parcel.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — A parcel or parcels of land or an area of water,
or a combination of land and water, within a development site designed and
intended for the use and enjoyment of the residents of a planned residential
development, not including streets, off-street parking areas, and areas set
aside for public facilities. Common open space shall be substantially free of
structures, but may contain such improvements in the development plan as
finally approved and are appropriate to the recreation.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use permitted in a particular zoning district
pursuant to the provisions of Article VI of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code.
CONSTRUCTION COSTS — Costs as determined by the Borough Engineer
including labor and material costs based on prevailing wage rates and
material costs.
CONSTRUCTION SIGN — Any sign identifying individuals or companies
involved in design, construction, demolition, financing, or development
when placed upon the premises where construction or development is
ongoing.
DEVELOPER — Any landowner, agent of such landowner, or tenant with
the permission of such landowner who makes or causes to be made a
subdivision of land or land development.
DIRECTIONAL SIGN — A sign used to convey directions and other
information for the convenience of the public. Included are signs
designating restrooms, address numbers, hours of operation, entrances to
buildings, help wanted, public telephone, etc. Also included are signs on
private property designed to direct pedestrians or vehicular traffic, such as
"entrance" or "exit."
DIRECTORY SIGN — A wall or freestanding sign on a multitenant
development site that is used to convey directions or tenant information to
pedestrians and motorists who have entered the site.
DISTINCTIVE MATERIALS/DESIGN SIGN — Custom-made signs that use
only indirect lighting and do not include a raceway or visible electrical
housing and that are constructed primarily of the following materials and
methods:
A. Ceramic tile, painted or sandblasted;
§ 265-202 TARENTUM CODE § 265-202
256:402
ELECTRONIC MESSAGE CENTER — A sign or component of a sign that
uses changing lights of a single color, consisting of a red or amber hue, to
form a message or series of messages that are electronically programmed
or modified by electronic processes.
ESTABLISHMENT — A place that comprises an economic unit, generally
at a single physical location, where business is conducted or services or
industrial operations performed.
FAMILY — One or more persons related by blood, marriage, adoption
or foster care, or a group of not more than five unrelated individuals
living together in a manner similar to persons related by blood, marriage,
adoption or foster care, who maintain and occupy one dwelling, including
individuals with handicaps that are defined and protected by the Fair
Housing Act of 1998 or its successor legislation who live in one dwelling
properly licensed and operated by a nonprofit entity. The preceding number
of unrelated persons shall be in addition to caregivers of an individual
or individuals residing within a dwelling, gratuitous guests, or domestic
servants provided that the primary purpose of residence is as caregivers or
servants and that gratuitous guests reside in the dwelling on a temporary
basis. However, in no instance shall a family include transient residents
other than gratuitous guests.
FENCE — A structure, partition, wall or other objects other than living
vegetation, intended or utilized to circumscribe, designate, delineate, define
or in some manner enclose an area or some feature or element thereon.
FLASHING SIGN — Any illuminated sign that contains an intermittent or
flashing light source or that changes light intensity in sudden transitory
bursts.
FORESTRY — The management of forests and timberlands when practiced
in accordance with accepted silvicultural principles, through developing,
cultivating, harvesting, transporting and selling trees for commercial
purposes, which does not involve any land development.
FREESTANDING SIGN — Any sign on a frame, pole or other support
structure that is not attached to any building, excluding monument signs.
GLARE — Excessive brightness in the field of view that causes loss in visual
performance or annoyance, so as to jeopardize health, safety or welfare.
GROSS FLOOR AREA — The sum of the gross horizontal area of the several
floors of a building, measured between the exterior faces of walls.
HALF STORY — A story that is entirely housed within a hip, gable, mansard,
or similar type of roof structure.
IMMINENT DEVELOPMENT — Construction of principal structure where
associated land development, land development applications or building
B. Wood, carved or sandblasted;
C. Metal, formed, etched, cast, or engraved;
D. Brick or stone with recessed or raised lettering.
§ 265-202 WATER § 265-202
256:403
permit applications are filed within eighteen months of a particular point in
time as established by reference in this chapter including but not limited to
application for a traditional neighborhood development or conditional use.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE COVERAGE — The percentage of a lot covered by
impervious surfaces, defined as surfaces with a coefficient of runoff greater
than 0.85, including all buildings, roofed areas, parking areas, driveways,
streets, sidewalks and areas paved in concrete and asphalt and any other
areas determined by the Municipal Engineer to be impervious within the
meaning of this definition.
INDIRECT LIGHTING — Illumination from a light source not contained
within a sign or awning, or halo or silhouette lighting that is not visible or
exposed on the face of the sign.
INFILL — The development of new residential or nonresidential uses on
scattered, vacant sites in a built-up area.
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option
or contract is subject to any condition), a lessee if he is authorized under
the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner, or other person having a
proprietary interest in land.
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as a
unit.
LOT AREA — The area of a lot calculated within the lot lines, excluding
areas that lie within streets.
LOT, CORNER — A lot at the junction of and having frontage on two or more
intersecting streets, excepting double frontage lots.
LOT COVERAGE — The portion of a lot covered by buildings.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE — A lot that bears two or more sets of opposite
or nonintersecting lines that each adjoin streets, excepting alleys, where
the lot does not lie at the intersection of such streets; or where said lines
intersect at an interior angle of 135° or greater, and when abutting a curved
street possess tangents to the curve at its points of beginning within the lot
or at the point of intersection of the remaining lot lines with the street line
where the intersection at an interior angle is 135° or greater.
LOT FRONTAGE — The length of one front lot line measured in feet.
LOT FRONTAGE or FRONTAGE — The length of one front lot line measured
in feet.
LOT, INTERIOR — A lot bearing one lot line adjoining a street which is not
otherwise defined as a double frontage lot or a corner lot.
LOT LINE, FRONT — In the case of a corner lot, a line separating the
narrowest frontage of the lots from an adjacent street; and in the case of
an interior lot, a line separating the lot from the street or place; and in the
§ 265-202 TARENTUM CODE § 265-202
256:404
case of a double frontage lot, the lines separating each frontage comprising
the double frontage lot from the respective adjacent streets.
LOT LINE, REAR — A lot line most directly opposite of the front lot line that
borders adjacent lot lines or an alley on an interior lot or a street in the case
of a corner lot.
LOT LINE, SIDE — Those lot lines other than side and rear lot lines as
defined in this part.
LOT WIDTH — The dimensions of a lot, measured between side lot lines on
the building line.
LOW-LEVEL PLANTING OR SHRUB — Consists of shrubs and similar plant
species that are greater than two feet in height at planting.
MEDIATION — A voluntary negotiating process in which parties in a dispute
mutually select a neutral mediator to assist them in jointly exploring and
settling their differences, culminating in a written agreement which the
parties themselves create and consider acceptable.
MENU BOARD SIGN — A sign displaying goods or services available
through a drive-up window or available through a drive-in or drive-through
establishment.
MOBILE HOME — A transportable, single-family dwelling intended for
permanent occupancy, contained in one unit, or in two or more units
designed to be joined into one integral unit capable of again being
separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site complete and ready
for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly
operations, and constructed so that it may be used without a permanent
foundation.
MOBILE HOME LOT — A parcel of land in a mobile home park, improved
with the necessary utility connections and other appurtenances necessary
for the erections thereon of a single mobile home.
MONUMENT SIGN — A freestanding sign where the base of the sign
structure is on the ground or no more than 12 inches above the ground
adjacent to the sign. Typically constructed of brick, wood, stone, or metal,
monument signs have a base that is at least 80% of the width of the top of
the sign structure.
NAICS CODE — The North American Industrial Classification Code, 2007,
as published by the White House Office of Management and Budget, that
includes classification codes and definitions by establishment.
NET SITE AREA — The site area after deducting planned street rightsof-
way, environmentally sensitive areas, and land area required for
nonresidential uses.
NOISE LEVEL — Airborne sound levels expressed in dB or decibel and
obtained by the use of certain frequency-dependent weighting networks,
as specified in the reference standards and indicated by proper notation;
where A-weighting is employed, and the sound level is indicated as dB(A).
§ 265-202 WATER § 265-202
256:405
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot the area or dimension of which was lawful
prior to the adoption or amendment of this chapter, but which fails to
conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located by
reasons of such adoption or amendment.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure or part of a structure
manifestly not designed to comply with the applicable use or extent of use
provisions of this chapter or amendment heretofore or hereafter enacted,
where such structure lawfully existed prior to the enactment of such
ordinance or amendment or prior to the application of such ordinance or
amendment to its location by reason of annexation. Such nonconforming
structures include, but are not limited to, nonconforming signs and parking
lots.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use, whether of land or of a structure, that
does not comply with the applicable use provisions in this Zoning chapter or
amendment heretofore or hereafter enacted, where such use was lawfully
in existence prior to the enactment of this chapter or amendment, or prior
to the application of the ordinance or amendment to its location by reason
of annexation.
NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION — A social service, charitable or educational
entity that holds current tax-exempt status from the Internal Revenue
Service, derives more than 50% of its operating funds from charitable
donations or public donations and can demonstrate that such funds are
used to achieve the objects and purposes of the organization as stated in its
articles of incorporation as a tax-exempt organization.
NUISANCE — A use, structure or activity of personal property which
creates a danger to the health, safety and welfare of persons in the
immediate environment.
OBSOLETE SIGN — A sign which serves to draw attention to or
commercially advertise for an establishment which is no longer actively
operating and which has not actively operated for a period of more than 180
days.
OFFICE PARK — A group of commercial establishments, primarily
comprised of professional offices, warehousing and distribution,
manufacturing facilities, which is planned, developed, owned and managed
as a unit related in its location, size, including independently owned and
managed outparcels which are accessed solely through the access drive or
drives serving the core of the center, which includes less than 20,000 square
feet of exclusively retail uses, including but not limited to restaurants,
small professional offices, and commercial schools, and indoor commercial
recreation establishments
OUTPARCEL — A parcel of land located on the perimeter of a shopping
center that is subordinate to the larger parcel for access, parking and
drainage purposes.
OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICT — A zoning district classification, the extents
of which are described in the Zoning Ordinance and/or depicted on the
Zoning Map, that modifies the standards of the base zoning district within
§ 265-202 TARENTUM CODE § 265-202
256:406
but not limited to areas of relatively steep slope or grade, floodplains,
transitional areas, the Allegheny River, areas where innovation and the
promotion of flexibility, economy and ingenuity are encouraged, and areas
surrounding and including public buildings and public grounds.
PASSIVE OPEN SPACE — Open space preserved in perpetuity with limited
disturbance permitted to vegetation and slopes thereon. Limited
disturbance may include timber harvesting according to accepted
silvicultural practices for purposes of maintaining a healthy forest,
replanting and revegetation, and installation of stormwater best
management practices.
PIN-MOUNTED CHANNEL LETTER SIGN — A wall sign mounted directly
on the face of a building wall as individual letters, numbers, or symbols
without a raceway or background other than the background provided by
the building to which the sign is affixed. In order to qualify for the sign
area ratios established for pin-mounted channel letter signs, pin-mounted
channel letter signs must not be illuminated or be illuminated only by
indirect lighting, halo lighting, or silhouette lighting. Pin-mounted channel
letter signs with other forms of illumination are subject to raceway-mounted
channel letter sign area ratios.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of Tarentum
Borough as established by ordinance of the Borough with membership duly
appointed by Tarentum Borough Council.
PORCH — An open-roofed or enclosed exterior appendage to a main or
accessory structure, projecting from the front, side, or rear walls of the
structure. For purposes of this chapter, porches shall include structures and
home additions commonly referred to as sun porches, sunrooms, decks, and
similar structures or construction, excluding stoops or slabs that extend less
than an additional four feet beyond the structure of the porch.
PORTABLE SIGN — Any sign not permanently attached to the ground, a
building or other structure that is not readily movable. Any sign attached
to a sign structure that has wheels will be considered a portable sign, as
well as any sign attached to a frame or other sign structure that is not
permanently attached to the ground or a building.
PROJECTING SIGN — Any sign that is attached to a building or other
structure and extends beyond the line of the building or structure or beyond
the surface of that portion of the building or structure to which it is attached
by more than 18 inches.
PUBLIC HEARING — A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice by the
Borough Council, intended to inform and obtain public comment, prior to
taking action in accordance with the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code.118
PUBLIC MEETING — A forum held pursuant to notice under the Act of July
3, 1986 (P.L. 388, No. 84), known as the "Sunshine Act."119
118. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
119. Editor's Note: See 65 P.S. § 271 et seq.
§ 265-202 WATER § 265-202
256:407
PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice published once each week for two successive
weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality. Such notice
shall state the time and place of the hearing and the particular nature of
the matter to be considered at the hearing. The first publication shall not be
more than 30 days and the second publication shall not be less than seven
days from the date of the hearing.
RACEWAY — A mounting bar or similar device that is used to attach channel
letters to a building. Raceways often conceal the electrical components of
channel letter signs.
RACEWAY-MOUNTED CHANNEL LETTER SIGNS — A wall sign mounted
on a raceway as individual letters, numbers, or symbols. Also includes
channel letter signs mounted on a background other than the building wall.
In order to qualify as a raceway-mounted channel letter sign, the raceway
must be painted or otherwise designed to match or blend in with the color
of the wall to which it is attached.
ROOF SIGN — Any sign erected, constructed, and maintained above the
parapet on a building with a flat roof or above the fascia board on a building
with a pitched roof.
SCREENED BOX SIGNS WITH RAISED (PUSH-THROUGH) OR RECESSED
LETTERS — A box sign with opaque (screened) background and lighting
that highlights only the individual letters, symbols, or logos and on which
the letters, symbols, or logos are raised or recessed onto a different plane
than the sign background, thereby giving a clearly distinguishable
dimensional effect to the sign.
SHADE TREE — Consists of trees of a deciduous nature with a minimum
height of six feet at planting and a caliper of 1 1/2 inches at planting which
will bear an ultimate height exceeding 25 feet.
SHOPPING CENTER — A group of commercial establishments which is
planned, developed, owned and managed as a unit related in its location,
size, including independently owned and managed outparcels which are
accessed solely through the access drive or drives serving the core of the
center, which includes at least 20,000 square feet of exclusively retail uses,
including but not limited to restaurants, small professional offices, and
commercial schools, and indoor commercial recreation establishments.
SIGN — For purposes of this chapter, a sign shall be considered as any
writing (including letter, word, or numeral); pictorial representation
(including illustration or decoration); emblem (including device, symbol
trademark, banner or pennant); or any other figure of similar character, that
is a structure or any part thereof, or is attached to, painted on, or in any
other manner represented on a building or other structure, and is used to
announce, direct attention to, or advertise.
SIGN AREA — The area, in square feet, the calculation of which is set forth
in this article.
§ 265-202 TARENTUM CODE § 265-202
256:408
SIGN COPY — Those letters, numerals, figures, symbols, logos and graphic
elements comprising the content or message of a sign, exclusive of
numerals identifying a street address only.
SITE AREA — The entire area of land involved in a TND, including open
space, proposed street rights-of-way, public lands, and proposed lots.
STAND-ALONE LOT — A lot bearing principal nonresidential uses that lies
outside of an office park or shopping center.
STEEP SLOPES — Areas of existing topography where, in over a onehundred-
foot horizontal distance, or where the difference in elevation is
over 20 feet, the slope equals or exceeds 25% from the top to bottom of
the break in grade, excluding manmade slopes designed and constructed in
accordance with all applicable ordinances and laws.
STORY — The portion of a building, other than the basement, included
between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or
if there is no floor above, then the space between any floor and the ceiling
next above it.
STREET — A public or private right-of-way which affords means of access to
abutting property. A street may be designated as a highway, thoroughfare,
parkway, boulevard, road, avenue, lane, drive, place, or other appropriate
name, but shall not include alleys.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires
location on the ground, or attachment to something having location on the
ground.
TEMPORARY OUTDOOR ACTIVITY — Any activity conducted outdoors or
within or about tents or other such contrivances within any special,
commercial or residential districts in the municipality, including but not
limited to carnivals, outdoor displays of merchandise, vehicles or
manufactured products, promotions, amusements, gatherings of people and
similar activities. (All "temporary outdoor activity" shall be considered
temporary uses.)
TEMPORARY SIGN — Any sign, banner, pennant, valance, or advertising
display that by intent is not permanent, constructed of cloth, canvas,
lightweight fabric, cardboard, wallboard, or other lightweight materials
with or without frames, intended to be displayed for a short period of time
only.
TEMPORARY STRUCTURE — Any structure without a permanent
foundation or footings which is intended to be removed after expiration of a
designated time period authorized for its installation.
TEMPORARY USE — Any activity of limited duration, other than a
household garage sale, established for a period of at least one day, or
portion thereof, and for no more than 21 days, with the intent to discontinue
the use after the expiration of that time period, whether or not a temporary
structure is required.
§ 265-202 WATER § 265-202
256:409
TRADITIONAL LOT — Any nonconforming lot bearing 10,000 square feet or
less of lot area or any such lot as authorized in the respective zoning district
through the cluster option as set forth in § 265-503, Cluster option model.
UNDERSTORY TREE — Trees at least four feet in height at planting, with
a minimum caliper of 1 1/2 inches, the ultimate height of which will not
exceed 25 feet.
USE — The specific purposes for which land or a building is designed,
arranged, intended, or for which it is occupied or may be occupied or
maintained. The term "permitted use" or its equivalent shall not be deemed
to include any nonconforming use. The term "conditional use" shall be
deemed to include only the uses which are specifically cited in the
ordinance to be allowed or denied by the Tarentum Borough Council after
recommendation by the Tarentum Planning Commission, pursuant to
express standards and criteria set forth in this chapter.
VARIANCE — A modification of the literal provisions of this chapter which
the Zoning Hearing Board is permitted to grant when strict enforcement of
said provisions would cause undue hardship owing to circumstances unique
to the individual property on which the variance is sought.
WALL SIGN — A single-faced sign attached generally flush or parallel to the
wall of a building.
WINDOW SIGN — A sign posted, painted, placed, or affixed in or on the
interior side of a window and exposed to public view. A sign that is interior
to the building that faces a window exposed to public view that is located
within two feet of the window face is a window sign for the purposes
of calculating the total area of all window signs. Merchandise used in a
window display will not be considered a window sign.
YARD — A space on the same lot with a principal building, open, unoccupied
and unobstructed by structures, except as otherwise provided in this
chapter.
YARD, FRONT — A yard extending across the full width of the lot, the
depth of which is the least distance between the front lot line and the
corresponding building line.
YARD, REAR — A yard extending across the full width of the lot, the depth of
which is the least distance between the rear lot line and the corresponding
building line.
YARD, SIDE — A yard located in the least distance between the side lot
line and the corresponding building line, bounded by front yard, or from the
front lot line where no front yard is required, to the rear yard.
ZONING HEARING BOARD or BOARD — The Zoning Hearing Board of
Tarentum Borough, appointed by resolution in accordance with the
procedures set forth in this chapter.
ZONING MAP — The map adopted as part of this chapter and amended
by ordinance of the Borough in accordance with all applicable procedures
which sets forth the boundaries of the zoning districts established by this
§ 265-202 TARENTUM CODE § 265-202
256:410
chapter in relation to property lines, rights-of-way, and natural features
indicated thereon.
§ 265-203. Use definitions.
The following terms consist of uses of particular establishments as
authorized and regulated throughout this chapter within but not limited to
the authorized uses within particular zoning districts, parking, and signage.
ADMINISTRATIVE AND PROFESSIONAL OFFICES — An establishment
that provides day-to-day office administrative services, such as financial
planning; billing and recordkeeping; personnel; and physical distribution
and logistics for others on a contract or fee basis; or any office of recognized
professions, such as lawyers, architects, engineers, real estate brokers,
insurance agents, medical offices, dental offices and others who, through
training, are qualified to perform services of a professional nature,
excluding banks and veterinary clinics.
ADULT USES — "Adult uses" shall include any one or more of the following
establishments where any such activity whether or not accessory to a
principal use otherwise defined herein shall render the establishment an
adult use: (See § 265-502.)
ADULT BOOKSTORE — Any commercial establishment in which is
offered for sale any book or publication, film or medium which depicts
nudity or sexual conduct.
A.
ADULT BUSINESS — An adult bookstore, movie theater, VCR, digital,
or other electronic or recording device medium movie, movie rental
or movie house or other adult entertainment, as defined herein. In the
event that a use includes activities which constitute an adult bookstore,
adult movie theater or movie house or adult entertainment, as defined
herein, then such use shall be considered an adult business and shall
be subject to all provisions in this chapter applicable to adult business
uses, even if such activities are not the only activities conducted upon
the premises.
B.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT — An establishment providing, either as a
sole use in conjunction with or in addition to other uses, entertainment
consisting of the use of live dancing, posing, displaying, acting or other
live presentation or use of persons whose actions are distinguished
or characterized by emphasis on use of the human body in a manner
intended to or resulting in arousal of sexual excitation or sexual
titillation or a prurient interest or intended to or resulting in producing
lustful emotions.
C.
ADULT MOVE THEATER OR MOVIE HOUSE (INCLUDING ADULT
MINI-THEATERS) — Any movie theater which on a regular continuing
basis shows films rated "X" by the Motion Picture Coding Association
of America or any movie theater which presents for public viewing
on a regular, continuing basis so-called "adult films" depicting sexual
conduct, as defined by this chapter.
D.
§ 265-202 WATER § 265-203
256:411
AMATEUR RADIO ANTENNA STRUCTURE or AMATEUR RADIO ANTENNA
— Any antenna structure employed solely for the purposes of transmitting
amateur radio service communications as defined and protected by
Pennsylvania Act 88 of 2008, an act Amending Title 53 (Municipalities
Generally) of the Pennsylvania Consolidated Statutes, restricting
municipalities from regulating amateur radio service communications,
including all support structures and excluding buildings.
ANIMAL HOSPITAL/CLINIC — A place where animals are given medical
or surgical treatment and are cared for during the time of such treatment.
Use as a kennel shall be limited to short-time boarding and shall be only
incidental to such hospital use not including outdoor runs, pens and/or
cages. The definition shall also include veterinary clinics.
ANTENNA — A structure and necessary auxiliary components designed for
transmitting and/or receiving radio, television. telephone communications
or any other telecommunications system signal which is operated by an
agency or corporation other than a public utility which is regulated by
the Public Utilities Commission or by other federal commission or agency,
excluding amateur radio antennas as accessory uses.
ASSEMBLY HALL, PUBLIC OR SEMIPUBLIC — A room, hall or building
used for lectures, tours, meetings and gatherings, other than churches or
other uses expressly defined herein. Any portion of such an establishment
where food and drink are regularly prepared and served to club members,
guests, or the public at large shall be classified as a restaurant.
AUTOMOTIVE SALES AND LEASING — Sales and leasing of automobiles
that do not require a commercial driver's license (CDL) under Pennsylvania
Law.
BANK — An establishment primarily engaged in accepting demand and
other deposits and making commercial, industrial, and consumer loans.
BANQUET HALL — A premises where food is prepared for direct onsite
consumption by individuals or groups of people and their respective guests
who rent the facility for specific events, conventions, celebrations, dances,
or similar gatherings and/or including catering for offsite events.
BAR/TAVERN — An establishment which sells alcoholic beverages for
consumption on the premises as the principal use and offers food for
consumption on the premises as an accessory use.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST — The offering of overnight accommodations and
food service for transient guests, for compensation, within the confines of
a detached single-family dwelling structure when conducted as an ancillary
use in association with a normal single-family residential use.
CAR WASH — A facility, whether automatic, semiautomatic or manual, for
washing and polishing vehicles.
CEMETERY — Property used for interring of dead persons or domestic pets,
including mausoleums and columbarium, but not including a crematorium.
§ 265-203 TARENTUM CODE § 265-203
256:412
CHURCH — A building, together with its accessory buildings and uses, that
is primarily used as a place where persons regularly assemble for religious
worship activities or similar regular exercise of religion. This term includes
similar uses such as synagogue, temple, or mosque.
COMMERCIAL KENNEL — A facility for the boarding of small animals,
the breeding of small animals such as dogs and/or cats, or the boarding,
grooming, sale or training of small animals such as dogs and/or cats for
which a fee is charged.
CONVENIENCE STORE — A retail establishment that sells limited food,
common households items, and convenience goods in addition to gasoline
sales.
DAY-CARE CENTER — A state-certified facility licensed to provide care to
seven or more children for a period of less than 24 hours in a day.
DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITY — An establishment, whether of a principal or
accessory use, that by design, physical facilities, service, or by packaging
encourages or permits customers to receive services, obtain goods or be
entertained while remaining in their motor vehicles.
DWELLING UNIT — A building or portion thereof providing complete
housekeeping facilities for one family.
ENTERTAINMENT RECREATION FACILITIES, INDOOR — Any activity
conducted for private gain that is generally related to the entertainment or
recreation field and limited to the following uses: motion-picture theaters,
bowling alleys, roller-skating rinks, theaters, playhouses, commercial
swimming pools, gyms, indoor miniature golf and playgrounds, indoor
courts, fields, or practice facilities for baseball, basketball, soccer, tennis,
and similar sports, and fitness centers.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY — A detached building designed for, or
occupied exclusively as, a residence for one family.
A.
DWELLING, DUPLEX — A detached building containing two dwelling
units that constitute the sole principle uses of the building and which
are arranged such that each unit possesses separate exterior entrances
and where the stories occupied are arranged adjacent to and not above
or below the other dwelling unit.
B.
DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE — A dwelling within a group of units,
consisting of a minimum of three, but no more than six, independent
single dwelling units that are attached side by side by common
unpierced party walls. This definition shall include those arrangements
commonly cited as quads and carriage homes that are arranged as
aforesaid.
C.
DWELLING, MULTI- OR MULTIPLE-FAMILY, APARTMENT — A
structure, other than a duplex, rowhouse or townhouse, containing
separate dwelling units for families living independently of each other,
but which may provide joint services, common access and circulation
ways and similar facilities.
D.
§ 265-203 WATER § 265-203
256:413
ESSENTIAL SERVICE — The erection, construction, alteration or
maintenance by public utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies
or authorities, of underground or overhead gas, electrical, communication,
steam or water transmission, distribution, collection, supply or disposal
systems, including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewer pipes, conduits,
cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants, and
other similar equipment, or structures accessory to the consistent and
efficient delivery of the aforementioned transmissions, fuels, resources,
and products between residential and nonresidential units and source of
production, refinement, or treatment of said items excepting
communications towers and buildings.
ESSENTIAL SERVICE BUILDINGS — Any building that serves as the
location for storage, distribution, maintenance and/or repair of facilities
and/or equipment associated with the operation of an essential service,
including pump stations.
FAMILY DAY-CARE HOME — A home other than the child's own home,
operated for profit or not-for-profit, in which child day-care is provided at
any one time to four, five or six children unrelated to the operator.
FUNERAL HOME — An establishment devoted to or used in the care and
preparation for the funeral and burial of dead human bodies and maintained
for the convenience of the bereaved for viewing or other services in
connection with dead human bodies and as an office or place for carrying on
the profession of funeral directing, excepting crematoriums as a principle
or accessory use.
GENERAL RETAIL — Any establishment, not otherwise defined in this
chapter, by which goods are sold directly to the consumer and where
such sales represent the principal use of the establishment and where any
assembly or creation of goods is customarily incidental to the retail sales
activity on the site and created for the sole purpose of onsite sales directly
to the consumer, including grocery and convenience stores that do not sell
gasoline, excluding retail supercenters.
GREENHOUSE, RETAIL — A glass-enclosed building or area of land
devoted to the cultivation and sale of plant materials and the products
which aid their growth and care, excluding sale of fruits and vegetables for
direct retail or wholesale consumption or sale.
GROCERY STORE — A retail store which contains 10,000 square feet or less
of gross floor area and whose primary activities involve the retail sales of
beverages, confections, drugs, unpackaged and packaged food, unprepared
and prepared food, magazines, tobacco and other household staples, which
may or may not include a deli as an accessory use.
GROUP RESIDENTIAL FACILITY — An establishment that provides room
and board, for any period of time, to persons who receive supervised
specialized service which are limited to health, social, rehabilitative or
housing services that are provided under the jurisdiction of a government
agency, their licensed or certified agents or other responsible nonprofit
social service organizations. Such group facilities shall be limited to child
§ 265-203 TARENTUM CODE § 265-203
256:414
and adult care and supervision that provide services for individuals not
in need of hospitalization or incarceration, but who because of age,
convalescence, infirmity, disability or related circumstance require such
services, including shelters for battered persons and their children, and
maternity homes.
HOSPITAL — An institution, licensed in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
as a hospital, which may render inpatient and outpatient medical care on
a twenty-four-hours-per-day basis; and provides primary health services
and medical/surgical care to persons suffering from illness, disease, injury,
deformity and other abnormal physical or mental conditions. A hospital
may include operating facilities, a cafeteria or restaurant, medically related
heliports, optical facilities and shops for pharmaceutical supplies, gifts,
books, magazines, toiletries, flowers, candy or similar items, provided such
uses are primarily for the benefit of patients, staff and visitors and are
located so as not normally to attract other retail customers and in
accordance with the standards of this chapter; or an outpatient clinic as
defined in this section.
HOTEL or MOTEL — An establishment offering transient lodging
accommodations at a daily rate to paying guests; the facility may also
provide additional services, such as restaurants, meeting rooms, and
recreational facilities, all of which are available to paying guests only.
INDUSTRIAL USES — Establishment primarily engaged in manufacturing,
wholesale, warehousing, and bus transportation, as well as retail or service
uses of a similar scale and impact including but not limited to NAICS
Code 532120, Truck, utility trailer, and RV (recreational vehicle) rental
and leasing; NAICS Code 8113, Commercial and industrial machinery and
equipment; heavy equipment and truck driver training schools as included
in NAICS Code 611519; NAICS Code 4853, Taxi and limousine service;
NAICS Code 45431, Fuel dealers; and the sale of aircraft fuels.
LOCAL PUBLIC USE — Building structures and land owned and occupied
by Tarentum Borough, the Highlands School District, or any of either's
agencies to provide services to the residents of the Borough or School
District. Such municipal or school district facilities may include but not be
limited to schools, administrative offices, public works buildings, storage
yards, libraries, fire company building and grounds, ambulance service
buildings and grounds, senior centers, recreation facilities and fields, and
parks and buildings, excepting bus garages.
MEDICAL OFFICES — Offices of recognized and licensed medical and
mental health professionals such as doctors, chiropractors, psychologists,
social workers, and psychiatrists.
MINOR EQUIPMENT AND AUTOMOTIVE REPAIRS — Small or automotive
engine repair or reconditioning, collision and body repair, including
straightening and repainting, replacement of parts and incidental services;
and repair of appliances of a scale customarily utilized by individuals for
noncommercial purposes and by retail or administrative uses.
§ 265-203 WATER § 265-203
256:415
MOBILE HOME PARKS — A parcel or contiguous parcels of land which has
been so designated and improved that it contains two or more mobile home
lots for the placement thereon of mobile homes.
NEIGHBORHOOD PARK OR COMMUNITY CENTER — A facility operated
by a nonprofit organization, or a homeowner's or condominium association
designed to primarily serve residents of the surrounding neighborhood
as defined by subdivision plan or a residential area generally within four
blocks of said park or center which may include and shall be limited
to the following, unless otherwise authorized by this chapter: children's
playground equipment, sport courts and fields, picnic areas, buildings
housing accessory food service, banquet and kitchen facilities, meeting
facilities, gymnasiums and fitness centers available solely to residents of
a defined residential neighborhood in which building is located and their
guests.
NO-IMPACT HOME-BASED BUSINESS — A business or commercial activity
administered or conducted as an accessory use which is clearly secondary
to the use as a residential dwelling and which involves no customer, client or
patient traffic, whether vehicular or pedestrian, pickup, delivery or removal
functions to or from the premises, in excess of those normally associated
with residential use. The business or commercial activity must satisfy the
following requirements:
NURSERY SCHOOLS — A preschool or nursery school licensed to educate
preschool students by the Pennsylvania Department of Education.
OUTDOOR COMMERCIAL RECREATION — An outdoor establishment
operated by a corporation, partnership or other business entity for the
pursuit of sports and recreational activities through the following types of
establishments: miniature golf, golf or batting practice facilities, playing
fields and courts, racquet clubs, swimming pools, and amphitheaters.
OUTPATIENT CLINIC — Any clinic primarily intended for the treatment of
those who typically do not reside within the establishment, including but not
limited to the following services provided for less than a twenty-four-hourper-
day period:
The business activity shall be compatible with the residential use of the
property and surrounding residential uses.
A.
The business shall employ no employees other than family members
residing in the dwelling.
B.
There shall be no display or sale of retail goods and no stockpiling or
inventory of a substantial nature.
C.
There shall be no outside appearance of a business use, including, but
not limited to, parking, signs or lights.
D.
The business activity may not use any equipment or process which
creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical or electronic
interference, including interference with radio or television reception,
which is detectable in the neighborhood.
E.
§ 265-203 TARENTUM CODE § 265-203
256:416
PERSONAL CARE HOME — A premise in which food, shelter and personal
assistance or supervision are provided for a period exceeding 24 hours,
for four or more adults who are not relatives of the operator, who do not
require the services in or of a licensed long-term care facility (as defined
and regulated by state law), but who do require assistance or supervision in
activities of daily living or instrumental activities of daily living.
PERSONAL SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT — An establishment that
principally provides the following services: laundry, grooming and related
cosmetic treatments, repair of small-scale personal property such as
watches, shoes, and similar apparel; repair of small electronic equipment
such as televisions, radios, and computer hardware; photography; and
weight loss centers.
PHARMACY — Retail establishments that primarily sell prescription and
nonprescription drugs. These facilities may also sell cosmetics, toiletries,
medications, stationery, personal care products, limited food products and
general merchandise.
RETAIL SUPERCENTER — Any retail establishment, supermarket, or home
center as classified under 2007 North American Industry Classification
Code 444110, Home centers, that encompasses more than 90,000 square
feet of gross floor area, including outside display or storage of merchandise
as may be authorized by this article.
RESTAURANT — An establishment that offers food and beverages for sale
directly to the end consumer for consumption either on and or off of the
premises, including banquet facilities.
SCHOOL, COMMERCIAL — A privately operated, for-profit establishment
providing technical or skilled training, vocational or trade educational
courses and programs, excepting truck driving and similar schools with
onsite training facilities.
A. Dialysis services.
B. Physical rehabilitation.
Mental health partial hospitalization center; drug and alcohol partial
hospitalization center; drug and alcohol outpatient center; drug and
alcohol intensive outpatient center as defined and licensed by the
Pennsylvania Department of Health, Department of Public Welfare, or
other applicable agencies of the Commonwealth.
C.
Methadone clinic or methadone treatment facility: A facility licensed by
the Department of Health to use the drug methadone in the treatment,
maintenance or detoxification of persons.
D.
Psychiatric outpatient clinic: A premises or part thereof in which mental
health evaluation or treatment, including psychiatric, psychological,
and other related services, are provided under medical supervision,
which is designed for children/adolescents with emotional disturbance
and adults with mental illness on a planned and regularly scheduled
basis, licensed as such by the Pennsylvania Department of Health.
E.
§ 265-203 WATER § 265-203
256:417
SCHOOL, PRIVATE — A nonprofit establishment licensed by the State
Department of Education to provide education as an elementary or
secondary school, vocational, or post-secondary education offering a
degree, excepting truck driving and similar schools with onsite training
facilities.
SERVICE STATION — A building, buildings, premises or portions thereof
that are used or arranged, designed, or intended to be used for the retail
sale of gasoline or other motor vehicle, or motor boat fuels, as well as
limited minor repairs.
SIMILAR USES, UNDEFINED — Any use, not otherwise specifically defined
within this chapter, which is determined by Borough Council through
approval of a conditional use with applicable conditions to be similar to uses
defined in this section and authorized within a respective zoning district, in
accordance with specific criteria set forth in this chapter.
SUPERMARKET — A grocery store that that contains more than 10,000
square feet of gross floor area.
TRADITIONAL NEIGHBORHOOD DEVELOPMENT (TND) — An area of land
developed in accordance with the principles authorized and encouraged by
Article VII-A of the Municipalities Planning Code, Act of 1968, P.L. 805,
No. 247,120 as reenacted and amended, and with those standards expressed
within this chapter.
TRADITIONAL NEIGHBORHOOD DEVELOPMENT (TND), INFILL MODEL
— Any TND that proposes a combination of two or more of the following
activities within the zoning district in which the TND is authorized:
TRANSITIONAL RESIDENTIAL FACILITY — A dwelling unit or group of
dwelling units occupied on a short-term basis by persons assigned by a
court of law, or who are self-referred, or referred by a public, semipublic
or nonprofit agency, and managed by a public, semipublic or nonprofit
agency responsible for the occupants' care, safety, conduct, counseling and
supervision for a specified period of time, for alcoholic recovery, community
reentry services following incarceration, prison assignment, house arrest
or other court-ordered treatment, and other such short-term supervised
assignments.
Construction or renovation of a building exceeding 1,000 square feet of
gross floor area.
A.
B. Expansion of an existing building by 50% of gross floor area or more.
C. Construction of a new parking lot.
Expansion of an existing parking lot by more than 25% of existing
parking spaces.
D.
E. Demolition of an existing building.
120. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 265-203 TARENTUM CODE § 265-203
256:418
VETERINARY CLINIC — An establishment, completely housed within a
building, intended for the medical examination and treatment of animals,
including commercial kennels.
§ 265-203 WATER § 265-203
256:419

ARTICLE III
Bulk Regulations
§ 265-301. Bulk regulations.
A. Principal uses. Within the R-1 and R-2 Districts, one principal use is
authorized per lot unless otherwise expressly authorized within this
chapter, provided that where townhouse and duplex dwellings are
authorized, such may be considered as one principal use for purposes of
the preceding limitation of principal uses. Multiple nonresidential
principal uses within the CC Commercial Center, RFO Riverfront
Overlay and RRO Rural Resource Districts shall be authorized to the
extent that all other standards of this chapter are met.
B. Access to lots. Notwithstanding stricter provisions of this chapter, no lot
shall be created nor any principal use constructed, operated, or housed
on any lot unless there is direct access to it through a recorded right-ofway
or easement for ingress and egress on the same lot. Such open
space shall extend from the lot to a public street or highway, or to a
private street or highway and shall bear a cartway so constructed and
maintained to a mud-free and permanently passable condition allowing
vehicular access. For the purpose of this section, an alley or street
expressly designed and functioning as an alley shall not constitute a
public street or highway.
C. Noise. No establishment, excepting Borough and school district
activities, as part of its regular operations, shall exceed the noise levels
as measured at the property lines of the parcel upon which the
establishment is operated in the following manners:
(1) The sound level at any one point in time exceeds 90 decibels.
(2) The sound exceeds any of the established limits in Subsection C(3)
by a measured sound level of 10 dB(A) for a cumulative total of one
minute or more out of any ten-minute period.
(3) The sound exceeds any 75 decibels continually for a period of five
minutes, or a total of five minutes out of any 10 minutes.
D. Projections into required yards.
(1) No principal building, and no part of a principal building, shall be
erected within or shall project into the required front, side or rear
yard of a lot, except cornices, eaves and gutters. Steps and stoops,
chimneys, and bay windows are permitted to project into yard
areas provided that the projection is not more than 24 inches.
Porches may encroach up to eight feet into a required front yard
setback.
(2) Corner lots. On corner lots, the yard abutting the street on the
longer dimension may be reduced by an amount not to exceed 50%
of the required front yard, but shall otherwise be recognized as a
§ 265-301 WATER § 265-301
256:421
front yard for purposes of this chapter. The remaining yards may
be applied as side yards.
(3) Platforms, etc. Terraces, uncovered porches, patios, platforms, and
ornamental features that do not extend more than four feet above
the floor level of the first (ground) story may project into a required
yard, provided these projections be distant at least two feet from
the adjacent side lot line and five feet from front and rear lot lines.
(4) Accessory structures.
(a) Any accessory structure which is attached to a principal
structure shall be subject to the same application of yard
standards and exceptions as applied to the principal structure.
(b) Accessory building location. Accessory buildings which are not
part of a principal structure shall be erected so as to conform
to all of the dimensional and yard requirements specified for
the district in which it is located. Accessory structures that
cover less than 800 square feet of a lot and bear a maximum
height of 14 feet and swimming pools may encroach into half or
50% of the required rear yard. Additionally, sheds that cover
144 square feet or less may locate within five feet of any side or
rear lot line, excepting the front yard and any such lot line that
adjoins a street.
(5) Fences. Fences may encroach into required yards as established by
minimum setbacks provided that the fence(s) conform to the
following requirements:
(a) Fences, walls, plant materials or similar enclosures are
permitted up to the property line. In no case shall such
structures and/or materials be placed beyond the lot line or in
any public right-of-way.
(b) Rear yard fences and any portion of side yard fences that
extend from the front building line to the rear lot line may be
erected up to the property line of a lot, to a height not in excess
of six feet above the adjacent ground level.
(c) Front yard fences and any portion of side yard fences that
extend from the front building line to the front lot line may be
erected up to the property line of a lot, to a height not in excess
of four feet above the adjacent ground level, provided that the
ratio of the solid portion of the fence to the open portion shall
not exceed one to one.
(d) Where any nonresidential use is authorized as a conditional
use and such approval is sought by an applicant, Council may
approve the encroachment of a fence higher than the
maximum heights authorized to encroach into particular yards
with the criteria that the height of the fence is the minimum
§ 265-301 TARENTUM CODE § 265-301
256:422
required to provide security, safety, and/or visual screening
of products or materials authorized to be stored onsite and
integral to the functioning of the use authorized. The
preceding shall be authorized as a special exception subject
to the same criteria where the principal use is existing or
authorized as a permitted use by right.
E. Height regulations. No structure shall exceed the maximum height
regulations imposed by this chapter with respect to each Zoning
District or provision otherwise imposing greater or lesser height
maximums, except as follows. Spires, belfries, cupolas, or domes not
used for human occupancy, chimneys, ventilators, skylights, silos, and
ornamental or necessary mechanical appurtenances may exceed the
maximum height requirements imposed by a respective district by 15
feet.
F. Commercial vehicles.
(1) No commercial vehicle or combination of vehicles for the operation
of which state law requires a commercial driver's license or CDL
shall be parked, stored or maintained on any street, road, or rightof-
way, within any zoning district of the Borough of Tarentum. Such
vehicles shall not be permitted on properties within the R-1 and R-2
Districts, unless within an authorized commercial establishment
bears a loading space used for deliveries where the vehicle is only
on the property at such times.
(2) Motor homes and recreational trailers, as defined in the
Pennsylvania Vehicle Code, and boats shall not be parked nor
stored or maintained on any street, road, or right-of-way within any
zoning district of the Borough of Tarentum.
(3) Commercial vehicles and those cited under Subsection F(2) shall
not be parked in the front yard of any parcel within the R-1 and R-2
Districts.
G. Accessory uses. Accessory uses shall include but not be limited to the
following. Where a certain threshold is established, any access of said
threshold shall constitute a principal use subject to express
authorization in a respective district.
(1) In R-1 and R-2 Residential Zones or uses (all zones):
(a) Children's playhouse, domestic gardens, garden house, private
(noncommercial) greenhouse.
(b) Garage, shed or building for domestic storage; storage of
camping trailers, boats and similar equipment, which are
owned or leased, for the use of the residents of the premises
for noncommercial purposes notwithstanding the standards of
§ 265-301F, Commercial vehicles.
§ 265-301 WATER § 265-301
256:423
(c) Care of up to three children who are not relatives of the
occupant. (For purposes of these requirements, "relative" shall
be deemed to be a child, stepchild, grandchild, brother, sister,
half-brother, half-sister, aunt, uncle, niece, nephew,
stepbrother or stepsister.)
(d) Housing of up to five of any one type of domestic pet, wherein a
number in excess shall constitute a kennel for purposes of this
chapter.
(2) Uses accessory to nonresidential principal uses.
(a) Storage of merchandise and goods normally carried in stock in
conjunction with retail or wholesale business use, on the same
parcel or lot of ground provided that such storage shall not
occur in the front yard unless otherwise provided for as a
temporary use in this chapter. However, storage of such
merchandise shall be housed within an completely enclosed
building or screened in accordance with the requirements of
this chapter.
(b) Where principal use is authorized, storage of goods used in, or
produced by, manufacturing activities, on the same parcel or
lot of ground shall be permitted except within the required
front yard.
(3) In all zones off-street motor vehicle parking areas, loading and
unloading areas shall be permitted subject to any limitations
otherwise imposed by this chapter.
(4) No-impact home-based businesses shall be permitted as an
accessory use to any residential dwelling unit.
(5) Amateur radio antenna structures. Amateur radio antennas shall
further be authorized in all zoning districts with the exception of
the CC Commercial Center District for purposes of protecting the
historic integrity of the neighborhoods comprising the district. The
following shall apply to amateur radio antennas:
(a) The antenna shall not exceed 65 feet in height.
(b) Evergreen tree species that will ultimately grow to a height
comparable to the height of the proposed antenna shall be
planted along the property line that lies along the yard in
which the antenna is constructed.
(c) The antenna shall be set back at least 50% of its height as
measured vertically from mean ground level from all lot lines.
(d) No antenna shall be erected in the front yard of a lot.
H. Modified yard depth. The following yard depth shall be maintained from
adjoining district boundaries of the district noted where a portion or the
§ 265-301 TARENTUM CODE § 265-301
256:424
entirety of a lot located within the adjoining district bears one or
more residential dwelling units. Landscaping and buffering otherwise
required by this chapter may be installed within said area. Each
category sited shall be exclusive of and shall not include the buildings
or uses of the preceding.
Depth
(feet) Use Types
20 Parking areas, storage, access drives, and drive-through
lanes where permitted
40 Local public uses, churches, daycare, funeral homes; and
structures housing 1 or more of any other nonresidential
principal use where said structure bears 8,000 or less
square feet of gross floor area
70 Buildings housing 1 or more uses other than local public
uses, churches, daycare, funeral homes that exceed 8,000
square feet of gross floor area
I. Construction in areas of steep slopes. No greater than 25% of lot area
which is comprised of steep slope shall be disturbed for purposes of
grading, installation of structures, or clear cutting of forests except for
forestry, as defined in this chapter. Upon initial evaluation using the
most recent topography available through the USGS, Pennsylvania
Department of Conservation and Natural Resources PAMAP Program,
or other standardized and reliable resource, the Zoning Officer may
require submission of topography necessary to verify compliance with
the foregoing performance standard.
J. Forestry shall be authorized as a permitted use in all zoning districts.
K. All lands, lots, and rights-of-way within the Borough shall be subject to
the parking, signage, and supplemental standards set forth in this
chapter. Unless otherwise stated, said standards shall apply equally to
all zoning districts within the Borough.
§ 265-301 WATER § 265-301
256:425

ARTICLE IV
District Regulations
§ 265-401. Authorization of districts.
§ 265-402. Commercial Center, CC.
A. The following base zoning districts are authorized by this chapter and
shall be depicted on the Zoning Map.
(1) Commercial Center, CC.
(2) Highway Commercial and Manufacturing District, HC-M.
(3) Mixed-Density Residential District, R-2.
(4) Single-family Residential District, R-1.
(5) Public District, P-1.
B. The following overlay zoning districts are authorized in this chapter and
shall be depicted on the Zoning Map.
(1) RFO Riverfront Overlay.
(2) RRO Rural Resource Overlay.
(3) Floodplain District as depicted on the most current Flood
Insurance Rate Maps as defined herein.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the CC District is to promote the character and
vitality of Tarentum's traditional downtown through preservation of
existing structures and development and redevelopment of commercial
and residential structures and uses.
B. Traditional neighborhood development. Where any construction or
improvement of structures in the CC Commercial Center District
constitutes a traditional neighborhood development (TND) as defined in
Article II of this chapter, the construction or improvement shall meet
the standards and require approval in accordance with Article VI of this
chapter. In addition, to the extent possible, construction or
improvement should meet the guidelines prepared by the Pittsburgh
History and Landmarks Foundation, attached as an appendix to this
chapter.121
C. Permitted uses. The following uses shall be authorized within the CC
District subject to the performance standards of this article.
(1) Administrative and professional offices.
(2) Adult day services center.
121. Editor's Note: Said appendix is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 265-401 WATER § 265-402
256:427
(3) Animal hospital/clinic.
(4) Assembly hall, public or semipublic.
(5) Bank.
(6) Banquet hall.
(7) Bar/tavern.
(8) Bed-and-breakfast.
(9) Cemetery.
(10) Church.
(11) Day-care center.
(12) Entertainment recreation facilities, indoor.
(13) Essential services and facilities.
(14) Family day-care home.
(15) Funeral home.
(16) General and specialty retail.
(17) Group residential facility.
(18) Local public use.
(19) Minor equipment and automotive repairs.
(20) Nursery schools.
(21) Personal care home.
(22) Personal and professional services.
(23) Pharmacy.
(24) Restaurant.
(25) School, commercial or private.
(26) Traditional neighborhood developments.
(27) Dwelling units, single-family and duplex.
(28) Mixed-use structures with residential uses above the first floor.
D. Conditional uses. See § 265-502.
(1) Drive-through facilities.
(2) Hospitals or clinics.
§ 265-402 TARENTUM CODE § 265-402
256:428
(3) Industrial uses.
E. Basic dimensional standards. The following standards may be modified
through the performance standards of the traditional neighborhood
development approval processes outlined in Articles VI and VII of this
chapter.
(1) Minimum front yard: 0 feet.
(2) Build-to line: one quarter of lot width to 0 feet unless otherwise
specified in a design manual if adopted by the Borough.
(3) Minimum side yard: 0 feet.
(4) Minimum rear yard: 40 feet.
(5) Maximum lot coverage: 80%.
(6) Maximum impervious surface coverage: 85%.
(7) Maximum building height: 45 feet or three stories, whichever is
less.
F. Design standards. The following shall apply to traditional neighborhood
developments as authorized in this section.
(1) All buildings shall provide one or more of the following on all
building facades or groups of buildings with party walls that face a
front lot line for every 50 lineal feet of building frontage.
(a) Change in building facade material accompanied by a variation
in the roof parapet or roof style, which may simply include a
variation in height or change in the style of cornice used.
(b) Offset in the building of at least one foot.
(c) The above variations shall occur not more than once every 20
lineal feet.
(2) Flat roofs, those without any pitched form, shall include a parapet
on the front concealing the roof.
(3) At least three of the following shall be incorporated into any
building proposed.
(a) Pitched or mansard roof form.
(b) Cornices or roof overhangs.
(c) Pilasters, stringcourses, or similar means of dividing the floors
of a structure.
(d) At least two stories in the building.
(e) Clear window including a display area.
§ 265-402 WATER § 265-402
256:429
§ 265-403. HC-M, Highway Commercial and Manufacturing District.
(4) At least 15% of the entire face of any building that parallels a front
lot line shall be comprised of windows or tinted glass the sum of
which shall be distributed as follows for multistory buildings:
(a) Two stories, 40% to 60% of the total required on each story.
(b) Three stories, 24% to 36% of the total required on each story.
(5) Drive-through facilities shall be limited to one per block.
(6) Parking lots and access drives that access or lie within 50 feet of a
particular street shall be limited to two per block of said street,
separated by distances as may be required by Borough ordinances.
The access to such parking lots shall be one way with egress on an
alley where site conditions allow. One-way entrances shall be
limited to 14 feet in street opening width and two-way access shall
be limited to 28 feet. The lot shall be surrounded by a four-foot-high
fence or solid hedgerow of four feet in height at maturity,
notwithstanding clear sight triangle requirements where the
maximum may be three feet. The fence shall be a picket style or
opaque fence constructed of wood, vinyl, or materials authorized as
exterior building facades.
(7) All buildings shall include a pedestrian entrance on the side of the
building paralleling the front lot line which shall be integrated with
municipal sidewalks through a sidewalk of at least four feet in
width extended to the entrance. One such entrance shall occur for
every 50 lineal feet of said side of building. Where no municipal
sidewalk fronts the building, Council may require the applicant to
construct a sidewalk to Borough specifications within said right-ofway.
(8) Loading and garage access shall occur from and be oriented to an
alley, where frontage of a lot is borne on an alley as of the adoption
date of this chapter.
(9) Dwelling units shall not be located on the first story of structures
within the CC District unless permitted through conversion of
single-family homes. Each dwelling unit shall bear a minimum of
800 square feet of gross floor area.
(10) Buildings may set back up to 12 feet from the required build-to line
where a porch roof, marquee, awning, or other approved covering
covers a space used for food consumption or congregation by
patrons of an establishment and where no more than 25% of said
area shall be used for the display of goods sold on the premises in
normal business hours.
(11) New buildings on corner lots shall have two facades.
§ 265-402 TARENTUM CODE § 265-403
256:430
A. Purpose. The HC-M District aims to encourage development and
redevelopment of highway-oriented retail and commercial uses near or
with access to corridors of the Borough where land and corridor type
may reasonably accommodate these uses and related vehicular and
truck traffic. Within these areas of the Borough, the District also aims to
provide for comparatively large scale manufacturing and industrial
uses that meet the performance standards of this chapter.
B. Permitted uses. The following uses shall be authorized as permitted
uses within the HC-M District:
(1) Administrative and professional offices.
(2) Adult day services center.
(3) Animal hospital/clinic.
(4) Assembly hall, public or semipublic.
(5) Bank.
(6) Banquet hall.
(7) Bar/tavern.
(8) Bed-and-breakfast.
(9) Day-care center.
(10) Entertainment recreation facilities, indoor.
(11) Essential service.
(12) Essential service buildings.
(13) Funeral home.
(14) General retail.
(15) Group residential facility.
(16) Local public use.
(17) Minor equipment and automotive repairs.
(18) Nursery schools.
(19) Personal care home.
(20) Personal service establishment.
(21) Pharmacy.
(22) Restaurant.
(23) School, commercial.
§ 265-403 WATER § 265-403
256:431
§ 265-404. R-2 Mixed Density Residential District.
(24) School, private.
(25) Drive-through facilities.
(26) Industrial uses.
C. Conditional uses. See § 265-502.
(1) Automotive sales and leasing.
(2) Car wash.
(3) Commercial kennel.
(4) Hospital.
(5) Service station.
(6) Adult uses. Also see Ord. No. 95-3.
D. Basic dimensional standards.
(1) Minimum front yard: 35 feet.
(2) Minimum front yard for industrial uses: 75 feet from front lot line
adjoining West Seventh Avenue.
(3) Minimum side yard: 20 feet.
(4) Minimum rear yard: 30 feet.
(5) Maximum lot coverage: 75%.
(6) Maximum impervious surface coverage: 85%.
(7) Maximum building height: 45 feet or three stories, whichever is
less.
A. Purpose. The R-2 District aims to preserve the character of the
Borough's traditional residential neighborhoods which have historically
been comprised of single-family detached dwelling units on small lots.
B. Permitted uses. The following uses shall be authorized as permitted
uses within the R-2 District:
(1) Single-family dwelling.
(2) Traditional neighborhood development.
(3) Essential services.
C. Conditional uses. See § 265-502.
(1) Duplex dwelling.
§ 265-403 TARENTUM CODE § 265-404
256:432
(2) Local public uses.
(3) Essential service buildings.
(4) Neighborhood park or community center.
(5) Church.
(6) Day-care center.
(7) Adult day-care services center.
(8) Funeral homes.
D. Basic dimensional standards.
(1) Minimum front yard: The depth of the determined build-to line.
(2) Build-to line: One quarter of lot width to 15 feet unless otherwise
specified in a design manual if adopted by the Borough.
(3) Minimum side yard: 12 feet total between both yards with two feet
minimum on each side yard.
(4) Minimum rear yard: 25 feet.
(5) Maximum lot coverage: 80%.
(6) Maximum impervious surface coverage: 85%.
(7) Maximum building height: 40 feet or 2 1/2 stories, whichever is
less.
(8) Minimum lot area: 5,000 square feet.
E. Design standards. The following improvements and standards shall be
constructed or adhered to where all new principal structures are
proposed or where single-family detached structures are converted to
other uses authorized.
(1) Exterior building renovations and additions as well as new
buildings shall be constructed in a manner that meets the district
performance standards as set forth in § 265-1104 and as applied to
the building facade.
(2) Parking lot expansions and new parking lots shall meet the
standards of Article VIII of this chapter and shall include screening
in accordance with § 265-901 of this chapter.
(3) If not existing, a sidewalk or pedestrian connection from the
entrance to the sidewalk shall be provided.
(4) If not existing, a sidewalk meeting Borough standards, constructed
within the adjoining street right-of-way and spanning the frontage
of the lot on which a traditional neighborhood development is
proposed shall be constructed.
§ 265-404 WATER § 265-404
256:433
§ 265-405. R-1 Single-Family Residential District.
(5) Street trees, where specified, shall be installed.
F. Demolition of structures. No building of historic significance shall be
demolished unless the applicant has demonstrated that the building is
in disrepair and is in an immediately unsafe condition, thereby
warranting condemnation by the Borough Building Code Official
through the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code and applicable
Borough ordinances.
A. Purpose. R-1 Single-Family Residential District is intended to promote
limited, primarily residential, development in areas that now consist of
natural open spaces, including areas of steep slopes and portions of the
Borough's riverfront.
B. Permitted uses. The following uses shall be authorized as permitted
uses within the R-1 District:
(1) Single-family dwelling.
C. Conditional uses. See § 265-502.
(1) Cluster development.
(2) Retail greenhouse.
(3) Churches.
(4) Local public use.
(5) Day-care center.
(6) Nursery school.
D. Basic dimensional standards.
(1) Minimum front yard: 50 feet.
(2) Minimum side yard: 25 feet.
(3) Minimum rear yard: 30 feet.
(4) Maximum lot coverage: 40%.
(5) Maximum impervious surface coverage: 60%.
(6) Minimum lot area: 20,000 square feet.
(7) Minimum lot width: 100 feet.
E. Dimensional standards for traditional lots. Traditional lots shall be
subject to the following standards which shall prevail over the basic
dimensional standards.
(1) Minimum front yard: 30 feet.
§ 265-404 TARENTUM CODE § 265-405
256:434
§ 265-406. RFO Riverfront Overlay and RRO Rural Resource Overlay
Districts.
(2) Minimum side yard: Two yards totaling 15 feet with none less than
six feet.
(3) Minimum rear yard: 30 feet.
(4) Maximum lot coverage: 60%.
(5) Maximum impervious surface coverage: 75%.
(6) Minimum lot area: 7,500 square feet.
(7) Minimum lot width: 50 feet.
(8) Maximum building height: 40 feet or 2 1/2 stories, whichever is
less.
A. Purpose. The RFO and RRO Districts are designed to encourage
innovative development in conjunction with complementary protection
of the Borough's natural features and assets, including its riverfront
and wooded hillsides.
B. Applicability of the districts. The RFO and RRO Districts shall be
designated as overlay districts. Therefore, the district standards,
whether greater or lesser than those of the underlying base zoning
district, shall prevail when uses expressly authorized within the overlay
are constructed, operated, and maintained.
C. The following uses shall be authorized as permitted uses within the
RFO and RRO Districts:
(1) All permitted and conditional uses in the R-1 Single-Family District.
(2) Administrative and professional offices.
(3) Banquet hall.
(4) Entertainment recreation facilities, indoor.
(5) Personal care home.
(6) School, private.
(7) Group residential facility.
(8) Planned commerce park model.
(9) Hospital or clinic.
(10) Transitional residential facility.
(11) Animal hospital/clinic.
§ 265-405 WATER § 265-406
256:435
D. Basic dimensional standards. The following shall apply to all uses
authorized:
(1) Minimum front yard: 75 feet.
(2) Minimum side yard: 60 feet.
(3) Minimum rear yard: 75 feet.
(6) Minimum lot area: 40,000 square feet.
(7) Minimum lot width: 150 feet.
E. Dimensional standards for authorized conditional uses. 
(1) Minimum front yard: 75 feet.
(2) Minimum side yard: 75 feet.
(3) Minimum rear yard: 75 feet.
(4) All yards shall increase by five feet for every 1,000 square feet of
gross floor area beyond 5,000 square feet of total gross floor area
of buildings on the lot.
(5) Maximum lot coverage: 35%.
(6) Maximum impervious surface coverage: 50%.
(7) Minimum lot area (conditional): 80,000 square feet.
(4) Maximum lot coverage: 40%.
(5) Maximum impervious surface coverage: 60%.
(8) Minimum lot width: 50 feet.
(9) Maximum building height: 45 feet or three stories, whichever is
less.
F. Billboards are authorized uses in the RRO Overlay District only, subject
to Pennsylvania Department of Transportation (PaDOT) regulations
where such billboard is proposed on land abutting a Commonwealthowned
and -maintained right-of-way and the following standards:
(1) Billboards may not exceed 42 feet in width and fourteen 14 feet in
height.
(2) Billboards may not be illuminated after 1:00 a.m. and before 6:00
a.m.
(3) Billboards may not be placed closer than 500 feet from another
billboard.
§ 265-406 TARENTUM CODE § 265-406
256:436
§ 265-407. Floodplain districts.
(4) An annual billboard permit fee shall be paid to the Borough, upon
inspection, at a rate set by Council by resolution, as may be
amended from time to time.
A. Purposes. The purpose of these provisions is to prevent the loss of
property and life, the creation of health and safety hazards, the
disruption of commerce and governmental services, the extraordinary
and unnecessary expenditure of public funds for flood protection and
relief and the impairment of the tax base by:
(1) Regulating uses, activities and development which, acting alone or
in combination with other existing or future uses, activities and
development, will cause unacceptable increases in flood heights,
velocities and frequencies.
(2) Restricting or prohibiting certain uses, activities and development
from locating within areas subject to flooding.
(3) Requiring all those uses, activities and developments that do occur
in flood-prone areas to be protected and/or floodproofed against
flooding and flood damage.
(4) Protecting individuals from buying lands and structures which are
unsuited for intended purposes because of flood hazards.
B. Applicability.
(1) These provisions shall apply to all lands within the jurisdiction of
the Borough of Tarentum and shown as being located within the
boundaries of the designated floodplain districts which are
considered as a part of the Official Zoning Map.
(2) No structure or land shall hereafter be used and no structure shall
be located, relocated, constructed, reconstructed, enlarged or
structurally altered except in full compliance with the terms and
provisions of this article and any other applicable ordinances and
regulations which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of this
article.
C. Overlay concept.
(1) The floodplain districts described in this section shall be overlays to
the existing underlying districts as shown on the Official Zoning
Ordinance Map, and as such, the provisions for the floodplain
districts shall serve as a supplement to the underlying district
provisions.
(2) Where there happens to be any conflict between the provisions or
requirements of any of the floodplain districts and those of any
underlying district, the more restrictive provisions and/or those
pertaining to the floodplain districts shall apply.
§ 265-406 WATER § 265-407
256:437
(3) In the event that any provision concerning a floodplain district is
declared inapplicable as a result of any legislative or administrative
actions or judicial discretion, the basic underlying district provision
shall remain applicable.
D. Zoning Map. The boundaries of the floodplain district are established as
part of the Official Zoning Map of the Borough of Tarentum which is
declared to be a part of this article and which shall be kept on file at the
Borough of Tarentum offices.122
E. District boundary changes. The delineation of any of the floodplain
districts may be revised by the governing body where natural or
manmade changes have occurred and/or more detailed studies
conducted or undertaken by the United States Army Corps of
Engineers, a River Basin Commission or other qualified agency or
individual documents the notification for such change. However, prior
to any such change, approval must be obtained from the Federal
Insurance Administration (HA).
F. Interpretation of district boundaries. Initial interpretations of the
boundaries of the floodplain districts shall be made by the Zoning
Officer. Should a dispute arise concerning the boundaries of any of the
districts, the Zoning Hearing Board shall make the necessary
determination. The person questioning or contesting the location of the
district boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to present his
case to the Board and to submit his own technical evidence if he so
desires.
G. District provisions.
(1) All uses, activities and development occurring within any floodplain
district shall be undertaken only in strict compliance with the
provisions of this article and with all other applicable codes and
ordinances such as the Borough of Tarentum Building Code and
applicable Subdivision Ordinance. In addition, all such uses,
activities and development shall be undertaken only in compliance
with federal or state law, including § 404 of the Federal Water
Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. § 1334.
(2) Under no circumstances shall any use, activity and/or development
adversely affect the capacity of the channels or floodways of any
watercourse, drainage ditch or any other drainage facility or
system.
(3) Prior to any proposed alteration or relocation of any stream,
watercourse, etc., within the Borough of Tarentum, a permit shall
be obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection,
Dams and Waterways Management Bureau. Further, notification of
the proposal by the Borough shall be given to all affected adjacent
municipalities. Copies of such notifications shall be forwarded to
122. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 265-407 TARENTUM CODE § 265-407
256:438
§ 265-408. P-1 Public District.
both the Federal Insurance Administration and the Department of
Community Affairs.
H. Administration.
(1) A zoning permit shall be required for all construction and
development which includes but is not limited to paving, filling,
grading, excavation, mining, dredging or drilling operations, etc.
(2) These provisions are to be read in conjunction with those of Ord.
No. 95-7 (Chapter 95, Building Construction, Article III, Floodplain
Management).
A. Purpose: The purpose of the P-1 Public District is to provide areas for
active and passive recreational activities and facilities as determined
appropriate by Borough Council.
B. Permitted uses.
(1) Permitted principal uses:
(a) Appropriate recreational uses as determined by the Borough
Council, and in accordance with the current Park and
Recreation Commission rules and guidelines.
(b) Facilities designed and constructed to promote access to and
utilization of riverfront property including, but not limited to,
boat launch ramps, outlooks and fishing docks.
(2) Permitted accessory uses: Accessory uses and structures
customarily appurtenant to a permitted use.
C. Basic dimensional standards: Dimensional standards shall be
determined based on the characteristics of the use proposed and the
physical attributes of the land being developed.
§ 265-407 WATER § 265-408
256:439

ARTICLE V
Conditional Uses
§ 265-501. General standards and application requirements.
A. Conditional uses. Conditional uses are unique, and their effect on the
surrounding environment cannot be determined in advance of the use
being proposed for a particular parcel of land. At the time of
application, a review of the location, design, configuration and potential
impact of the proposed use shall be conducted by the Planning
Commission. The proposed use shall be analyzed by comparing it to
established development standards and design guidelines. This review
shall determine whether the proposed use addresses the specific
standards identified in this chapter, and whether or not it should be
permitted by weighing the public need for, and the benefit to be derived
from the use, against the impact which it may cause.
B. General standards. Each conditional use proposed shall be evaluated by
and shall meet the following standards.
(1) The use shall meet the specific standards and criteria set forth in
this chapter, particularly in the article with respect to the
particular use authorized. Where no express standards are set
forth relating to a specific use:
(2) The use shall not endanger the public health, safety, morals and
general welfare in the location where proposed.
(3) The use shall not deteriorate the environment or generate
extraordinary nuisance conditions including but not limited to
traffic congestion, noise, dust, smoke, glare and vibration.
(4) The use, as proposed, shall be consistent with the Comprehensive
Plan.
(5) The character of the use shall be in general conformity and
compatible with uses in the neighborhood in which it is proposed to
be located.
(6) The use shall not adversely affect the assessed valuation of
abutting properties.
C. Application requirements. The applicant shall submit all of the
following in order for the application to be considered as an application
for conditional use approval.
(1) Where new structures, parking, or landscaping are required or
proposed, the applicant shall submit a mylar and sufficient copies
of a plan on twenty-four-inch-by-thirty-six-inch-sized paper at a
scale necessary to show all required details. Said plan shall be
drawn by a registered surveyor and shall include all details
§ 265-501 WATER § 265-501
256:441
§ 265-502. Specific conditional use standards.
necessary to demonstrate and evaluate compliance with the Zoning
Ordinance and the standards and criteria specified in this article.
(2) Where new structures are proposed, building elevations showing
building facade treatments.
(3) The following shall be submitted as an impact study.
(a) Information concerning the average number of daily vehicle
trips estimated to be generated by such use, with peak-hour
vehicle trip ends identified.
(b) Information concerning the estimated amount of tax revenue
to be generated by such a use, broken down by revenue to paid
to the Borough, Allegheny County, and the Highlands School
District.
(c) Information concerning the estimated cost of public services to
be provided to such use, broken down by cost to be borne
Borough, Allegheny County, and the Highlands School District,
including police, transportation, and other public services.
(d) Applicants shall submit a narrative detailing the proposed use
including gross floor area, number of employees, operating
hours, and a general synopsis of business or use activities and
operating polices, including information sufficient to
demonstrate compliance with state licenses as may be
required.
(4) Required fee per the Borough's adopted fee schedule.
(5) The applicant shall indicate in writing whether or not the applicant
is willing to accept the decision of a hearing officer if the Borough
Council, by majority vote, accepts the decision and findings of a
hearing officer in lieu of its own decision and findings, as
authorized in § 913.2 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, as amended.
A. Automotive sales and leasing.
(1) The impervious area utilized for the retail display of vehicles shall
not exceed twice that of the gross floor area of the principal
structure.
(2) A full parking plan shall be submitted delineating areas reserved
for employee and customer parking versus those to be utilized for
retail display of vehicles.
(3) Display of vehicles shall be within parking spaces that are striped
and landscaped in accordance with those standards otherwise
applied to parking lots throughout this chapter.
§ 265-501 TARENTUM CODE § 265-502
256:442
(4) In lieu of screening requirements, the applicant may install one
additional ornamental tree for every 30 feet of screening omitted in
order to permit visibility of the retail display of vehicles on the lot.
Said trees shall be installed within the landscaping area from which
the required screening was omitted.
B. Billboards. Billboards are authorized as a conditional use as follows in
the C-3 Heavy commercial district on otherwise vacant parcels of land.
(1) The billboard shall be limited to 200 square feet.
(2) The billboard shall be set back a minimum of 500 feet from the
property line of any lot bearing an existing single-family dwelling.
(3) The billboard shall be setback at least 100 feet from any side or
rear property line not withstanding stricter provisions regarding
residentially zoned properties.
(4) The billboard shall be set back at least 20 feet from any street and
shall be located within 125 feet of the right-of-way of Route 28 and
oriented to Route 28.
(5) Manual changeable copy signs and electronic message centers as
defined in Article II are not permitted in association with a
billboard.
(6) No flashing or colored lighting are permitted in association with
any billboard.
C. Drive-through facilities and car washes.
(1) A minimum of 100 feet as a stacking lane shall be provided with an
additional 20 feet of stacking required for each bay or station
beyond one. The lane(s) shall be at least 10 feet in width.
(2) Drive through facilities shall be situated on parcels bearing a lot
size of 20,000 square feet or greater.
(3) All drive through lanes shall abide by the same setbacks imposed
on principal building structures as applied to the lot on which the
facility is constructed.
D. Animal hospital or clinic, commercial kennel.
(1) Exterior runs shall be enclosed by a secured opaque fence of six
feet in height which shall be setback the same distance as required
for principal building, as applied to the lot on which the
establishment operates. Use of the runs shall not occur before 8:00
a.m. and after 9:00 p.m.
E. Hospitals and transitional residential facilities.
(1) Notwithstanding stricter standards otherwise applied by this
chapter, the principal building housing the establishment or facility
§ 265-502 WATER § 265-502
256:443
shall be set back 300 feet from a preexisting dwelling unit, daycare
or adult day-care center, nursery school, or local public use,
church, or other hospital. The same requirement shall apply to
heliports accessory to the facility. The establishment shall be
situated on a lot with a lot area of one acre or greater.
F. Service station.
(1) No gasoline service station shall be located within 1,000 feet of a
preexisting service station.
(2) Access driveways to the service station shall be at least 30 feet
from the intersection of any public street.
(3) Fuel pumps, air towers and water outlets may be located outside an
enclosed building, provided that no portion of these facilities shall
be closer than 10 feet of any property line.
(4) Inspections, lubrication, oil changes, tire changes and similar
minor repairs are permitted if conducted entirely within a building.
(5) All automobile pails and supplies shall be stored within a building,
except that automotive supplies may be displayed for sale at the
fuel pump and at a distance no greater than five feet from the
pumps.
G. Industrial uses in the CC Commercial Center District.
(1) Loading spaces required by this chapter shall be provided on site
and out of any public right-of-way.
(2) Existing retail storefronts shall be preserved such that they may be
utilized for future retail or use or ancillary retail use as related to
the establishment.
(3) Noise or fumes associated with the production process shall not be
discernible outside of the principal building.
(4) With the exception of loading and unloading in authorized spaces,
no part of the production process, including storage of materials,
shall occur outside of a completely enclosed building.
H. Adult uses and businesses.
(1) Adult businesses may be established only in the HCM District.
(2) Persons or owners who intend to open an adult business must
obtain from the Borough of Tarentum a license to operate such an
enterprise and must pay an investigation fee of $500 to the
Borough. In addition, such persons or owners must supply to the
Borough detailed information as to the ownership and financing as
required on the licensing application form. This form can be
obtained at the office of the Borough Secretary. This subsection
does not apply to nonconforming uses.
§ 265-502 TARENTUM CODE § 265-502
256:444
(3) No adult business may be located within 500 feet of a preexisting
residence, mental health/mental retardation centers, community
action centers, nonprofit centers established to help the mentally
infirm or families or children, schools, private and public,
preschools, hospitals, nursing homes, sanitariums, retirement or
convalescent homes, group homes, personal care homes, public
parks, churches or synagogue or other place of worship, and
establishments which are licensed to and do sell alcoholic
beverages or to other adult business.
(4) No adult business may be located within 250 feet of an area zoned
residential.
(5) An adult business shall be initially licensed, where is has met all
ordinance requirements, through December 31 of the year in which
the license is used. For each year thereafter that the adult business
intends to continue its business as an adult commercial enterprise,
it must seek from the office of the Secretary of the Borough of
Tarentum a renewal of this license. The application for renewal is
due in the Secretary's office no later than November 21 of the year
preceding the year for which the license renewal is sought. The
lack of a license or the failure to seek license renewal on a timely
basis shall be a proper basis for the Borough to deny or revoke an
occupancy permit to an adult bookstore, adult movie theater, bar or
similar adult commercial enterprise or other adult establishment.
(6) Operators of adult businesses shall comply with all applicable
provisions of Borough Ord. No. 95-3, as amended.
(7) Any adult bookstore, VCR movie rental, adult movie theater, or
similar adult commercial enterprise or other adult entertainment
establishment found to be in violation of this chapter, as amended,
shall be subject to the enforcement penalties provided for in Article
XIII and/or the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
I. Gas and oil extraction, mineral extraction.
(1) The applicant shall submit evidence that all required materials
have been submitted to the Department of Environmental
Protection.
(2) The applicant shall submit a statement of understanding
concerning the noise limitations set forth in the supplemental
standards of this chapter and shall, to the furthest extent practical,
meet said chapter.
(3) The applicant shall submit cross sections of the proposed access
where it meets Borough streets.
(4) The applicant shall submit sight distance measurements for the
access drive, whether proposed or existing.
§ 265-502 WATER § 265-502
256:445
(5) The applicant shall submit a plan showing the access route (of
Borough or state roads) over which heavy equipment will travel to
the site.
(6) The applicant shall meet all current minimum driveway sight
distance standards and shall demonstrate that the point of access
to any Borough street will not cause the deposition of mud or debris
onto said street.
(7) The applicant shall post all necessary street and road bonding as
approved by the Borough Engineer.
(8) Mining. Deep or open pit mining shall be permitted only upon
authorization of the Borough Council, as a result of a public hearing
held thereon by the Borough Council, duly advertised as provided
by law, and further subject to all rules and regulations of the
Commonwealth that apply to such operation, plus additional
safeguards to the public health, safety, and general welfare deemed
necessary by the Borough Council.
J. Communications towers.
(1) Lot size. The lot size dimensions (depth and width) shall be dictated
by the fall radius of the tower. The minimum dimensions shall be
the radius of the height of the tower in each direction.
(a) The communications company is required to demonstrate,
using technological evidence, that the antenna must go where
it is proposed in order to satisfy its function in the company's
grid system.
(2) If the communications company proposes to build a tower (as
opposed to mounting the antenna on an existing structure), it is
required to demonstrate that it contacted the owners of tall
structures within a one-quarter-mile radius of the site proposed,
asked for permission to install the antenna on those structures, and
was denied for reasons other than economic ones. This would
include smoke stacks, water towers, tall buildings, antenna support
structures of other communications companies, other
communications towers (fire, police, etc.), and other tall structures.
(3) The applicant shall demonstrate that the antenna is the minimum
height required to function satisfactorily. No antenna that is taller
than this minimum height shall be approved. In addition, no
antenna shall exceed 199 feet in height.
(4) All communications towers not erected in the RRO District shall be
stealth towers. A stealth tower is a communications tower which is
not recognizable as a conventional communications tower (e.g., a
metal lattice structure), but instead is disguised or concealed in
such a fashion as to conform to its surroundings. Examples of such
stealth towers include a tower which looks like a tree or a clock
§ 265-502 TARENTUM CODE § 265-502
256:446
tower, or one which is concealed in a church steeple or concrete
silo.
(5) The Borough Council may waive the stealth tower requirement
where the applicant can demonstrate that the requirement is not
necessary to protect health, safety and welfare, considering items
such as impact on surrounding and abutting property values;
height; screening; number of uses per tower, including public uses;
location; and actual setbacks.
(6) Setbacks from base of antenna support structure. If a new antenna
support structure is constructed (as opposed to mounting the
antenna on an existing structure), the minimum distance between
the base of the support structure or any guy wire anchors and any
property line shall be the largest of the following:
(a) One hundred percent of antenna height.
(b) The minimum setback in the underlying zoning district.
(c) Fifty feet minimum.
(7) Fencing. A fence shall be required around the antenna support
structure and other equipment, unless the antenna is mounted on
an existing structure. The fence shall be a minimum of eight feet in
height.
(8) Landscaping: The following landscaping shall be required to screen
as much of the support structure as possible, the fence surrounding
the support structure, and any other ground level features (such as
a building), and in general soften the appearance of the cell site.
Tarentum Borough may permit any combination of existing
vegetation, topography, walls, decorative fences or other features
instead of landscaping, if they achieve the same degree of
screening as the required landscaping. If the antenna is mounted
on an existing structure, and other equipment is housed inside an
existing structure, landscaping shall not be required.
(9) An evergreen screen shall be required to surround the site. The
screen can be either a hedge (planted three feet on center
maximum) or a row of evergreen trees (planted 10 feet on center
maximum). The evergreen screen shall be a minimum height of six
feet at planting, and shall grow to a minimum of 15 feet at maturity.
(10) In addition, existing vegetation on and around the site shall be
preserved to the greatest extent possible.
(11) In order to reduce the number of antenna support structures
needed in the community in the future, the proposed support
structure shall be required to accommodate other users, including
other communications companies, and local police, fire, ambulance
services and Borough authority and road departments. In addition,
§ 265-502 WATER § 265-502
256:447
a linear two-mile separation shall be maintained between
communications towers, measured from the base of the support
structure.
(12) The communications company must demonstrate that it is licensed
by the Federal Communications Commission.
(13) Antenna support structures should be painted silver or have a
galvanized finish retained, in order to reduce the visual impact.
Support structures may be painted green up to the height of nearby
trees. Support structures near airports shall meet all Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation, Bureau of Aviation and Federal
Aviation Administration regulations. No antenna support structure
may be artificially lighted except as provided for and required by
the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, Bureau of Aviation
and FAA.
(14) A plan shall be required for all cell sites showing the antenna,
antenna support structure, building, fencing, buffering, and access
to public rights-of-way. The plan shall not be required if the antenna
is to be mounted on an existing structure.
(15) In granting the use, Borough Council may attach reasonable
conditions warranted to protect the public health, safety and
welfare, including, but not limited to, location, fencing, screening,
increased setbacks and the right to use said facilities for public
purposes.
(16) All approvals will be only for specific facilities set forth in the
application. No additions or alterations thereto, other than colocation
which meets all associated setbacks, will be permitted
without a new application and accompanying conditional use
approval.
K. Mobile home parks.
(1) A mobile home park shall have principal access from a street or
highway capable of handling the traffic generated by the park and
providing adequate access for the individual mobile units without
impairing the normal traffic operations of the street or highway.
(2) Ten percent of the park's gross site area shall be set aside for
common open space, including recreation areas, community
buildings, storage facilities for park residents, laundry facilities,
management offices for the park and storage of park maintenance
equipment.
(3) All internal roads and parking areas shall be improved with an
asphalt or similar all-weather surface. Internal roads shall be
designed to meet anticipated traffic loads and shall have a
minimum cartway width of 28 feet.
§ 265-502 TARENTUM CODE § 265-502
256:448
(4) The park operator shall obtain required permits and approval from
the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection,
Allegheny County and Borough agencies for the sanitary sewer and
water supply systems.
(5) Borough storm drainage standards shall apply to a mobile home
park. A park shall have an erosion and sedimentation plan in
compliance with Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection regulations and reviewed by the Allegheny County
Conservation District and approved by the Borough Engineer.
(6) Landscaping and planting shall be provided in accordance with
Article IX.
(7) No individual mobile home shall be closer than 20 feet to any street
right-of-way or to any property line of the park, nor shall any unit
be located within a one-hundred-year floodplain.
(8) The following lot area and setback requirements shall apply for
individual home lots:
(a) Lot area: 6,000 square feet.
(b) No mobile home unit shall be sited to be within 15 feet of any
other unit or accessory structure.
(c) An enclosure of compatible design and material to the exterior
of the mobile home shall be erected around its entire base.
Such enclosure shall provide sufficient ventilation to inhibit
decay and deterioration of the structure. The hitch which is
employed for the normal movement of the unit shall be
removed.
(9) No mobile home shall be erected on a mobile home lot except upon
a mobile home pad. Each mobile home unit shall have its own
separate pad.
(a) Each mobile home pad shall be at least equal in length and
width to the dimensions of the mobile home to be placed on the
pad.
(b) The pad, at least six inches in thickness, shall be constructed
from either concrete, asphalt or other material adequate to
support the mobile home and to prevent abnormal settling or
heaving under the weight of the home. In order to prevent
wind overturn and rocking, the corners of the mobile homes
shall be secured with at least six tie-downs such as concrete
dead men, screw augers, arrowhead anchors or other devices
suitable to withstand a tension of at least 2,800 pounds.
(c) Each mobile home shall be set level on sturdy and substantial
supports.
§ 265-502 WATER § 265-502
256:449
§ 265-503. Cluster option model.
(10) Two off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each mobile
home lot.
(11) Parking shall comply with Articles IX and X of this chapter.
L. Similar uses, undefined.
(1) The Zoning Officer shall formally determine that the use is not
classified under any use definition of which the particular use is
authorized in any district.
(2) The use shall be reasonably similar to other uses authorized in the
district in terms of general intensity, impact of noise and lighting,
and hours of operation.
(3) Borough Council, in its written decision, shall set forth parameters
for future expansions or alterations of the use, wherein expansions
or changes to the particular establishment which is the subject of
use approval beyond those limitations stated in the decision shall
require additional conditional use approval to determine continuity
as a undefined similar uses.
A. Purpose. The cluster option is set forth to promote the preservation of
wooded steep slopes and open space in the Borough as well as the
minimization of street construction and long term maintenance of
public improvements.
B. Lot types.
(1) Traditional lot.
(2) Suburban lot.
(3) Estate lot.
C. Lot standards.
Lot Type Traditional Lot Suburban Lot Estate Lot
Lot size 7,000 to 10,000
square feet
10,001 to
20,000 square
feet
Over 20,000
square feet
Required front
yard
30 40 50
Required side yard 15 total with
neither yard less
than 5 feet
20 feet 20 feet
Required rear yard 20 25 30
Minimum lot width 65 80 90
§ 265-502 TARENTUM CODE § 265-503
256:450
§ 265-504. Planned commercial park model.
Lot Type Traditional Lot Suburban Lot Estate Lot
Minimum lot
frontage
65 48 54
D. Determination of number of lots.
(1) The gross site area shall be defined as the cumulative lot areas of
all parcels proposed for the cluster option.
(2) The gross site area shall be a minimum of five acres.
(3) The maximum density or number of lots permitted shall be two per
acre.
E. Mixture of lots. Where application of a percentage results in a fraction
of a lot, the number shall be rounded to the nearest whole number.
(1) Traditional lots: 50% to 65%.
(2) Suburban lots: 30% to 50%.
(3) Estate lots: 0 to 20%.
F. The sole permitted principal use of each lot shall be limited to one
single-family dwelling.
G. A minimum of 50% of the site shall be dedicated as open space in one or
more of the following methods:
(1) Dedicated to the Borough at the sole discretion of Borough Council.
(2) Dedicated as open space to be maintained by a homeowner's
association.
(3) Established as estate lots where covenants in favor of the Borough
are established to protect further subdivision of the lot and clear
cutting of healthy forest beyond the anticipated curtilage of the
proposed dwelling which is not exceed 25% of the lot size. Said lots
shall bear adequate frontage on public streets existing at the time
of application.
H. All proposed streets shall meet Borough standards unless waived in
accordance with the ordinances requiring said standards.
A. Purpose. The planned commercial park model is authorized in order to
promote the provision of industrial, manufacturing, wholesale, and
administrative uses and functions in a parklike setting, integrated with
adjoining open space and jointly maintained access roads, landscaping,
and accessory uses and amenities.
§ 265-503 WATER § 265-504
256:451
B. Authorized uses. The following shall be authorized subject to meeting
the performance standards of this chapter and the planned commercial
park model.
(1) Assembly hall, public or semipublic.
(2) Industrial uses.
(3) Commercial kennel.
(4) Hotel or motel.
(5) Multiple-family dwelling.
(6) All uses authorized as permitted by right in the Mixed-Use
Development Overlay District.
C. Performance standards. The following shall apply to the overall site.
(1) For purposes of this section, a site shall be defined as the entire
tract of land or lot (s) under common ownership of which all or a
portion of said lots are the subject of final land development
approval, excluding public rights-of-way.
(2) General design standards. The plan shall meet the following
general objectives and standards:
(a) The plan will incorporate areas of environmental value
including but not limited to wooded steep slopes, wetlands,
and floodplains as preserved focal points of the development.
(b) Development in accordance with the planned commercial park
model shall promote a sense of destination and place while
facilitating linkages between destinations in the Borough and
recognized open space corridors.
(c) The scale of structures shall promote perception of the
development as complementary to residential-scale uses
including single-family dwellings when coupled with
surrounding parklike settings and buffering.
(3) Perimeter setbacks shall be determined by the yards otherwise
required in the Mixed Use Development Overlay District.
(4) Interior yards on lots within the plan shall be enforced as follows:
(a) Front yard: 50 feet.
(b) Side yard: 30 feet.
(c) Rear yard: 40 feet.
(5) Principal structures on the same lot shall be separated at least 30
feet from other such structures.
§ 265-504 TARENTUM CODE § 265-504
256:452
§ 265-505. Conditional use application process.
(6) Maximum lot coverage: 30%.
(7) Maximum impervious surface coverage: 50%.
(8) Lot and impervious surface coverage ratios shall be increased
respectively to 50% and 70% respectively as an incentive to and
upon meeting the following standards:
(a) Covenants, as approved by the Borough Solicitor, shall be
prepared and recorded in favor of the Borough and all future
property owners ensuring that lot and impervious surface area
coverage on lots within the plan collectively do not exceed the
increased coverage granted by this section.
(b) No lot shall bear more than 80% total lot and impervious
surface coverage.
(c) A minimum of 10% of the total site area shall be dedicated as
contiguous open space for the enjoyment of residents, tenants,
employees, or visitors of principal uses on the site. Where the
site adjoins a public trail or a public pedestrian connection is
indicated on the Borough's Official Map, such area shall be
dedicated to the Borough for such use.
(9) Parking shall be subject to the same perimeter setbacks set forth in
this section and may not encroach more than 50% into any other
yard required.
(10) Access to the development shall be limited to one access point per
public street on which the site fronts.
(11) The applicant shall submit a preliminary plan for the entire site for
all imminent development as per the requirements of the
applicable Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance. The
preliminary plat shall indicate planned street and access drive
connections.
(12) The applicant shall submit a lighting and landscaping plan
verifying compliance with Borough ordinances.
(13) Covenants guaranteeing compliance of future development and the
overall site with the subject approval and Borough ordinances shall
be provided in a manner acceptable to the Borough Solicitor and
recorded with the related plats.
A. A complete application shall be submitted to the Zoning Officer at least
21 days prior to the next regularly scheduled monthly Planning
Commission.
B. Three copies of all application materials and reports and seven copies
of all plans and drawings shall be submitted with all applications.
§ 265-504 WATER § 265-505
256:453
C. The Borough Council shall hold a public hearing, per public notice
within 60 days of the filing of a complete application. In addition,
written notice of said hearing shall be conspicuously posted on the
affected tract or tracts of land or water body at least one week prior to
the public hearing. Where a hearing officer has been designated, the
officer shall preside over the hearing.
D. A decision and accompanying findings of fact shall be issued within 45
days after the conclusion of the aforesaid hearing. The Borough Council
or hearing officer may attach conditions to any approval that either
finds are necessary to permit the conditional use in a manner consistent
with this chapter and this article in particular. A condition of approval
shall include the receipt of the applicant's signature, indicating
acceptance of the findings of fact and conditions, if any, within 30 days
of approval, wherein the failure of the applicant to submit the aforesaid
acceptance shall be deemed a denial of the conditional use. A copy of
the decision shall be filed at the Borough Office. The decision shall be
mailed to the applicant no later than one day following the date of the
decision.
E. Where the Borough Council fails to render the decision within 45 days
of the conclusion of the required public hearing or fails to commence
the required hearing within 60 days from the date of the applicant's
request for a hearing or fails to complete the hearing no later than 100
days after the completion of the applicant's case in chief, unless
extended for good cause upon application to the court of common pleas,
the decision shall be deemed to have been rendered in favor of the
applicant unless the applicant has agreed in writing or on the record to
an extension of time. When a decision has been rendered in favor of the
applicant because of the failure of the Borough Council to meet or
render a decision as hereinabove provided, the Borough Council shall
give public notice of the decision within 10 days from the last day it
could have met to render a decision in the same manner as required by
the public notice requirements of this act. If the Borough Council shall
fail to provide such notice, the applicant may do so.
F. Failure to comply with all conditions and standards attached to a
specific conditional use in any zoning district within 60 days of
occupancy and full operation of said use shall render the conditional
use status null and void and subject the owner of the property and/or
owner of the business or land use to all enforcement remedies available
to the Borough of Tarentum.
§ 265-505 TARENTUM CODE § 265-505
256:454
ARTICLE VI
Traditional Neighborhood Development
The Traditional Neighborhood Development TND is established in order to
promote forms of mixed use development that complement the Borough's
traditional business district and meet the objective of traditional
neighborhood development by integrating open space, providing
pedestrian connections between varieties of uses and providing a variety
of housing choices for current and expected residents. Development, to
the extent possible, should meet the design guidelines prepared by the
Pittsburgh History and Landmarks Foundation, attached as an appendix to
this chapter.123
§ 265-601. Objectives.
The objectives of the Traditional Neighborhood Development District are as
follows:
§ 265-602. Applicability to other Borough ordinances.
A. To establish or encourage the continuation of the traditional
commercial downtown that are pedestrian-oriented with connections to
parks, a centrally located public or semipublic commons, square, plaza,
park or prominent intersection of two or more major streets,
commercial enterprises and civic and other public buildings and
facilities for social activity, recreation and community functions;
B. To minimize traffic congestion and reduce the need for extensive road
construction by reducing the number and length of automobile trips
required to access everyday needs;
C. To provide the elderly and the young with independence of movement
by locating daily activities within walking distance;
D. To foster the ability of citizens to come to know each other and to watch
over their mutual security by providing public spaces such as streets,
parks and squares and mixed use which maximizes the proximity to
neighbors at almost all times of the day; and
E. To promote the provision of adequate housing and housing options to
the current and expected range of residents;
F. To facilitate economic viability for small commercial establishments
through shared parking, services, pedestrian access, and
complementary businesses; and
G. To encourage preservation of open space, environmentally sensitive
areas, and historic assets.
123. Editor's Note: Said appendix is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 265-601 WATER § 265-602
256:455
§ 265-603. Open space and public areas.
A. Unless expressly modified by provisions of this article, all Borough
ordinances including but not limited to subdivision and land
development, erosion and sedimentation, grading, street construction
standards, and stormwater shall apply to subdivisions and land
developments approved in accordance with this article and compliance
with the aforesaid shall serve as a prerequisite or requirement of
traditional neighborhood development approval.
B. Where conflicts occur between the standards of this article and the
aforementioned Borough ordinances, the standards of this article,
whether greater or lesser, shall prevail.
C. Where a finally approved traditional neighborhood development is
recorded and properly filed with the Allegheny County Recorder of
Deeds Office, all portions of the zoning ordinance and subdivision
ordinance otherwise applicable to the land shall cease to apply thereto.
A. Where a TND involves construction of 20,000 square feet or more of
space, calculated by the sum of the gross floor area of all commercial
establishments and 1,200 square feet per dwelling unit proposed, open
space shall be required as follows:
(1) A minimum of 25% of the site area shall be preserved as open
space. Where the base zoning of the respective district is R-1, 40%
of the site shall be preserved as open space. Where the site is
proposed to be under the control of one property owner and no
subdivision or condominium is proposed, required open space may
be designated on the plat. Otherwise, open space shall be shown by
easement or parcel with applicable covenants.
(2) Environmentally sensitive areas such as jurisdictional wetlands,
steep slopes, floodplains, and riparian buffers shall be preserved as
passive open space and may incorporate trails where feasible.
(3) Unless the TND acts as infill within an area of existing
development, passive open space shall be distributed around the
perimeter of the site.
(4) A minimum of 5% of the site area shall be dedicated as centralized
active open space or spaces that meet the following design
objectives:
(a) Provide active open space suitable for use by residents and/or
patrons or members of establishments or institutions within
the TND or the public at large.
(b) Facilitate interaction of pedestrians and focused social activity
for the mutual benefit, support, and security of neighborhoods
and establishments within the TND through installation of
§ 265-602 TARENTUM CODE § 265-603
256:456
sidewalks, trails, street furniture such as park benches,
gazebos, and uniform styles of lighting and landscaping.
(c) Centralized active open space shall be bounded by street
rights-of-way on at least two sides.
B. Common open space shall be maintained, through covenants, by an
association comprised of landowners including condominium
associations and homeowners associations which shall perpetually
maintain the open space which may not be conveyed to a private third
party.
C. In the event that the organization established to own and maintain
common open space, or any successor organization, shall at any time
after establishment of the TND fail to maintain the common open space
in reasonable order and condition in accordance with the development
plan, the Borough may serve written notice upon such organization or
upon the residents of the TND setting forth the manner in which the
organization has failed to maintain the common open space in
reasonable condition, and said notice shall include a demand that such
deficiencies of maintenance be corrected within 30 days thereof, and
shall state the date and place of a hearing thereon which shall be held
within 14 days of the notice. At such hearing the Borough may modify
the terms of the original notice as to the deficiencies and may give an
extension of time within which they shall be corrected.
D. If the deficiencies set forth in the original notice or in the modifications
thereof shall not be corrected within said 30 days or any extension
thereof, the Borough, in order to preserve the taxable values of the
properties within the TND and to prevent the common open space from
becoming a public nuisance, may enter upon said common open space
and maintain the same for a period of one year. Said maintenance by the
Borough shall not constitute a taking of said common open space, nor
vest in the public any rights to use the same.
E. Before the expiration of said year, the Borough shall, upon its initiative
or upon the request of the organization theretofore responsible for the
maintenance of the common open space, call a public hearing upon
notice to such organization, or to the residents or owner(s) of the TND,
to be held by the Borough Council, at which hearing such organization
or the residents of the TND shall show cause why such maintenance by
the Borough shall not, at the option of the Borough, continue for a
succeeding year. If the Borough Council shall determine that such
organization is ready and able to maintain said common open space in
reasonable condition, the Borough shall cease to maintain said common
open space at the end of said year. If the Borough Council shall
determine that such organization is not ready and able to maintain said
common open space in a reasonable condition, the Borough may, in its
discretion, continue to maintain said common open space during the
next succeeding year and, subject to a similar hearing and
determination, in each year thereafter.
§ 265-603 WATER § 265-603
256:457
§ 265-604. Permitted uses.
§ 265-605. Density and dimensional standards.
§ 265-606. Site design standards.
F. The decision of the Borough Council shall be subject to appeal to court
in the same manner, and within the same time limitation, as is provided
for zoning appeals by this act.
G. The cost of such maintenance by the Borough shall be assessed ratably
against the properties within the TND that have a right of enjoyment of
the common open space, and shall become a lien on said properties.
The Borough, at the time of entering upon said common open space for
the purpose of maintenance, shall file a notice of lien in the office of the
Prothonotary of Allegheny County, upon the properties affected by the
lien within the TND.
A. Principal and accessory uses permitted within the base district and the
following types of residential uses:
(1) Duplex dwelling.
(2) Single-family detached dwelling.
(3) Townhouse dwellings.
(4) General and specialty retail.
(5) Professional service.
(6) Personal services.
(7) Restaurants and drinking establishments.
A. Where the base district is an R or residentially zoned district, the
number of dwelling units permitted shall not exceed the minimum lot
size relating to the type of dwelling unit(s) divided into the net site area.
Where varied minimum lot sizes per dwelling unit type are required in
the base district, the number of units by type of unit permitted in the
TND shall be proportional to the respective minimum lot size or area
required per such dwelling.
B. Where the base district is an R or residentially zoned district, uses
authorized as conditional uses in said districts may be incorporated into
the TND. Such uses, upon receiving requisite conditional use approval,
may locate at the lesser front yard setback lines authorized in the TND.
C. Major TNDs shall be subject to the performance and dimensional
standards of the CC Commercial Center Zoning District.
A. Streets.
§ 265-603 TARENTUM CODE § 265-606
256:458
(1) Generally, streets shall be arranged in a grid pattern with limited
use of cul-de-sac streets. Blocks shall generally be no longer than
600 feet. Variations in street and grid design shall incorporate the
preservation of natural topography and environmentally sensitive
areas.
(2) Streets shall be constructed in accordance with the Borough's
Construction Standards unless such standards are waived by the
Borough Council in accordance with § 265-706E.
(3) Lots bearing single-family dwellings where a majority of said lots
are less than 65 feet in width at the building line and/or those lots
bearing structures with party walls shall be served by an alley.
Alleys shall be a minimum of 16 feet in width. The preceding shall
be evaluated on a block-by-block basis.
(4) The Borough Council may require the installation of on-street
parking in primarily commercial blocks of the TND where on-street
parking helps to promote the objectives of this article.
B. Landscaping shall be in accordance with Article IX.
C. Parking: Parking may be provided in central lots serving establishments
within one block of the lot. In such instances, maintenance of the lot
shall be maintained by an association in accordance with the standards
and remedies for failure to maintain the lot set forth in § 265-603. Use
of the lot and number of spaces credited per establishment shall be
determined at the time of tentative approval. Easements or fee simple
ownership through an association shall be executed or established.
D. Sidewalks. Sidewalks should be installed in accordance with Borough
construction standards. Sidewalks on blocks primarily serving
nonresidential establishments shall promote pedestrian traffic between
such establishments and from parking and common areas to the
business district.
E. Modification of waiver of standards. The Borough Council may waive
standards of this article or those otherwise applicable to the submitted
TND including but not limited to street width, landscaping, and parking
requirements, where the applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed
modification better furthers the objectives of this article than the
standards otherwise required.
(1) Specifically, waiver of minimum street width and one-way streets
may be considered where blocks serving single-family detached
lots provided with alley access depending upon the overall
functionality of the street with the TND's street network.
(2) Landscaping requirements as relating to individual lots may be
waived or the distribution of required landscaping may be modified
based on the relationship structures and lots to the adjoining
street.
§ 265-606 WATER § 265-606
256:459
§ 265-607. Sketch plan review.
The Borough Planning Commission may informally meet with a landowner
to informally discuss the conceptual aspects of the landowner's
development plan prior to the filing of the application for tentative approval
for the TND. The landowner may present a sketch plan to the Borough
Planning Commission for discussion purposes only, and during the
discussion the Borough Planning Commission may make suggestions and
recommendations on the design of the developmental plan which shall not
be binding on the Borough.
§ 265-608. Tentative plan application requirements.
At least 30 calendar days prior to the regular meeting of the Planning
Commission, 15 copies of an application for tentative approval shall be
submitted. The application shall be in sufficient detail for the Planning
Commission to determine compliance with the standards of this article and
shall contain, at a minimum, the following information:
F. Development or redevelopment in the CC Commercial Center District
should, to the extent possible, meet the design guidelines prepared by
the Pittsburgh History and Landmarks Foundation, attached as an
appendix to this chapter.124
A. A legal description of the total tract proposed for development,
including a statement of present and proposed ownership.
(1) A written statement demonstrating conformance with the Borough
plans and community development objectives of this chapter.
(2) Written statement detailing the general character of the
development in relation to surrounding uses and the proportion of
use types contained therein. Each use type shall be listed by unit
and square footage. Types shall include those separately
authorized as residential or conditional use in the TND.
B. A written statement of the requested modifications to other ordinance
provisions otherwise applicable.
C. A location map which clearly shows the location and area of the site
proposed for development with relation to all lands, buildings and
structures within 200 feet of its boundaries, the location and distance to
existing streets and highways and the names of landowners of adjacent
properties.
D. A development plan prepared at a scale no smaller than one inch equals
50 feet showing the following information:
(1) Existing contours at intervals of five feet; watercourses;
floodplains; wetlands; woodlands; soils; steep slopes, delineating
124. Editor's Note: Said appendix is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 265-606 TARENTUM CODE § 265-608
256:460
and labeling 25% through 40% slopes and greater than 40% slopes;
and other natural features.
(2) Proposed lot lines and subdivision plat. The plat shall show
approximate building footprints and anticipated square feet,
identify the type of use anticipated, and proposed setbacks for both
residential and commercial uses.
(3) Proposed phases of development.
(4) The location of all existing and proposed buildings, structures and
other improvements, including maximum heights, types of dwelling
units and dwelling unit density.
(5) The location and size in acres or square feet of all areas to be
conveyed dedicated or reserved as common open space.
(6) The existing and proposed vehicular circulation system of local and
collector streets, including off-street parking areas, service areas,
loading areas and major points of access from the Planned
Residential Development to public rights-of-way.
(7) The existing and proposed pedestrian circulation system, including
its interrelationship with the vehicular circulation system and open
space.
(8) The existing and proposed utility systems, including sanitary
sewers, storm sewers and water, electric, gas and telephone lines.
(9) Subsurface conditions, including mining and overburden.
(10) A preliminary landscaping plan indicating the treatment and
materials proposed to be used in common areas, buffer areas,
parking, townhouses, and commercial buildings.
(11) Location of trails for public use and easements or right-of-ways
dedicating those trails for public use.
E. A preliminary traffic report which details impact on onsite intersections
and off-site intersections substantially impacted by the TND.
F. Application forms prepared by the Borough requiring information
sufficient to review the application, provide findings of fact, and
determine conformance to the provisions of this section.
G. Review and application fees required by Borough ordinance or
resolution.
H. Preliminary elevations and architectural renderings of typical
structures.
I. Preliminary reports demonstrating the general basis or nexus of
general site design to grading, erosion, storm water, and street
construction ordinance standards.
§ 265-608 WATER § 265-608
256:461
§ 265-609. Tentative approval process.
§ 265-610. Tentative plan; consideration of findings.
Tentative approval shall be approved, denied, or approved with conditions
based on the following findings of fact.
J. In the case of development plans that call for development over a period
of years, a schedule for phasing the development shall be provided. This
phasing schedule shall be reviewed annually with the Planning
Commission on the anniversary of tentative approval or as each phase
is completed, whichever occurs first.
A. The Zoning Officer shall review an application for tentative approval
within one week of delivery and shall notify the applicant of any
deficiencies of certify the applicant as complete. Submissions of
deficient items shall be reviewed in the same manner. The Zoning
Officer shall, when all application materials are submitted, certify the
application as complete. The date on which completion is certified shall
constitute the official filing date.
B. The Planning Commission shall review the application at the next
regular meeting scheduled 21 days or later from the official filing date.
C. The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the matter
pursuant to public notice within 60 days of the official filing date. The
commission or governing body may hold subsequent hearings provided
that all hearings are concluded within 60 days of the initial hearing.
D. Decision. Within 60 days following the conclusion of the public
hearings, the Borough Manager shall, by official written
communication, either grant tentative approval of the development
plan, as submitted; grant tentative approval of the development plan,
subject to specified conditions not included in the development plan as
submitted; or deny tentative approval. Failure to act within said period
shall be deemed to be a grant of tentative approval of the development
plan as submitted. In the event, however, that tentative approval is
granted subject to conditions, the landowner may, within 30 days after
receiving a copy of the official written communication of the Borough,
notify the Borough of his refusal to accept all said conditions, in which
case, the Borough shall be deemed to have denied tentative approval of
the development plan. In the event that the landowner does not, within
said period, notify the Borough of his refusal to accept all said
conditions, tentative approval of the development plan, with all said
conditions, shall stand as granted. The decision will be filed with the
Secretary of the Borough and the applicant. The decision shall include
an approved schedule of final plan application filing which shall not be
less than three months from the tentative approval date.
A. In those respects in which the development plan is or is not consistent
with the plans for the development of the Borough;
§ 265-608 TARENTUM CODE § 265-610
256:462
§ 265-611. Final plan application requirements.
Final applications shall include the following.
B. The extent to which the development plan departs from zoning and
subdivision regulations otherwise applicable to the subject property,
including but not limited to density, bulk and use, and the reasons why
such departures are or are not deemed to be in the public interest;
C. The purpose, location and amount of the common open space in the
planned residential development, the reliability of the proposals for
maintenance and conservation of the common open space, and the
adequacy or inadequacy of the amount and purpose of the common
open space as related to the proposed density and type of residential
development;
D. The physical design of the development plan and the manner in which
said design does or does not make adequate provision for public
services, provide adequate control over vehicular traffic, and further
the amenities of light and air, recreation and visual enjoyment;
E. The relationship, beneficial or adverse, of the proposed planned
residential development to the neighborhood in which it is proposed to
be established;
F. In the case of a development plan which proposes development over a
period of years, the sufficiency of the terms and conditions intended to
protect the interests of the public and of the residents of the planned
residential development in the integrity of the development plan; and
G. The mixture of uses and housing choices and commercial
establishments and their ability or inability to meet current and
anticipated needs of present and future residents and patrons.
H. Adherence to all specific performance standards and requirements of
this article or lack thereof.
A. All final reports demonstrating compliance with local erosion and
sedimentation, grading, and storm water ordinances in forms required
by the Borough Engineer and the respective ordinances.
B. A plan showing existing and proposed contours at intervals of five feet;
watercourses; floodplains; wetlands; woodlands; soils; steep slopes,
delineating and labeling 25% through 40% slopes and greater than 40%
slopes; and other natural features.
C. A plat, in conformance with that required by the local subdivision
ordinance showing or denoting all approved setbacks.
D. Plans showing the platted lines along with building footprints and
number of stories and gross square footage related thereto. Said plans
shall show all easements and designations of residential and
§ 265-610 WATER § 265-611
256:463
§ 265-612. Final plan approval process.
commercial areas. Single-family homes may show a building envelope
or area with a typical square footage or building footprint anticipated.
E. All covenants required to demonstrate initial and ongoing compliance
with the provisions of this article. Such covenants shall include but not
be limited to the preservation of woodlands, usage of open space,
preservation of natural features, maintenance of buffer areas, signage
and lighting, etc.
F. Documents establishing a home- or landowners' association and
detailing the maintenance of common open space. Said documents may
include condominium declaration statements and related covenants.
G. A general plan of signage and lighting, including styles, materials, and
colors utilized.
H. Street cross-sections and construction drawings demonstrating
compliance with municipal standards or approved modifications.
I. Further reports including geotechnical reports where required to
demonstrate safe and stable construction of principal dwellings,
streets, access drives, and parking.
J. A narrative detailing any modifications from tentative approval.
K. Finalized phase specific traffic study indicating level of service for all
intersections.
L. Deeds dedicating public land, where required through tentative
approval.
M. Estimates for public improvements and amenities for which bonds are
required by the local subdivision ordinance.
N. Final landscaping and parking plans including tables demonstrating
compliance with the provisions of this article in terms of number and
percentage provided.
A. The Zoning Officer shall review an application for final approval within
one week of delivery and shall notify the applicant of any deficiencies of
certify the applicant as complete. Submissions of deficient items shall
be reviewed in the same manner. The Zoning Officer shall, when all
application materials are submitted, certify the application as complete.
The date on which completion is certified shall constitute the official
filing date.
B. Variation from original plan. In the event that the development plan
submitted contains variations from the development plan granted
tentative approval, the Borough may refuse to grant final approval and
may, within 45 days of the official filing date of the application for final
approval, advise the applicant, in writing, of said refusal, setting forth
§ 265-611 TARENTUM CODE § 265-612
256:464
§ 265-613. Modification of approved plans.
in said notice the reasons why one or more of the variations are not
in the public interest. In the event of such refusal, the landowner may
either refile the application for final approval without the variations
objected; or file a written request with the Borough Council that it hold
a public hearing on the application for final approval. If the landowner
wishes to take either alternate action, he may do so at any time within
which he shall be entitled to apply for final approval, or within 30
additional days, if the time for applying for final approval shall have
already passed at the time when the landowner was advised that the
development plan was not in substantial compliance. If the landowner
fails to take either of these alternate actions within said time, he shall
be deemed to have abandoned the development plan.
C. In the event the application for final approval has been officially filed,
together with all drawings, specifications and other documents in
support thereof, and as required by this article and the official written
communication of tentative approval, the Borough shall, within 45 days
from the date of the regular meeting of the local planning commission,
whichever first reviews the application, next following the date the
application is filed, grant such development plan final approval;
provided, however, that should the next regular meeting occur more
than 30 days following the filing of the application, the forty-five-day
period shall be measured from the 30th day following the official filing
date.
D. The developer shall post financial security and shall execute a
developer's agreement as required by the local subdivision ordinance
prior to recording of the final plat. The plat shall be recorded within 90
days of final plan approval. The developer's agreement shall at a
minimum, in addition to that required by the local subdivision
ordinance, cite those provisions of the notice of tentative approval
applicable to the respective phase, include a timeline for development
proposed by the developer but not to exceed five years, reference
construction inspections and responsibilities, reference the installation
of landscaping and private amenities, and address the recordation of
homeowners' association documents and covenants.
E. The developer shall be afforded the five-year timeline to commence and
complete development as noted in § 508 of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended, and otherwise applicable to
subdivisions and land developments. Where the developer notifies the
Borough that he has abandoned the plan or the aforesaid timeline cited
in § 508 expires, the plan shall be deemed abandoned and no further
development or permits for such development shall take place. The
Borough shall amend its ordinance to reclassify the property to a zoning
district.
A. An applicant for permits which do not conform strictly to the approved
plan may request a modification to the plan by providing all reports and
§ 265-612 WATER § 265-613
256:465
plans required by final approval which are proposed to be modified.
A statement concerning consistency with the comprehensive plan and
community development objectives shall be submitted along with any
required fees and forms provided by the Borough. Upon acceptance,
the application shall be afforded the timelines and process provided for
final TND approval. The Borough, however, shall hold a public hearing
pursuant to public notice prior to voting on the application.
B. Modification approval shall be provided in a manner that meets all
requirements and standards of this article.
C. Findings regarding approval shall consider the following:
(1) No such modification, removal or release of the provisions of the
development plan by the Borough shall affect the rights of the
residents of the planned residential development to maintain and
enforce those provisions, at law or equity, as provided in this
section.
(2) No modification, removal or release of the provisions of the
development plan by the Borough shall be permitted except upon a
finding by the Borough or the planning agency, following a public
hearing thereon pursuant to public notice called and held in
accordance with the provisions of this article, that the same is
consistent with the efficient development and preservation of the
entire planned residential development, does not adversely affect
either the enjoyment of land abutting upon or across the street
from the planned residential development or the public interest,
and is not granted solely to confer a special benefit upon any
person.
(3) No part of the approval shall conflict with private covenants that
run in favor of residents or property owners within the entire TND.
§ 265-613 TARENTUM CODE § 265-613
256:466
ARTICLE VII
Signs
The construction, operation, improvement, and maintenance of all signs in
the Borough of Tarentum shall be subject to the standards outlined in this
article.
§ 265-701. Calculation methods.
§ 265-702. General standards.
A. For purposes of this article, sign area shall be calculated as follows:
(1) In the case of panel or cabinet type signs, the sign area shall
include the entire area of the sign panel, cabinet or face substrate
upon which the sign copy is displayed or illustrated.
(2) Signs consisting of individual letters and/or elements or logos
installed directly on a building surface will be measured as one sign
when the distance between the letters and/or elements is less than
the largest dimension of the largest sign letter.
(3) When the sign faces of a multisided sign are parallel or within 30°
of parallel, only one side is counted. If the sign faces are not
parallel or within 30° of parallel, all sign faces are counted.
B. Where sign area allotment is calculated based on building frontage, the
linear feet used shall be the length of the building facade at ground
level.
A. Obscene material, illustrations, or language shall not be depicted or
displayed on any sign.
B. To the extent possible, signs should meet the design guidelines
prepared by the Pittsburgh History and Landmarks Foundation,
attached as an appendix to this chapter.125
C. Notwithstanding that any signs not expressly authorized within this
article are prohibited, the following are expressly prohibited:
(1) Flashing signs.
(2) Banners, series of balloons, and pennants.
(3) Balloons and other inflatable objects with a diameter of two feet or
greater.
(4) Signs larger than two square feet that are suspended by chains,
ropes, or other means designed to allow the sign to swing or move
freely.
125. Editor's Note: Said appendix is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 265-701 WATER § 265-702
256:467
§ 265-703. Exemptions.
The following signs shall not require a permit. The sign area of the following
shall not count toward maximum sign area requirements imposed by this
article.
(5) Roof signs.
(6) Signs affixed directly to a tree, utility pole, light pole, traffic control
device, barn, shed, or roof of a building or structure.
(7) Back-lit, translucent awnings or canopies.
(8) Permanent signs made of plywood, pressed board, MDO or nonexterior-
grade wood products.
(9) Signs attached to or painted on a licensed vehicle within a
residential zoning district if such sign is visible from a public street
where such is displayed with the intent of advertising.
D. Signs shall not block required sight distance at intersections of streets
and access roads and driveways to streets.
E. No sign or structure shall be erected at any location where, by reason of
the position, shape or color of the sign or structure, it may interfere
with, obstruct the view of or be confused with any authorized traffic
sign, signal or device or public directional, emergency, or street
signage.
F. The display of signage within public rights-of-way, including sidewalks
within public rights-of-way shall be governed by Article VII of this
chapter.
G. Window signs displayed on a permanent basis shall be considered as
walls signs for purposes of this article.
H. All external lighting associated with signs shall be provided as indirect
lighting.
I. Billboards, as defined, shall be permitted in the RRO Rural Resource
Overlay District. (See § 265-406, Subsection F.)
A. Public, semipublic, and commemorative signs and monuments
including signs established by, or by order of, any governmental agency;
and religious symbols, commemorative plaques of recognized historic
agencies, or identification emblems of religious orders or historic
agencies.
B. Signs indicating the address or name of a building up to two square feet
for single-family dwellings and six square feet for all other uses.
C. One "For Sale" or "For Rent" sign is allowed per street frontage. Such
signs must be removed within seven days after the sale, rental, or lease
has been accomplished.
§ 265-702 TARENTUM CODE § 265-703
256:468
§ 265-704. Commercial Center, CC and HCM Highway Commercial
and Manufacturing District sign standards.
D. "For Sale" or "For Rent" signs on lots containing a single-family
dwelling unit or zoned for single-family residential development may
not exceed nine square feet in area.
E. "For Sale" or "For Rent" signs on lots containing principal uses other
than single-family dwellings may not exceed the greater of 32 square
feet or 0.25 square feet of sign area per each linear foot of street
frontage for the first 150 feet of street frontage and 0.10 square feet of
sign area for each linear foot of street frontage for street frontage in
excess of 150 feet. These area calculations must be based on the street
frontage to which the sign is oriented. No such sign may exceed 150
square feet in area.
F. One construction sign is allowed per street frontage during the time
that construction or development activity is occurring on the subject
lot, as follows:
(1) Construction signs on a lot bearing a single-family dwelling or
zoned for single-family residential development may not exceed 12
square feet in area.
(2) Construction signs on a lot containing multifamily residential,
office, institutional, public, commercial or industrial uses or a lot
zoned for such uses may not exceed 32 square feet in area.
G. Holiday decorations on private property clearly incidental, customary,
and commonly associated with national, local or religious holidays are
allowed, provided they are displayed for a period of not more than 60
days for each holiday.
H. One sign per lot not exceeding two square feet with the name of a
business operating as a home occupation on the lot.
A. The following types of signs shall be authorized in the Commercial
Center CC District, on buildings and lots bearing one or more
nonresidential principal uses, subject to the standards contained in this
section. No internal illumination of signs is permitted.
(1) Walls signs.
(2) Freestanding signs.
(3) Monument signs.
(4) Electronic message center.
(5) Changeable copy signs.
(6) Projecting signs.
(7) Awning and canopy signs.
§ 265-703 WATER § 265-704
256:469
B. Wall signs.
(1) Wall signs may be installed on any building facade. The minimum
sign area allotted shall be 15 feet for each building facade up to a
maximum of 200 square feet. The preceding allotments
notwithstanding, permitted sign area shall be determined as
follows by measuring the respective frontage of the respective
building facade on which the wall sign is attached. Multiple wall
signs may be installed, the maximum cumulative sign area of which
shall not exceed that authorized below.
Sign Type
Square feet of sign per
linear
foot of building frontage
Box sign 0.25
Screened box sign with raised or
recessed letters
05
Raceway-mounted channel letter
signs
1.0
Pin-mounted channel letter sign 1.25
Distinctive materials/design sign 1.50
(2) Wall signs shall not include changeable copy signs or electronic
message centers, except as expressly authorized within this section
as wall signs.
(3) Wall signs representing an establishment located on solely on the
first floor of a building be located a minimum of 12 feet and a
maximum of 20 from the average grade of the ground.
(4) Walls signs representing an establishment located on the second
floor of a building shall be located on the second story of a building
shall be located over the header of the second floor and below the
second floor cornice line on two-story buildings or over the window
header and below the sill line of third-story windows of third
stories.
(5) Wall signs shall bear only the name(s) or logos of the
establishments located within the building on which the sign(s) are
installed.
(6) Maximum letter height: three feet.
(7) Wall signs shall not project more than 18 inches from the building
facade to which it is attached.
C. Awning and canopy signs.
(1) Nonilluminated canopies or awnings with no more than six square
feet of sign (copy) area on the border of the awning may be used in
§ 265-704 TARENTUM CODE § 265-704
256:470
addition to wall signs. Other awning signs or canopy signs may be
substituted for allowed wall signs, provided that the total combined
number of wall signs and awning and canopy signs may not exceed
that authorized for wall signs with respect to the building facade to
which the signs are attached.
(2) Maximum sign area. Notwithstanding the sign area allotment
limitations otherwise applicable, letters, logos, and symbols on
awning or canopy signs are limited to a maximum area of 1.25
square feet per one foot of awning length or 25% of the awning
area, whichever is less. The total combined length of letters, logos
and symbols may not exceed 70% of awning or canopy length. In
calculating the length and area of an awning or canopy only the
single longest plane of the awning or canopy may be counted. This
generally means that the valance and sides (ends) of the awning or
canopy will not be counted for purposes of measuring length or
area.
D. Projecting signs shall be permitted under the following conditions.
(1) The sign must be attached directly to the building facade as
opposed to an awning or canopy.
(2) No more than one is installed for every 50 linear feet of building
facade to which the sign(s) is (are) attached.
(3) The lowest point of the sign shall not be located less than 7.5 feet
from the grade of adjacent ground.
(4) The sign shall no project more than 3.5 feet from the building
facade to which it is attached.
(5) The sign area of such signs shall not exceed six feet or 25% of the
allotted wall sign area of the respective building facade, whichever
is less. The number of square feet used for projected signage shall
be deducted from the wall signage allotted for the building facade
to which the projected signage is affixed.
E. Freestanding and monument signs.
(1) One freestanding or monument sign is authorized in the front yard
of each lot where the yard is 10 feet or greater.
(2) The sign shall not exceed six feet in height.
(3) The sign area of freestanding signs shall not exceed eight square
feet.
(4) The sign area of monument signs and freestanding signs that are
distinctive materials/design signs shall not exceed 24 square feet.
F. Electronic message centers.
§ 265-704 WATER § 265-704
256:471
§ 265-705. Standards in residential and overlay districts.
Signage in all districts excepting the Commercial Center CC District and
including overlay districts shall be subject to the following standards.
(1) Electronic message centers shall be authorized as window signs
provided that such do not encompass greater than eight square
feet. Where messages are intended to be conveyed to or font size or
display are clearly discernible to the motoring public, messages
shall remain stationary and shall not change more than once every
five seconds.
(2) Electronic message centers are otherwise permitted as and subject
to the standards of wall or projecting signs provided that such do
not exceed 10 square feet and display only time and temperature.
G. Changeable copy signs. Changeable copy signs shall be authorized to
be incorporated as part of a freestanding sign, provided that the face
consisting of the changeable copy sign does not exceed 30% of the sign
area of the freestanding sign.
A. Stand-alone lots. Signs on stand-alone lots, as defined in this chapter,
shall be authorized as follows:
(1) Walls signs.
(a) Wall signs may be installed on the building facade of any
principal building and other building faces where said faces
are oriented to property lines that adjoin properties bearing or
approved for the development and operation of nonresidential
principal use(s). The minimum sign area allotted shall be 15
feet for each building facade up to a maximum of 400 square
feet. The preceding allotments notwithstanding, permitted
sign area shall be determined as follows by measuring the area
of the respective building facade or face on which the wall sign
is attached. Multiple wall signs may be installed, the maximum
cumulative sign area of which shall not exceed that authorized
below.
[1] Combinations of sign types may be installed where the
percentage allotted for a particular sign type is not
entirely used and the unused percentage is converted
proportionally to that allotted for the respective additional
sign type. For example, if 3% of a building face or facade is
used for a box sign, the remaining 1% allotted equals 25%
of the portion allotted for box signs. This 25% may be
applied to the percentage of the face applied to another
sign type such as a distinctive materials/design sign where
3.75% (or 25% of the 15% allotted) of the building face or
facade may be used for such a sign.
§ 265-704 TARENTUM CODE § 265-705
256:472
Sign Type
Square feet of sign as a
percentage of building
face
Box sign 4%
Screened box sign with
raised or recessed letters
4%
Raceway-mounted channel
letter signs
6%
Pin-mounted channel letter
sign
9%
Distinctive materials/design
sign
15%
(b) Wall signs shall not include changeable copy signs or
electronic message centers, except as expressly authorized
within this section as wall signs.
(c) Wall signs representing an establishment located on solely on
the first floor of a building be located a minimum of 12 feet and
a maximum of 20 from the average grade of the ground.
(d) Walls signs representing an establishment located on the
second floor of a building shall be located on the second story
of a building shall be located over the header of the second
floor and below the second floor cornice line on two-story
buildings or over the window header and below the sill line of
third-story windows of third stories.
(e) Wall signs shall bear only the name(s) or logos of the
establishments located within the building on which the sign(s)
are installed.
(2) Freestanding and monument signs on stand-alone lots.
(a) One freestanding or monument sign is authorized in the front
yard of each lot where the yard is 10 feet or greater.
(b) The sign shall not exceed six feet in height.
(c) The sign area of freestanding signs shall not exceed 16 square
feet.
(d) The sign area of monument signs and freestanding signs that
are distinctive materials/design signs shall not exceed 24
square feet.
(3) Electronic message centers.
(a) Electronic message centers shall be authorized as wall signs
provided that such do not encompass greater than 12 square
§ 265-705 WATER § 265-705
256:473
feet. Messages shall remain stationary and shall not change
more than once every five seconds.
(b) Electronic message centers are otherwise permitted as up to
50% of a freestanding sign or as projecting signs provided that
any such sign does not exceed eight square feet and displays
only time and temperature.
(4) Awning and canopy signs.
(a) Nonilluminated canopies or awnings with no more than 15
square feet of sign (copy) area on the border of the awning may
be used in addition to wall signs. Other awning signs or canopy
signs may be substituted for allowed wall signs, provided that
the total combined number of wall signs and awning and
canopy signs may not exceed that authorized for wall signs
with respect to the building facade to which the signs are
attached.
(b) Maximum sign area. Notwithstanding the sign area allotment
limitations otherwise applicable, letters, logos, and symbols on
awning or canopy signs are limited to a maximum area of 1.25
square feet per one foot of awning length or 40% of the awning
area, whichever is less. The total combined length of letters,
logos and symbols may not exceed 70% of awning or canopy
length. In calculating the length and area of an awning or
canopy only the single longest plane of the awning or canopy
may be counted. This generally means that the valance and
sides (ends) of the awning or canopy will not be counted for
purposes of measuring length or area.
(5) Changeable copy signs. Changeable copy signs shall be authorized
to be incorporated as part of a freestanding sign, provided that the
face consisting of the changeable copy sign does not exceed 50% of
the sign area of the freestanding sign.
B. Shopping centers and office parks.
(1) Wall signs as authorized for stand-alone parcels shall be authorized
on building facades and faces within shopping centers and office
parks except that wall signs in office parks shall be authorized at a
rate of 75% as otherwise authorized for stand-alone parcels and
shopping centers.
(2) One freestanding or monument sign is authorized for each
entrance from a public street with a limit of one sign per street
where multiple entrances exist on the street.
(a) Monument and freestanding signs shall not be located closer
than 10 feet to any adjoining street right-of-way.
§ 265-705 TARENTUM CODE § 265-705
256:474
§ 265-706. Miscellaneous standards.
(b) Freestanding signs shall not exceed 15 feet in height. The sign
area of freestanding signs as box signs and similar sign types
shall not exceed 100 feet and the sign area for freestanding
signs as distinctive materials/design sign shall not exceed 150
square feet. The lowest point of the sign face attached to the
sign's support structures shall be mounted no higher than
eight feet from the average grade of the ground.
(c) The sign area of monument signs shall not exceed 150 square
feet.
(3) Each outparcel in a shopping center or lot within an office park
shall be authorized one freestanding or ground sign as authorized
for stand-alone lots provided that said sign is located within 15 feet
of an entrance from the lot to the internal street or access road
network of the shopping center or office park.
C. Traditional neighborhood development. Signage within an area
approved and developed as a traditional neighborhood development
shall adhere to the standards set forth for the CC Commercial Center
District.
A. Menu board signs. Menu board signs accessory to allowed drivethrough
uses are permitted in addition to other allowed signs, as
follows:
(1) Number and dimensions.
(a) Primary menu board. One primary menu board not to exceed
36 square feet in area or eight eight feet in height is allowed
per order station up to a maximum of two primary menu
boards.
(b) Secondary menu board. One secondary menu board not to
exceed 15 square feet in area or six feet in height is allowed.
(2) Residential separation. Menu board signs must be set back at least
75 feet from residential zoning districts.
B. Neighborhood or subdivision identification signs. Neighborhood or
subdivision identification sign are allowed as entrance features to
neighborhoods or subdivisions and must be actively maintained by a
homeowners association. Neighborhood/subdivision identification signs
must be monument signs and may not exceed eight feet in height or 40
square feet of sign area. One such sign shall be authorized for a group
of multifamily dwellings and may be installed as a freestanding sign in
the form of a distinctive materials/design sign not to exceed 20 square
feet.
§ 265-705 WATER § 265-706
256:475
C. Temporary signs. The following shall be authorized for nonresidential
establishments in all districts. One temporary sign no greater than 16
square feet in sign area may be displayed for a period not more than 30
days after the opening of an establishment nor 14 days before the
opening of said establishment. One temporary sign not exceeding 24
square feet and advertising an onsite promotional event for an
establishment may be placed at an establishment two times per year,
not to exceed 14 days each time.
§ 265-706 TARENTUM CODE § 265-706
256:476
ARTICLE VIII
Parking
§ 265-801. Parking regulations.
A. Parking shall be provided in accordance with the rates cited in the
following schedule and in accordance with the specifications and
standards set forth in this article and associated development
approvals.
Off-Street Parking
Use Requirement
Administrative and
professional offices
1 per 325 square feet of gross floor area
Adult day services center 1 space per 3 clients, based on the
maximum authorized occupancy at any one
time during the center's operation
Adult uses Determined as per parking study
Animal hospital/clinic 4 spaces for every veterinarian and 1
space for each additional employee
Assembly hall, public or
semipublic
Number of spaces shall equal 20% of the
maximum occupancy determined by the
Uniform Construction Code
Bank 1 per 250 feet of floor area
Banquet hall 1 for every 3 1/2 seats for areas with fixed
seating, plus 1 for each 100 square feet of
assembly area or display area without
fixed seating, plus 1 for every 2 employees
on a peak shift
Bar/tavern .85 spaces per seat
Bed-and-breakfast 2 spaces plus 1 space per guest bedroom
Car wash 4 stacking spaces per either bay (self-serve
car wash) or 4 standard parking spaces
per bay plus 1 space per employee on peak
shift for full-serve carwash
Cemetery 1 for each employee, plus 1/4 space for
every seat of a chapel or assembly room
Church 1 for every 4 seats in places of assembly
Convenience store 1 per 150 square feet of gross floor area
Day-care center 1 for each teacher, administrator or
employee on a peak shift, plus 1 for every
6 persons based on regulated maximum
capacity
§ 265-801 WATER § 265-801
256:477
Off-Street Parking
Use Requirement
Dwelling unit 2 per multifamily dwelling unit and 2 per
dwelling unit for all other dwelling unit
types
Entertainment recreation
facilities, indoor
Determined as per parking study
Essential service 2 spaces
Essential service
buildings
1 per employee on peak shift and 1 per
250 square feet of meeting room space
Family day-care home 5 spaces
Funeral home 1 space for each 50 square feet of floor
area in the public or parlor rooms plus one
space for each vehicle maintained on the
premises, plus 1 space for each employee
General retail 1 for every 225 square feet of gross floor
area
Greenhouse, retail 1 1/2 for every 1,000 square feet of gross
floor area
Grocery store 1 for every 200 square feet of gross floor
area
Group residential facility Determined as per parking study
Hospital Determined as per parking study
Hotel or motel 1 per sleeping room. A parking study is
required for other accessory functions that
may serve patrons other than hotel guests
Industrial uses 1 per employee on peak shift plus an
additional number equal to 25% of peak
shift number of employees
Local public use For schools, sufficient parking for teachers
and 1 space per 10 students enrolled.
Other services shall include sufficient
parking for employees plus a minimum of 6
additional spaces
Medical offices 2 spaces per treatment room or chair
(whichever is greater) and 1 per doctor
and/or employee on peak shift
Minor equipment and
automotive repairs
1 space per 250 feet of gross floor area
Mobile home parks 1 space per 250 feet of floor area
§ 265-801 TARENTUM CODE § 265-801
256:478
Off-Street Parking
Use Requirement
Nursery schools 3 for each classroom and administrative
office or 1 space for every four seats in
places of assembly available to the public,
whichever requirement is greater
Outdoor commercial
recreation
Determined as per parking study
Personal care home 1 for every 4 beds, plus 1 for each staff
position during the peak shift
Personal service
establishment
1 per 350 square feet of gross floor area
Pharmacy 1 per 200 square feet of gross floor area
Restaurant 1 space per every 3 seats
Retail supercenter Determined as per parking study
School, commercial Determined as per parking study
School, private Determined as per parking study
Service station Parking or storage space for all vehicles
used directly in the conduct of the
business plus 1 parking space for each gas
pump, 3 spaces for each grease rack or
similar facility, and 1 space for every 2
persons employed on the premises at
maximum employment on a single shift
Similar uses, undefined Determined as per parking study
Supermarket 1 for every 250 square feet of gross floor
area
Transitional residential
facility
Determined as per parking study
B. Parking for dwelling units may be accommodated within garages with
each bay capable of accommodating a motor vehicle equaling one
space. Such garages shall be accessory structures to the principal
structure(s) for which parking is required.
C. All areas used for parking, access, and loading shall be paved with an
all-weather dustless material such as asphalt, grouted brick, concrete,
pavers, or similar material approved by the Borough Engineer.
D. Measurement of space. When determination of the number of required
off-street parking spaces results in a fractional space, any fraction up to
and including 1/2 may be disregarded, and fractions over 1/2 shall be
interpreted as one parking space.
§ 265-801 WATER § 265-801
256:479
E. Parking study. Where parking is to be determined by a study, said study
shall be performed by a qualified engineer in accordance with the
following standards:
(1) Parking requirements shall be related to current and relevant
studies conducted by the Institute of Traffic Engineers or a
similarly accepted industry standard and shall be directly related to
the size, number of employees, hours of operation, and other
applicable factors associated with the particular establishment
proposed; or parking requirement studies may be based upon
studies of similar establishments at existing locations in
accordance with the preceding standards.
(2) The study shall outline minimum parking requirements based on
certain criteria including but not limited to employees, floor area,
and hours of operation. Said criteria shall be used to determine
future parking requirements if or when additional parking is
required due to building, employment, or similar expansion of
activities requiring additional parking.
(3) The study shall be sealed by a qualified engineer.
(4) The study shall subject to the review and approval of the Borough
Engineer or a qualified engineer as appointed by the Borough to
review the study.
(5) The study shall address the number of off-street loading spaces that
are required.
F. Access. Parking facilities shall be designed with appropriate means of
vehicular access to a street or alley in such manner as will least
interfere with the movement of traffic. No driveway or curb cut in any
district shall exceed 25 feet in width for one-way movement or 32 feet in
width for two-way movement.
G. Parking space; description. A required off-street parking space shall be
not less than nine feet wide by 18 feet long measured perpendicularly
to the sides of the parking space exclusive of access drives or aisles,
ramps, columns, or office and work areas, directly accessible from
streets or alleys or from private driveways or aisles leading to streets or
alleys and to be used for the storage or parking of passenger
automobiles or commercial vehicles under 1 1/2 ton capacity.
H. Aisles between vehicular parking spaces shall be not less than 12 feet in
width when serving automobiles parked at a forty-five-degree angle in
one direction, not less than 22 feet in width when serving automobiles
parked perpendicularly for two-way aisle movement, and not less than
20 feet in width when serving automobiles parked perpendicularly for
one-way aisle movement.
I. Off-street loading.
§ 265-801 TARENTUM CODE § 265-801
256:480
(1) The minimum size loading space shall be 40 feet in depth and 12
feet in width, with an overhead clearance of 14 feet.
(2) A minimum of one off-street loading space shall be provided on any
lot on which a building exceeding 6,000 square feet of gross floor
area for business or industry is hereafter erected or converted.
(3) All commercial and industrial establishments shall provide loading
and unloading and commercial vehicle storage space(s) adequate
for their needs. This required space will be provided in addition to
established requirements for patron and employee parking.
Loading space shall be provided to ensure that in no case where a
building is erected, converted or enlarged for commercial,
manufacturing or business purposes shall the public rights-of-way
or approved access roads be used for loading or unloading of
materials.
(4) Required off-street parking spaces shall not be computed for
loading and unloading purposes.
J. Shared parking. Shared parking is permitted for development
containing multiple principal uses or establishments not withstanding
and in accordance with Subsection K for offsite parking, where the
minimum spaces in the lot utilizing such is computed as follows and
accordance with the table in § 265-801A.
(1) Determine the minimum parking requirements in accordance with
Table 808-2 for each land use as if it were a separate use;
(2) Multiply each amount by the corresponding percentages for each
of the five time periods set forth in Columns (B) through (F) of Table
808-2;
(3) Calculate the total parking demand for each time period;
(4) Select the column with the highest total and use this number as the
required minimum number of parking spaces.
Shared Parking Allowance by Land Use
Weekday Weekend
Land Use Daytime* Evening* Daytime* Evening* Nighttime*
Office,
Industrial
100% 10% 10% 5% 5%
Retail 60% 90% 100% 70% 5%
Hotel 75% 100% 75% 100% 75%
Restaurant 50% 100% 100% 100% 10%
Entertainment,
Recreation
40% 100% 80% 100% 10%
§ 265-801 WATER § 265-801
256:481
Key: Daytime: 6:00 a.m. – 5:00 p.m.
Evening: 5:00 p.m. – 12:00 midnight
Nighttime: 12:00 midnight – 6:00 a.m.
(5) Shared parking shall be permitted in the CC Commercial Center
District on public parking lots, metered spaces and other
unassigned designated on-street parking spaces located within 500
feet of the use generating the need for such parking, and may be
counted toward meeting the off-street parking requirements of said
use.
K. Off-site parking. Unless otherwise approved through a traditional
neighborhood development in accordance with the following standards,
all parking shall be located on the same lot as the principal use(s) which
it serves except that off-site parking shall be authorized as a conditional
use subject to the following same standards:
(1) The parking shall lie within 500 linear feet of the entrance to the
building housing the establishment for which the parking is
required.
(2) The parking area shall be connected to the principal structure by a
system of sidewalks and crosswalks meeting all Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation, American with Disabilities Act, and
other applicable Borough standards.
(3) Easements or leases shall be executed in a manner that guarantees
use of the parking area sufficient to meet the minimum parking
requirements of this article. The applicant shall execute a
developer's agreement, prepared by the Borough Solicitor, which
gives notice that operation and occupancy of the subject
establishment(s) is contingent upon continued access to the off-site
parking approved.
(4) Existing parking lots, all or a portion of which, are proposed for offsite
parking, shall meet the dimensional requirements set forth in
this article for aisle width, access, and parking stall size.
L. Uses located in historically designated structures are exempt from offstreet
parking requirements.
§ 265-801 TARENTUM CODE § 265-801
256:482
ARTICLE IX
Landscaping Requirements
§ 265-901. Scope, purpose, and general standards.
A. This section sets forth landscaping and tree planting requirements by
Zoning District and type of use and establishes thresholds of
construction, improvement, and change of use at which the current
landscaping requirements shall apply. The purpose of the following
requirements is to:
(1) Promote tree planting and screening requirements that are an
integral part of traditional neighborhood development guidelines;
(2) Protect property values by providing landscape buffering as a
transition between districts and uses of varying intensities.
(3) Ensure installation and maintenance of landscaping and vegetation
in new residential neighborhoods, commercial centers, and mixeduse
developments in order to minimize effects of heat associated
with paved areas, provide for shade, minimize erosion, and provide
for functional integration with existing neighborhoods and
commercial centers.
(4) Landscaping shall be used in all open areas not covered by
buildings, required parking areas, sidewalks or other impervious
surfaces. Landscaping shall be a mixture of shade tree, low-level
planting and ground cover that shall be of a type, size and
placement compatible with the land development and the
surrounding land uses.
(5) All measurements and plant quality shall be consistent with the
American Standards for Nursery Stock published by the American
Association of Nurserymen, Inc., Washington, D.C.
B. Parking lot requirements. The following shall apply to all parking lots in
the Borough.
(1) All parking lots shall meet the following requirements for
landscaping.
(a) All landscaped island curbs shall be constructed of a durable
material such as asphalt or concrete.
(b) Raised landscaped islands adjacent to municipal or state
rights-of-way shall comply with Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation (PennDOT) or Borough regulations, whichever
is more stringent.
(c) Trees, shrubs or flowers shall not be permitted to grow within
two feet of a curb to prevent damage of plant materials by auto
bumpers.
§ 265-901 WATER § 265-901
256:483
(2) In addition to the requirements above, parking lots with five or
more parking spaces other than single-family or duplex dwellings
shall include one shade tree for each 50 linear feet or fraction
thereof of perimeter. Also, within these planting areas, low-level
plantings and ground cover shall be installed in such a manner as
to screen the parking area from the public right-of-way or adjacent
property.
(3) In addition to the requirements above, parking lots with 100 or
more spaces shall provide for the following:
(a) An eight-foot-wide raised planting strip between alternate sets
of parking stall rows. This requirement is applicable if the
parking stall row has 15 or more continuous parking spaces.
The landscaping required in this planting strip shall include a
mixture of shade tree, low-level planting and ground cover.
Shade trees shall be planted up to 20 feet apart, and low-level
planting up to five feet apart.
(b) Raised landscaped islands, eight feet wide, at each end of a
parking stall row of 15 or more continuous parking spaces.
Such island shall be the full length of the parking spaces
provided to prevent the encroachment of moving vehicles into
parking spaces. In addition, if a parking stall row
accommodates 40 or more spaces, an additional island, eight
feet wide, is required. Thereafter, an additional landscaped
island is required for every additional 20 spaces in the parking
stall row. All required landscaped islands that are in addition to
those at each end of a parking stall row must be spaced at
regular intervals. The required landscaping to be included
within these islands includes an appropriate mixture of shade
tree, low-level planting and ground cover. A minimum of one
shade tree or three low-level plantings shall be required for
each island, with the remainder of the island consisting of
ground cover.
C. Street and access drive tree requirements. The following shall apply to
all streets and access drives constructed within developments and shall
also apply to the frontage and adjoining rights-of-way of lots in infill
model and major traditional neighborhood developments.
(1) The Borough may adopt, by resolution and within the parameters
set forth in this section, standards for the location and type of
plantings required. Such standards may vary by specific street and
may be based upon existing neighborhood character and related
street construction standards. In such instances, landscaping shall
be installed in accordance with said specifications.
(2) Unless authorized or otherwise required within street rights-ofway,
street trees shall be planted within 10 feet of an adjoining
§ 265-901 TARENTUM CODE § 265-901
256:484
right-of-way and at a uniform distance in each block. The species of
tree shall be uniform per block as well.
(3) Trees shall be planted on the following centers:
(a) Shade trees: 50 feet.
(b) Understory trees: 30 feet.
D. Buffering yard types. Buffers shall be installed in accordance with the
following standards. Bufferyards shall be required in addition to street
tree and parking lot landscaping otherwise required by this section.
Bufferyards are set forth and defined as follows:
(1) Bufferyard A, minor: required plant units per hundred feet (at five
feet minimum width):
(2) Bufferyard B, moderate: required plant units per hundred feet (at
10 feet minimum width):
(3) Bufferyard C, average: required plant units per hundred feet (at 15
feet width):
§ 265-901 WATER § 265-901
256:485
(4) Bufferyard D, substantial: required plant units per hundred feet (at
25 feet width):
E. Determination of applicable buffer yard. Buffer yards shall be installed
and maintained along property lines adjoining the property line(s) of
lots within a category that require installation of a certain bufferyard
type. Category types are defined below. The applicable bufferyard for
the side and rear yards required, if any, is first determined by
identifying the category in which the subject lot is classified and the
category of adjoining lots. Once identified, the category of the subject
lot is selected from the column and the applicable bufferyard specified
under the column descending from the category type of the adjoining
lot. For example, improvement of a lot that is classified as Category III
that bears a side yard adjoining a lot classified as Category II would
require installation of Bufferyard B according to the table.
(1) Category I:
(a) Vacant lots in the R-1 and R-2 Districts.
(b) Any lot bearing a single-family or duplex dwelling unit.
(2) Category II:
(a) Conditional uses in the R-1 and R-2 Districts and overlay
districts thereof, excepting local public uses.
(b) Multifamily dwellings.
(c) Adult day services center.
(d) Day-care center.
(e) Group residential facility.
(f) Personal care home.
(3) Category III:
(a) Local public uses.
(b) Essential service buildings.
§ 265-901 TARENTUM CODE § 265-901
256:486
(c) Lots bearing nonresidential principal uses in the CC District,
except those set forth under Category II.
(4) Category IV:
(a) Major traditional neighborhood development.
(b) Mobile home park.
(c) Hospital.
I II III IV
I N/A N/A N/A N/A
II B A N/A N/A
III C B A N/A
IV D D C B
N/A = Not Applicable
F. Plan and bonding requirements.
(1) All applications requiring land development approval through the
effective subdivision and land development ordinance, conditional
use applications, and traditional neighborhood development
applications shall include a landscaping plan, prepared and sealed
by a landscape architect duly registered to prepare said plans in
and by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(2) Completion of landscaping. Prior to the issuance of any building
permit by the Borough, a bond or other cash security in the amount
of 110% of an approved estimate of the required landscaping
improvements shall be submitted to the Borough. An occupancy
permit shall not be issued until all required landscaping
improvements are installed and verified by a registered landscape
architect. In the event that all of the required landscaping
improvements cannot be installed at the time of request for an
occupancy permit due to the loss of the planting season, a
temporary occupancy permit may be granted for a period not
longer than nine months to allow for landscaping improvements to
be installed during the next planting season.
(3) Where a decision is required by Council for conditional use or
traditional neighborhood development approval and financial
security for associated landscaping or plantings is required by this
section, Council may require posting of a maintenance surety or
bond in the amount of 15% of the financial security required which
shall be posted for a period of 18 months to guarantee replacement
of unviable plantings.
§ 265-901 WATER § 265-901
256:487

ARTICLE X
Lighting
The following standards shall apply to the design and operation of outdoor
lighting for residential, commercial and institutional areas for loading,
ingress and egress, parking, security, private recreational uses and
institutional uses:
§ 265-1001. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish minimum standards for outdoor
lighting to:
§ 265-1002. Applicability.
Outdoor lighting shall be provided in accordance with the following
standards for the following uses:
§ 265-1003. Criteria.
A. Provide lighting in outdoor places where public health, safety and
welfare are potential concerns.
B. Protect drivers and pedestrians from the glare of nonvehicular light
sources that affect driver vision.
C. Protect neighbors and the night sky from nuisance glare and stray light
from incorrectly aimed, placed, applied, maintained or shielded light
sources.
A. Multifamily. Multifamily shall include multifamily and groups of
townhouse dwelling units.
B. Residential. Residential shall include all types of units other than
multifamily, namely single-family and duplex dwellings.
C. Commercial. Commercial uses shall include all retail, office, and
personal service activities.
D. Industrial. Industrial uses shall also include warehouse, wholesale, and
distribution.
E. Educational. Educational uses shall include public, private, commercial,
and nursery schools and day-care centers.
F. Private recreational uses as provided for in this chapter.
G. Institutional uses including hospitals, clinics, churches, and public and
semipublic uses.
(1) In addition, the glare-control requirements herein apply to lighting
in all of the above-mentioned uses as well as, but not limited to,
signs and architectural, landscaping and residential lighting.
§ 265-1001 WATER § 265-1003
256:489
A. Illumination levels.
(1) Lighting, where required or permitted by this section, shall have
intensities and uniformity ratios in accordance with the current
recommended practices of the Illuminating Engineering Society of
North America (IESNA) as contained in the IESNA Lighting
Handbook, 9th Edition.
(2) Examples of intensities for typical outdoor applications, as
extracted from the 9th Edition of the Lighting Handbook, are
presented below:
Use/Task
Maintained
Footcandles
Uniformity
Ratio -
Average:
Minimum
Streets, local residential 0.4 average 6:1
Streets, local commercial 0.9 average 6:1
Parking, residential, multifamily
Low vehicular/
pedestrian activity
0.2 minimum 4:1
Medium vehicular/
pedestrian activity
0.6 minimum 4:1
Parking, industrial/
commercial/institutional/
municipal:
High activity, e.g., regional
shopping centers/fast food
facilities, major civic/cultural
events and private
recreational activities
0.9 minimum 4:1
Medium activity, e.g.
community shopping
centers, office parks,
hospitals, commuter lots
0.6 minimum 4:1
Low activity, e.g.,
neighborhood shopping,
industrial employee parking,
schools, church parking.
0.2 minimum 4:1
Walkways and bikeways 0.5 average 5:1
Building entrances 5.0 average -
§ 265-1003 TARENTUM CODE § 265-1003
256:490
Notes: Illumination levels are maintained horizontal footcandles
on the task, e.g., pavement or area surface. Uniformity ratios
dictate that average illuminance values shall not exceed minimum
values by more than the product of the minimum value and the
specified ratio, e.g., for commercial parking high activity, the
average footcandles shall not be in excess of 3.6, i.e. (0.9 x 4).
B. Lighting fixture design.
(1) For lighting of horizontal surfaces such as roadways, pathways and
parking areas, fixtures shall meet IESNA full-cutoff criteria.
(2) For lighting of nonhorizontal surfaces such as the use of
floodlighting, spotlighting, wall-mounted fixtures, decorative
globes and other fixtures not meeting IESNA full-cutoff criteria
shall be remitted only with glare control and notwithstanding the
required uniformity ratio.
(3) Fixtures shall be equipped with or be capable of being back-fitted
with tight-directing devices such as shields, visors or hoods when
necessary to redirect offending light distribution.
C. Control of glare, light pollution and light trespass.
(1) All outdoor lighting whether or not required by this chapter, on
private, residential, commercial, industrial municipal, educational
or institutional property, shall be aimed, located, designed, fitted
and maintained so as not to create glare, light pollution and light
trespass.
(2) Lighted signs advertising individual business and combinations of
businesses (as in a shopping center) may remain on until 15
minutes after closing of the business or combination of businesses
and then shall be extinguished.
(3) Entrance signs to residential developments and to business parks
or shopping centers may remain on throughout the night for
identification purposes for emergency vehicles.
(4) Unless a period of outdoor lighting extending throughout the night
for safety or security purposes, lighting shall be controlled by
automatic switching devices, such as time clocks or combination
motion detectors and photocells, to permit extinguishing lighting
between 11:00 p.m. and dawn.
(5) Vegetation screens shall not be employed to serve as the primary
means for controlling glare. Rather, glare control shall be achieved
primarily through the use of such means as cutoff fixtures, shields
and baffles, and appropriate application of fixture mounting height,
wattage, aiming angle and fixture placement.
§ 265-1003 WATER § 265-1003
256:491
(6) The intensity of illumination projected onto a residential use from
another property shall not exceed 0.1 vertical footcandle,
measured at 30 inches above the ground at the property line.
(7) Externally illuminated signs shall be lighted by fixtures mounted at
the top of the sign and aimed downward.
(8) Except as otherwise permitted in this section, fixtures meeting
IESNA full-cutoff criteria shall not be mounted in excess of 20 feet
above finished grade. Fixtures not meeting IESNA full-cutoff
criteria shall not be mounted in excess of 16 feet above grade
except as specifically approved by the Borough Council.
(9) Fixtures used for architectural lighting, e.g., facade, fountain,
feature and landscape lighting, shall be designed, fitted and aimed
so as not to project their output beyond the objects intended to be
illuminated.
(10) Lighting. The approval of security or flood lighting which exceeds
the uniformity ratios otherwise authorized in a particular use may
be granted by Council as a conditional use with the following
criteria:
(a) Floodlights and spotlights, when permitted, shall be so
installed or aimed that they do not project their output into the
windows of neighboring residences, adjacent uses, directly
skyward or onto a roadway.
(b) All-night safety or security lighting shall be permitted, but the
light-intensity levels shall not exceed 25% of the levels
normally permitted for the use by this section.
(c) The nature or historic functioning of a particular establishment
type shall be demonstrated to require greater security for the
safety of employees and patrons and/or security of
merchandise, products, or other items integral to the
establishment's functionality and stored on-site.
(11) The departure from the uniformity ratio typically required for a
certain class and intensity of establishment shall be the minimum
required for security related purposes.
D. Installation.
(1) Electrical feeds for lighting standards shall be run underground,
not overhead.
(2) Lighting standards to the rear of the parking spaces shall be placed
a minimum of five feet outside paved areas, curbs or tire stops, or
be suitably protected by other means approved by the Borough
Council.
§ 265-1003 TARENTUM CODE § 265-1003
256:492
§ 265-1004. Residential development fixture placement.
E. Maintenance. Lighting fixtures and ancillary equipment shall be
maintained so as always to meet the requirements of this section.
A. Street lighting fixtures in multifamily residential developments and
mobile home parks shall be placed at the following locations:
(1) At the intersection of public roads with entrance roads to the
proposed development.
(2) Intersections involving proposed public or nonpublic major roads
within the proposed development.
B. Recreational lighting. When facilities for outdoor recreational activities
such as, but not limited to, baseball, tennis, football and miniature golf
are specifically authorized within this chapter:
(1) Except as otherwise authorized, sporting events shall be timed so
that all area lighting in the sports facility, except as required for
safe spectator exit, is extinguished by 11:00 p.m.
(2) Mounting heights. Maximum mounting heights for outdoor
recreational lighting shall be generally in accordance with the
following:
(a) Basketball: 20 feet.
(b) Football and other field sports: 50 feet.
(c) Organized baseball and softball:
[1] Two-hundred-foot-radius: 60 feet.
[2] Three-hundred-foot-radius: 70 feet.
(d) Miniature golf: 20 feet.
(e) Tennis: 30 feet.
C. Plan submission.
(1) Lighting plans shall be submitted to the Borough for review and
approval for all proposed outdoor lighting, including but not limited
to proposals which are part of a subdivision or land development
plan, and shall include:
(a) Layout of the proposed fixture locations.
(b) For installations of up to four fixtures, an isofootcandle plot of
the individual fixtures.
(c) Where more than four fixtures are used, a point-by-point plot
using a 10-foot-by-10-foot illuminance grid. This shall include a
statistical summary of typical areas and include minimum,
§ 265-1003 WATER § 265-1004
256:493
average and maximum values and uniformity ratios that
demonstrate compliance with the intensities and uniformities
set forth in this section.
(d) Description of the equipment, including fixture catalog cuts,
photometrics, glare-reduction devices, lamps, control devices,
mounting heights and mounting methods proposed.
(2) When requested by the Council, applicant shall submit a visual
impact plan that demonstrates appropriate steps have been taken
to mitigate on-site and off-site glare.
(3) Post-approval alterations to lighting plans or intended substitutions
for approved lighting equipment shall be submitted to the Borough
for review and approval.
D. District-specific standards.
(1) CC Commercial Center District, traditional neighborhood
developments, R-2, and R-1 Zoning Districts. No freestanding light
fixture shall be taller than 15 feet. Wall-mounted lighting, unless
authorized as indirect lighting for signage, shall not be mounted
higher than 15 feet from the adjoining grade of ground.
(2) RFO Riverfront Overlay and RRO Rural Resource Overlay Districts.
Where development is approved in accordance with and authorized
by the overlay district, no freestanding light fixture shall be taller
than 20 feet. Wall-mounted lighting, unless authorized as indirect
lighting for signage, shall not be mounted higher than 20 feet from
the adjoining grade of ground.
§ 265-1004 TARENTUM CODE § 265-1004
256:494
ARTICLE XI
Supplemental Standards
§ 265-1101. Outdoor storage.
Where outdoor storage of supplies and merchandise is authorized under
the bulk regulations of this chapter, such shall be screened by an opaque
fence, landscaping mounding and landscaping, evergreens providing proper
screening at maturity, or a combination of the preceding sufficient to screen
said storage from the view of the public or from the view of adjoining lots
provided that the height of said fences remains subject to those standards
set forth within the bulk regulations of this chapter.
§ 265-1102. Temporary uses.
A. No person shall conduct or allow to be conducted any temporary
outdoor activity as defined in Article II (including those specifically
listed herein) without first obtaining a temporary use permit therefore,
where required, in compliance with the terms of this article.
B. A signed application on a form furnished by the municipality shall be
filed with the Zoning Officer 10 working days prior to the
commencement of the temporary outdoor activity.
C. All temporary outdoor activities shall require review and approval by
the Zoning Officer or Borough Manager and issuance of a temporary
use permit, including the following:
(1) Seasonal sale of produce whether from a portable stand or
sectional display unit wherein items are displayed;
(2) The sale of trees or shrubbery for seasonal events;
(3) The periodic sale of crafts such as leather goods, furniture or art
from a vehicle;
(4) The sale of special event T-shirts, clothing items, or sports related
items from a vehicle;
(5) Multiday, multi-family yard sales, estate sales and auctions;
(6) Sidewalk sales and other similar activities, which shall be
permitted only in commercially zoned areas and only for a
maximum of seven consecutive days, limited to three per year;
(7) Temporary structures and construction;
(8) Carnivals;
(9) Circuses;
(10) Assemblies;
(11) Marathons, bicycle races or road rallies;
§ 265-1101 WATER § 265-1102
256:495
(12) Antique car shows; or
(13) Still or motion pictures made by any analog or digital recording
device.
D. Conditions for all temporary use permits:
(1) All temporary uses shall be compatible with other uses permitted in
the zoning district in which the use is proposed. Yard sales in
residential zoning district shall be considered compatible only
when the activity is conducted so as to minimize its impact on
surrounding properties.
(2) Temporary uses operating within parking lots shall not result in a
deficient number of spaces as required by this chapter for those
establishments to which the parking lot is an accessory use.
(3) The temporary use shall not involve the construction or alteration
of any permanent structure.
(4) If the use involves the construction or placement of a temporary
structure, the structure shall be removed within 48 hours of the
expiration of the designated time period for the approved
temporary use or upon the completion of the construction project
for which it is erected.
(5) The temporary use shall not involve the creation of any nuisance to
adjoining properties or public or private road, including excessive
noise, odors, glare or vibrations. Items which will be considered in
making this determination will be: projected hours of operations;
volume of traffic; available parking, projected traffic patterns; and
type of activity.
(6) No person shall, in order to promote the sale or promotion of any
goods, wares, merchandise or services, or in connection with any
trade or business operate from any premises, building, vehicle or
on any street any horn, bell, chimes, loudspeaker or any other
sound device. The display of obscene signs or operation of adult
uses is expressly prohibited.
E. Except for sidewalk sales and temporary structures and construction
trailers, the temporary use permit shall be issued for a period of 21
days. Any temporary use permit may contain conditions which the
Zoning Officer or Borough Manager may deem necessary to minimize
inconvenience to the public. Such conditions may include, but are not
limited to, the hours during which the temporary outdoor activity may
operate and the duration of said activity and traffic safety measures.
Further, the Zoning Officer or Borough Manager may require the
applicant to make arrangements with the Police Department of the
municipality for traffic and crowd control. All costs for said control
measures shall be borne entirely by the applicant. Violation of the
conditions of the permit shall render the permit null and void,
§ 265-1102 TARENTUM CODE § 265-1102
256:496
§ 265-1103. Home-based business.
constitute a violation of this article and subject the applicant to the
penalties provided for in this chapter.
F. Upon application, the Zoning Officer may renew and extend the permit
for a period of not more than seven days. One temporary use permit and
one renewal may be issued in any one twelve-month period, except as
otherwise specified. No extension is permitted for a sidewalk sale. The
permit shall be maintained on the property where the subject
temporary outdoor activity is conducted at all times and shall be
available on demand for inspection and review by any municipal official,
representative or employee.
G. Temporary structures and construction trailers: The Zoning Officer
shall issue a temporary use permit for occupancy of temporary
structures only when they are incidental to permitted nonresidential
uses, such as outdoor display or sales areas, or construction trailers,
sales offices or other temporary business offices to be maintained
during construction of any permanent structure or structures for which
a zoning/building permit has been issued, provided that all of the
following requirements have been met:
(1) Temporary use permits for temporary structures as herein defined
shall be granted for a period of not to exceed 12 months.
(2) The temporary use permit for temporary structures shall be
canceled upon written notice by the Zoning Officer or a designated
agent of Tarentum Borough, if construction of the permanent
structure is not diligently pursued or if the existing use is
discontinued.
(3) All temporary structures shall be located at least 20 feet from any
property lines.
(4) All temporary structures which are proposed to be accessible to the
public shall be located at least 100 feet from any construction
entrance or from the foundation of any structures which is under
construction.
(5) Vehicular access to all temporary structures which are proposed to
be accessible to the public shall be designed to ensure pedestrian
safety.
H. The construction of said temporary structure shall comply with the
Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code and all other local, state, and
federal laws and regulations.
A. A home-based business that involves an activity or operation which is
construed as being capable of adversely influencing surrounding
residential uses through any of the following conditions shall not be
permitted:
§ 265-1102 WATER § 265-1103
256:497
§ 265-1104. Performance standards.
(1) Changes the external appearance of the dwelling;
(2) Is visible from surrounding properties or the adjacent street;
(3) Generates traffic, parking or utility use in excess of normal levels in
the neighborhood;
(4) Creates hazards to persons or property;
(5) Creates interference or a nuisance;
(6) Involves outside storage, display or operations; or
(7) Utilizes more than 25% of the floor area of the primary dwelling
structure; 50% of the floor area of an accessory structure; or a
combined total floor area which exceeds 400 square feet.
B. Only members of the family residing on the premises shall be permitted
to work at the establishment.
C. Activities shall be limited to the following:
(1) Professional, technical or business pursuits that involve only office
related functions and practices.
(2) Light handicrafts, sewing, photography and objects of art.
(3) Teaching instruction limited to no more than three students at any
one time.
(4) Small appliance and lawn mower repair provided that equipment is
stored within a completely enclosed building.
(5) Beautician, barber and similar services, limited to no more than
two clients at any one time.
(6) Personal services that meet the definition of adult uses as defined
in this chapter are expressly prohibited.
A. Compliance. No use, land or structure in any district shall involve any
element or cause any condition that may be dangerous, injurious or
noxious, or cause offensive odor, smoke, dust, dirt, noise, vibration,
glare, excessive traffic, attract vermin or rodents or constitute a
nuisance or be a detriment to the health, safety, morals or general
welfare of the community or to any other person or property in the
Borough. All uses in all districts shall be subject to the following
standards of operation.
B. Environmental performance standards. The developer shall determine
the presence of environmental or natural features on any site proposed
for land development and shall meet the following standards for
environmental protection. Site alterations, erosion and sedimentation
§ 265-1103 TARENTUM CODE § 265-1104
256:498
control, regrading, filling, the clearing of vegetation or timbering and
forestry activities without an appropriate and current permit prior
to approval of the plans for development shall be a violation of this
section.
(1) Floodway delineation. One-hundred-year floodways shall be
delineated as per the provisions of the current Borough ordinances.
Within the floodway, the following uses and activities having a low
flood damage potential and not obstructing flood flows shall be
permitted, provided that they are in compliance with the provisions
of the underlying district and are not prohibited by any other
ordinance, and do not require structures, fill or storage of materials
and equipment:
(a) Agricultural uses;
(b) Public and private recreational uses and activities such as
parks, picnic grounds, hiking and horseback riding trails,
wildlife and nature preserves, hunting and fishing;
(c) Accessory residential uses such as yard areas, gardens and
play areas.
(2) Floodplains. For the purpose of this section, normally dry land area
adjacent to stream channels that is susceptible to being inundated
by overbank stream flows. development activities shall be
regulated as per the provisions of the current Borough ordinances.
(3) Steep slopes. In areas of steep slopes, i.e., those above 15%, the
following standards shall apply, except as approved by the Borough
Engineer:
(a) Sixteen percent to 24%. No more than 60% of such areas shall
be developed and/or regraded or stripped of vegetation.
(b) Twenty-five percent or more. Earth disturbance activities in
these areas in preparation for development are restricted
except as approved by the Borough Engineer.
(4) Forest. No more than 50% of any forest as defined may be cleared
or developed, unless trees are the primary crop being harvested.
(5) Ponds, watercourses or wetlands. No development, filling, piping
or diverting shall be permitted except for required roads and utility
line extensions, unless permitted by the appropriate state, county
or regulatory agency.
(6) Stormwater drainage and management. All plans shall comply with
the provisions of the Borough of Tarentum Subdivision and Land
Development, and all amendments thereto.
(7) Soil erosion and sedimentation. With any earth disturbance there
shall be control of erosion and the protection of streams and ponds
§ 265-1104 WATER § 265-1104
256:499
from sedimentation in accordance with the Clean Streams Law,
P.L. 1987, Chapter 102 of Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code, and
the "Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Manual" of the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. In addition,
a soil erosion and sediment control plan (SE & SC plan) shall be
required as part of the application for any Borough permit where
earth disturbance or excavation will occur. As a minimum, where
sediment can be transported away from the disturbed area, a silt
fence or straw bale barrier shall be erected and maintained in
working order until vegetation is fully established as determined
by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, or
erosion-resistant ground cover has been installed. Additional
sediment pollution control measures may be required where land
development is more extensive than single-family construction.
C. Odor. Those standards for the control of odorous emissions established
by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (PADEP)
shall be applied in all zoning districts. Where an odor is deemed
offensive, a duly authorized Borough representative shall refer the
matter to the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection
(PADEP) where it has jurisdiction relative to an established airshed.
D. Storage and waste disposal.
(1) No highly flammable, explosive or toxic liquids, solids or gases shall
be stored in bulk (over 500 gallons), above ground, except in an
enclosed building and except new tanks or drums of fuel connected
directly with energy devices or heating appliances located and
operated on the same lot as the tanks or drums of fuel.
(2) All new permanent bulk outdoor storage facilities for fuel over 500
gallons, raw materials and products and all fuel, raw materials and
products stored outdoors shall be enclosed by an approved safety
fence.
(3) No materials or wastes shall be deposited upon a lot in such form or
manner that they may be transported off the lot by natural causes
or forces; nor shall any substance which can contaminate wells,
watercourses, or potable water supplies otherwise render such
wells, watercourses, or potable water supplies undesirable as
sources of water supply or recreation; nor shall any substance
which will destroy aquatic life be allowed to enter any wells,
watercourses, or potable water supplies, where applicable. A
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection approved
plan for spill containment shall be submitted to the Borough for
review by the Borough Engineer prior to the issuance of any
required permit.
(4) Any materials or wastes which might cause fumes or dust or which
constitute a fire hazard or which may be edible or otherwise
§ 265-1104 TARENTUM CODE § 265-1104
256:500
attractive to rodents or insects shall be stored outdoors only if
enclosed in containers adequate to eliminate such hazards.
E. Air pollution. No emission at any point from any chimney or otherwise
of visible smoke in excess of that permitted by the air pollution control
regulations of the commonwealth agency with jurisdiction shall be
permitted.
F. Dust, fumes, vapors, and gases. The emission of dust, dirt, fly ash,
fumes, vapors or gases which can cause any damage to human health,
to animals, to vegetation, or to property or which can cause any soiling
or staining of persons or property at any point beyond the lot line of the
use creating the emission is herewith prohibited.
G. Glare. No use shall produce a strong, dazzling light or a reflection of a
strong, dazzling light or employ unshielded illumination sources beyond
its lot lines or onto any public road. Spillover lighting from parking
areas shall not exceed two footcandles per square foot beyond the
property line.
H. Vibrations. No use shall cause earth vibrations, or concussions
detectable beyond its lot lines without the aid of instruments, with the
exception of vibration produced as a result of temporary construction
activity.
I. Discharge. No discharge at any point into any private sewage disposal
system or stream or into the ground of any materials in such a way or in
such manner or temperature as can contaminate any public or private
water supply or otherwise cause the emission of dangerous, noxious or
objectionable elements, or the accumulation of solid wastes conducive
to the breeding of rodents or insects, is permitted.
J. Heat, cold, dampness or movement of air. No activities producing heat,
cold, dampness or movement of air are permitted which shall produce
any material effect on the temperature, motion or humidity of the
atmosphere at the lot line or beyond.
K. Noise. No new use proposed in any district which, by the nature of its
use, operation or activity, produces noise of objectionable character or
volume as noted by a person at the property line of the parcel upon
which the offending use is located will be permitted.
(1) Residential uses.
(a) In excess of 60 dba for any period of time between the hours of
10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
(b) In excess of 80 dba for any period of time between the hours of
7:01 a.m. and 9:59 p.m.
(c) The use of maintenance equipment, including, but not limited
to, power mowers, on a temporary basis, in residentially zoned
districts shall be exempt from the standards in this section.
§ 265-1104 WATER § 265-1104
256:501
§ 265-1105. Uses not provided for.
Whenever, under this chapter, a use is neither specifically permitted nor
denied, and an application is made by an applicant to the Zoning Officer
for such use, the Zoning Officer shall refer the application to the Borough
Council to hear and decide such request as a conditional use. The Borough
Council shall have the authority to permit the use or deny the use in
accordance with the standards governing conditional use applications. The
use may be permitted if it is similar to and compatible with the permitted
uses in the zone in which the subject property is located, is not permitted in
any other zone under the terms of this chapter, and in no way is in conflict
with the general purposes and intent of that section. The burden of proof
shall be upon the applicant to demonstrate that the proposed use meets the
foregoing criteria and would not be detrimental to the public health, safety
and welfare of the neighborhood.
§ 265-1106. Determination of building of historic significance.
(2) Commercial uses. In excess of 90 dba for more than two hours
during a twenty-four-hour period.
(3) Industrial uses. In excess of 90 dba for two hours during a twentyfour-
hour period.
L. Electrical disturbance or radioactivity. No activities which emit
dangerous radioactivity or continuous cumulative low-level radiation at
any point are permitted, and no electrical disturbance adversely
affecting the operation at any point of any equipment other than that of
the creator of such disturbance shall be permitted.
M. Maintenance of yards, adjacent undeveloped property. The owner or
lessee of the property, whether occupied or vacant, located within or
adjacent to any developed area shall maintain such premises so that all
portions of the property shall be kept free of junk, debris, disabled
motor vehicles and dangerous or noxious material.
N. Vehicle and equipment maintenance.
(1) In industrial and commercially zoned areas, all vehicles and
movable equipment repair done on the property shall be performed
within an enclosed building, except that minor maintenance
activities may be completed on the exterior of a lot where space has
been provided for the temporary parking or storage of vehicles and
movable equipment.
(2) In residentially zoned areas, minor vehicle maintenance activities
on vehicles owned by the occupant may be conducted in driveways,
but in no case shall repairs be made on vehicles and movable
equipment which would result in the storage of said vehicles or
movable equipment on the exterior of the lot for more than 48
hours, unless said vehicles are stored in an enclosed building.
§ 265-1104 TARENTUM CODE § 265-1106
256:502
A. As part of a decision otherwise required by process mandated by this
chapter including conditional uses and traditional neighborhood
developments, Council shall evaluate whether or not buildings
impacted by the proposed application should be designated or defined
as buildings of historic significance.
B. In order to be designated as a building of historic significance, thereby
subject to standards and protections accorded to such structures, the
building must be 50 years old or older and must meet one or more of the
following criteria:
(1) Possess significant character, interest, or value associated with the
development, heritage, or cultural characteristics of the Borough
and is associated with a significant period of time in its history;
(2) Is representative of the built environment of an era of history as
characterized by distinctive architectural styles;
(3) Is the site or location of a notable local event considered to have
had a significant effect on the Borough;
(4) Is an example of the cultural, political, economic, social, or
historical heritage of the community;
(5) Has achieved significance within the past 50 years or is of
exceptional importance to the Borough;
(6) Possesses a unique location or physical characteristics that
represent an established and familiar visual feature of a
neighborhood within the Borough.
C. Council may rely upon evaluations and reports prepared by qualified
professionals including but not limited to architects, landscape
architects, and historians. Costs for such evaluations shall be borne by
the applicant but shall be limited solely to the evaluation of the subject
structure.
D. Information concerning the historical significance of a building or
buildings impacted by a proposed application may be introduced by the
applicant or a member of the general public.
§ 265-1106 WATER § 265-1106
256:503

ARTICLE XII
Nonconformities
§ 265-1201. Application.
Subject to the provisions of this section, a use of building or land existing
at the time of the enactment of this chapter may be continued even though
such use does not conform to the provisions of these regulations for the
district in which it is located.
§ 265-1202. Unsafe structures.
Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the strengthening or restoring to a
safe condition of any portion of a building.
§ 265-1203. Restoration and regular maintenance.
Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the reconstruction, repairing,
rebuilding and continued use of any nonconforming building or structure
damaged by fire, collapse, explosion or act of God, excepting demolition
specified in § 265-1211, subsequent to the date of this chapter, nor shall
it prevent the regular maintenance of a nonconforming structure including
the replacement of a roof, exterior facade, windows, and other treatments.
§ 265-1204. Unlawful use.
Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted as authorization for or approval
of the continuance of the use of a structure or premises in violation of
zoning regulations in effect at the time of the effective date of this chapter.
§ 265-1205. Zoning district changes.
Whenever the boundaries of a district shall be changed so as to transfer
an area from one district to another district of a different classification, the
following provisions shall apply to any nonconforming uses or structures
existing therein.
§ 265-1206. Alterations and additions to nonconforming structures.
§ 265-1207. Nonconforming uses.
A nonconforming use shall not be extended, except as authorized by special
exception pursuant to § 265-1405. The extension of a lawful or conforming
use to any portion of a nonconforming building or structure that existed
A. A nonconforming structure may be increased in height not to exceed
the maximum height of the respective district.
B. A nonconforming structure may be expanded into a required yard as
long as such expansion does not encroach further into the yard than at
the time adoption of this chapter.
§ 265-1201 WATER § 265-1207
256:505
prior to the enactment of this chapter shall not be deemed an extension of
a nonconforming use.
§ 265-1208. Change of nonconforming use.
No nonconforming building, structure, or use shall be changed to another
nonconforming use unless approved by the Zoning Hearing Board as a
special exception pursuant to § 265-1405.
§ 265-1209. Abandonment.
A nonconforming use of a building or land that has been abandoned shall
not thereafter be returned to such nonconforming use. A nonconforming use
shall be considered abandoned as follows:
§ 265-1210. Construction approved prior to chapter adoption or
amendment.
Nothing herein contained shall require any change in plans, construction or
designated use of a building or structure for which a zoning permit has been
issued and the construction of which shall have been diligently prosecuted
within six months of the date of such permit.
§ 265-1211. Reconstruction of demolished structures.
A. When the intent of the owner to discontinue the use is apparent; or
B. When the characteristic equipment and furnishings of the
nonconforming use have been removed from the premises and have not
been replaced by similar equipment within 90 days, unless other facts
show intention to resume the nonconforming use; or
C. When a nonconforming use has been discontinued for a period of one
year; or
D. When it has been replaced by a conforming use; or
E. When it has been changed to another use under approval by the Zoning
Hearing Board.
A. Any nonconforming structure demolished within the Borough may be
reconstructed within 18 months after the date on which demolition
commenced as per approved demolition permit required by the
Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code or the date on which
destruction occurred by act of God, fire, vandalism, or accident.
B. The nonconforming structure may be reconstructed in a manner that
maintains, but does not increase, those legal nonconformities
associated with the structure. The structure shall then continue to be
classified as a nonconforming structure and all standards and
exceptions granted to such structures by this chapter shall remain in
full effect.
§ 265-1207 TARENTUM CODE § 265-1212
256:506
§ 265-1212. Signs.
Any nonconforming sign removed, whether by act of God, vandalism,
accident, or voluntarily, if replaced, shall be subject to all existing standards
of this chapter.
§ 265-1213. Parking.
When an existing single-family detached dwelling is converted to a duplex
dwelling where authorized by this chapter, off-street parking required for
both units shall be provided and no credit for nonconforming deficiency
of off-street parking shall be given for the existing single-family detached
dwelling unit.
§ 265-1214. Nonconforming lots.
§ 265-1215. Historically designated structures.
Historically designated structures are exempt from applicable provisions
for nonconformities.
A. Nonconforming lots shall be considered lawful if shown by a recorded
plat or deed in a manner not prohibited by zoning provisions in effect at
the time of recording, provided that such have not been subsequently
consolidated by recorded subdivision or deed.
B. Nonconforming structures on nonconforming lots may be repaired or
expanded in accordance with this article provided that no further
nonconformities are created beyond those otherwise permitted by this
article such as expansion into required yards.
C. Construction of principal structures on such lots shall be in compliance
with the existing standards of this chapter with the following exception.
Construction of a single-family dwelling or a duplex dwelling on a
nonconforming lot may encroach into required side yard setbacks if
approved by conditional use from Borough Council with the following
standards:
(1) The required side yard or yards shall not be reduced to less than
two feet.
(2) The approved side yard shall be within the general character of the
block on which the nonconforming lot is located with respect to
typical spacing between dwelling units and typical location of
structures in relation to the side lot lines.
(3) Where a duplex dwelling is constructed with reduced setbacks, the
location of the structure shall permit the provision of parking
otherwise required by this chapter.
§ 265-1212 WATER § 265-1215
256:507

ARTICLE XIII
Zoning Officer and Enforcement Proceedings
§ 265-1301. Zoning Officer.
§ 265-1302. Zoning certificate required.
§ 265-1303. Certificate of occupancy.
A. A Zoning Officer shall administer and enforce this chapter, including
the receiving of applications, the issuance and prosecution of
enforcement proceedings, the inspection of premises and the issuing of
zoning certificates. No zoning certificates shall be issued by said officer
except where the provisions of this chapter have been complied with.
The Zoning Officer shall be appointed by the Tarentum Borough
Council.
B. The Zoning Officer shall be qualified by demonstrating to the
satisfaction of the Borough Council a working knowledge of the Zoning
Ordinance, an understanding of municipal development goals and
objectives, an ability to work harmoniously with local citizens, and such
other criteria as may be established by the Borough Council to qualify
for this office.
A. No building or structure shall be erected, placed, or added to, until a
permit therefor has been issued by the Zoning Officer. All applications
for zoning certificates shall be in accordance with the requirements of
this chapter and, unless upon written order of the Zoning Hearing
Board, no such zoning certificates shall be issued for any building
where said construction, addition or alteration for use thereof would be
in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter.
B. Zoning certificates shall also be required for principal and temporary
uses, whether or not construction or expansion of a structure is
associated.
C. Matter accompanying applications. There shall be submitted with all
applications for zoning certificates two copies of a layout or plot plan
drawn to scale showing the actual dimensions of the lot to be built
upon, the exact size and location of the building on the lot and
accessory buildings to be erected, and other such information as may
be deemed necessary by the Zoning Officer to determine and provide
for the enforcement of this chapter.
D. No permit shall be issued unless all requirements and conditions of
associated conditional uses, variances, special exceptions, traditional
neighborhood developments, subdivisions or land developments are
satisfied.
A. After completion of a building or structure for which a zoning certificate
has been issued, and inspection has determined that all requirements of
§ 265-1301 WATER § 265-1303
256:509
§ 265-1304. Nonconforming use certificate.
The Zoning Officer shall issue a zoning certificate, upon request of the
property owner, recognizing the status of a nonconforming use as a legal
nonconforming use. It shall be the burden of the property owner to provide
sufficient proof that the use was legally operated or constructed prior to
adoption of current ordinance provisions rendering said use, structure,
or lot nonconforming and that, in the case of uses, such have not been
abandoned.
§ 265-1305. Remedies.
the Ordinance have been met, a certificate of occupancy shall be issued
by the Zoning Officer. The certificate of occupancy shall state that the
building and proposed use thereof complies with the provisions of the
Ordinance.
B. No nonconforming use shall be renewed, changed or extended without
a certificate of occupancy having first been issued by the Zoning Officer
for such use as per applicable approval from the Zoning Hearing Board.
C. The Zoning Officer shall maintain a record of all certificates and copies
shall be furnished, upon request, to any person having a proprietary or
tenancy interest in the building affected.
D. No permit for excavation, or erection, alteration of, or repair to any
building shall be issued until an application has been made for a
certificate of occupancy.
E. A zoning certificate of occupancy shall be required for all changes in
tenants within nonresidential principal uses and for nonresidential
occupancy of any building.
F. A zoning certificate of occupancy shall be required for all home
occupations and family home day-care facilities.
A. Enforcement notice. If a violation of the chapter occurs, the Zoning
Officer, on behalf of the Borough shall initiate enforcement proceedings
by sending an enforcement notice as provided in this section. The
enforcement notice shall be sent to the owner of record of the parcel on
which the violation has occurred, to any person who has filed a written
request to receive enforcement notices regarding that parcel, and to
any other person requested in writing by the owner of record. The
enforcement notice shall state at least the following:
(1) The name of the owner of record and any other person against
whom the Borough intends to take action.
(2) The location of the property in violation.
§ 265-1303 TARENTUM CODE § 265-1305
256:510
(3) The specific violation with a description of requirements that have
not been met, citing in each instance the applicable provisions of
the Ordinance.
(4) The date before which the steps for compliance must be
commenced and the date before which the steps must be
completed.
(5) That the recipient of the notice has the right to appeal to the
Zoning Hearing Board within a prescribed period of time in
accordance with procedures set forth in this chapter.
(6) That failure to comply with the notice within the time specified,
unless extended by appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board,
constitutes a violation, with possible sanctions clearly described.
B. Causes of action. In case any building, structure, landscaping or land is,
or is proposed to be, erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered,
converted, maintained or used in violation of this chapter, the Borough
Council, or with the approval of the Council, an officer of the Borough,
or an aggrieved owner or tenant of real property who shows that his
property or person will be substantially affected by the alleged
violation, in addition to other remedies, may institute any appropriate
action or proceeding to prevent, restrain, correct or abate such
building, structure, landscaping, or land or to prevent, in or about such
premises, any act, conduct, business or use constituting a violation.
When any such action is instituted by a landowner or tenant, notice of
that action shall be served upon the Borough at least 30 days prior to
the time the action is begun by serving a copy of the complaint on the
Borough. No such action may be maintained until such notice has been
given.
C. Enforcement.
(1) Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated
or permitted the violation of the provisions of any zoning ordinance
enacted under this act or prior enabling laws shall, upon being
found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced
by Tarentum Borough, pay a judgment of not more than $500 plus
all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees incurred by a
municipality as a result thereof. No judgment shall commence or be
imposed, levied or payable until the date of the determination of a
violation by the district justice. If the defendant neither pays nor
timely appeals the judgment, Tarentum Borough may enforce the
judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure. Each
day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation,
unless the district justice determining that there has been a
violation further determines that there was a good faith basis for
the person, partnership or corporation violating the ordinance to
have believed that there was no such violation, in which event there
shall be deemed to have been only one such violation until the fifth
§ 265-1305 WATER § 265-1305
256:511
day following the date of the determination of a violation by the
district justice and thereafter each day that a violation continues
shall constitute a separate violation. All judgments, costs and
reasonable attorney fees collected for the violation of zoning
ordinances shall be paid over to the municipality whose ordinance
has been violated.
(2) The court of common pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of
stay, upon cause shown, tolling the per diem fine pending a final
adjudication of the violation and judgment.
(3) Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted
to grant to any person or entity other than Tarentum Borough the
right to commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this
section.
§ 265-1305 TARENTUM CODE § 265-1305
256:512
ARTICLE XIV
Zoning Hearing Board, Procedures, and Proceedings
§ 265-1401. Zoning Hearing Board, procedures, and proceedings.
§ 265-1402. Jurisdiction.
A. Membership. Council shall, by resolution, appoint five qualified
residents, who do not serve as elected officials and are not employees
or appointees thereof, to the Zoning Hearing Board. Initial
appointments shall be staggered so that one expires each year for the
first five years and all subsequent appointments shall be for five-year
terms.
B. Removal of members. Any Board member may be removed for
malfeasance, misfeasance or nonfeasance in office or for other just
cause by a majority vote of the Borough Council appointing said
member, taken after the member has received 15 days advance notice
of the intent to take such a vote. A hearing shall be held in connection
with the vote if the member shall request it in writing within the
aforementioned time period.
C. The Board shall elect from its own membership its officers, who shall
serve annual terms as such and may succeed themselves. For the
conduct of any hearing and the taking of any action, a quorum shall be
not less than a majority of all the members of the Board. The Board
shall also appoint a hearing officer from its own membership to conduct
any hearing on its behalf where the parties agree to waive further
action by the Board.
A. The Zoning Hearing Board shall have exclusive jurisdiction to hear and
render final adjudications in the following matters:
(1) Substantive challenges to the validity of any land use ordinance,
except those brought before Borough Council pursuant to §§ 609.1
and 916.1(a)(2) of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code,
as amended.
(2) Challenges to the validity of a land use ordinance raising
procedural questions or alleged defects in the process of
enactment or adoption which challenges shall be raised by an
appeal taken within 30 days after the effective date of said
ordinance. Where the ordinance appealed from is the initial zoning
ordinance of the municipality and a Zoning Hearing Board has not
been previously established, the appeal raising procedural
questions shall be taken directly to court.
(3) Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer, including,
but not limited to, the granting or denial of any permit, or failure to
act on the application therefor, the issuance of any cease and desist
§ 265-1401 WATER § 265-1402
256:513
order or the registration or refusal to register any nonconforming
use, structure or lot.
(4) Appeals from a determination by a Municipal Engineer or the
Zoning Officer with reference to the administration of any
floodplain or flood hazard ordinance or such provisions within a
land use ordinance.
(5) Applications for variances from the terms of the zoning ordinance
and flood hazard ordinance or such provisions within a land use
ordinance, pursuant to § 910.2 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, as amended.
(6) Applications for special exceptions under the zoning ordinance or
flood plain or flood hazard ordinance or such provisions within a
land use ordinance, pursuant to § 912.1. of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.
(7) Appeals from the determination of any officer or agency charged
with the administration of any transfers of development rights or
performance density provisions of the zoning ordinance.
(8) Appeals from the Zoning Officer's determination under § 916.2. of
the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.
(9) Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer or Municipal
Engineer in the administration of any land use ordinance or
provision thereof with reference to sedimentation and erosion
control and storm water management insofar as the same relate to
development, not involving Article V or VII applications.
B. Borough Council or, except as to Subsection B(3), (4) and (5), the
Planning Commission, if designated, shall have exclusive jurisdiction to
hear and render final adjudications in the following matters:
(1) All applications for approvals of planned residential developments
under Article VII pursuant to the provisions of § 702 of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.
(2) All applications pursuant to § 508 for approval of subdivisions or
land developments under Article V of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.
(3) Any provision in a subdivision and land development ordinance
requiring that final action concerning subdivision and land
development applications be taken by a planning agency rather
than Borough Council shall vest exclusive jurisdiction in the
Planning Commission in lieu of Borough Council for purposes of the
provisions of this subsection.
(4) Applications for conditional use under the express provisions of the
zoning ordinance pursuant to § 603(c)(2) of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.
§ 265-1402 TARENTUM CODE § 265-1402
256:514
§ 265-1403. Board proceedings.
(5) Applications for curative amendment to a zoning ordinance
pursuant to §§ 609.1 and 916.1(a)(2). of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.
(6) All petitions for amendments to land use ordinances, pursuant to
the procedures set forth in § 609 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, as amended. Any action on such petitions shall be
deemed legislative acts, provided that nothing contained in this
clause shall be deemed to enlarge or diminish existing law with
reference to appeals to court.
(7) Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer or the
Municipal Engineer in the administration of any land use ordinance
or provisions thereof with reference to sedimentation and erosion
control and stormwater management insofar as the same relate to
application for land development under Articles V and VII of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended. Where
such determination relates only to development not involving an
Article V or VII application, the appeal from such determination of
the zoning officer or the municipal engineer shall be to the zoning
hearing board pursuant to Subsection A(9). Where the applicable
land use ordinance vests jurisdiction for final administration of
subdivision and land development applications in the planning
agency, all appeals from determinations under this paragraph shall
be to the planning agency and all appeals from the decision of the
planning agency shall be to court.
(8) Applications for a special encroachment permit pursuant to § 405
and applications for a permit pursuant to § 406 of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.
A. The Zoning Officer shall accept complete applications and shall provide
them to the Zoning Hearing Board within five working days of receipt.
B. The Board shall advertise each hearing stating the purpose thereof, the
location of the subject property when applicable, the name of the
applicant, a brief description of the appeal, and the date, time, and
location scheduled. Advertisements shall occur in accordance with
public notice. Where the hearing relates to property, said property shall
be posted with the aforesaid information no later than one week prior to
the scheduled hearing. The Zoning Officer shall notify the applicant and
Borough Council of the date, time, and purpose of the respective
hearing.
C. The first hearing before the Zoning Hearing Board or hearing officer
shall be commenced within 60 days from the date of receipt of the
applicant's application, unless the applicant has agreed in writing to an
extension of time. Each subsequent hearing before the Zoning Hearing
Board or hearing officer shall be held within 45 days of the prior
§ 265-1402 WATER § 265-1403
256:515
hearing, unless otherwise agreed to by the applicant in writing or on
the record. An applicant shall complete the presentation of his casein-
chief within 100 days of the first hearing. Upon the request of the
applicant, the Zoning Hearing Board or hearing officer shall assure that
the applicant receives at least seven hours of hearings within the 100
days, including the first hearing. Persons opposed to the application
shall complete the presentation of their opposition to the application
within 100 days of the first hearing held after the completion of the
applicant's case-in-chief. An applicant may, upon request, be granted
additional hearings to complete his case-in-chief provided the persons
opposed to the application are granted an equal number of additional
hearings. Persons opposed to the application may, upon the written
consent or consent on the record by the applicant and municipality,
be granted additional hearings to complete their opposition to the
application provided the applicant is granted an equal number of
additional hearings for rebuttal.
D. The Zoning Hearing Board shall conduct the hearings or the Zoning
Hearing Board may appoint any member or an independent attorney as
a hearing officer. The decision, or, where no decision is called for, the
findings shall be made by the Zoning Hearing Board; however, the
appellant or the applicant, as the case may be, in addition to the
Borough Council, may, prior to the decision of the hearing, waive
decision or findings by the Zoning Hearing Board and accept the
decision or findings of the hearing officer as final.
E. The chairman or acting chairman of the Zoning Hearing Board or the
hearing officer presiding shall have power to administer oaths and issue
subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of
relevant documents and papers, including witnesses and documents
requested by the parties.
F. Parties to every hearing shall be the Borough, the applicant(s), and any
affected party that enters a verbal or written appearance or statement
at the hearing. The Zoning Hearing Board may require attendees to
enter a written appearance as a condition of being a party.
G. The parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel and shall
be afforded the opportunity to respond and present evidence and
argument and cross-examine adverse witnesses on all relevant issues.
H. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but irrelevant, immaterial, or
unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded.
I. The Zoning Hearing Board shall keep a stenographic record of each
hearing.
J. The Zoning Hearing Board or the hearing officer shall not
communicate, directly or indirectly, with any party or his
representatives in connection with any issue involved except upon
notice and opportunity for all parties to participate, shall not take
notice of any communication, reports, staff memoranda, or other
§ 265-1403 TARENTUM CODE § 265-1403
256:516
materials, except advice from their solicitor, unless the parties are
afforded an opportunity to contest the material so noticed and shall
not inspect the site or its surroundings after the commencement of
hearings with any party or his representative unless all parties are
given an opportunity to be present.
K. The Zoning Hearing Board or the hearing officer, as the case may be,
shall render a written decision or, when no decision is called for, make
written findings on the application within 45 days after the last hearing
before the Zoning Hearing Board or hearing officer. Where the
application is contested or denied, each decision shall be accompanied
by findings of fact and conclusions based thereon together with the
reasons therefor. Conclusions based on any provisions of the MPC or of
any ordinance, rule or regulation shall contain a reference to the
provision relied on and the reasons why the conclusion is deemed
appropriate in the light of the facts found. If the hearing is conducted by
a hearing officer and there has been no stipulation that his decision or
findings are final, the Zoning Hearing Board shall make his report and
recommendations available to the parties within 45 days and the
parties shall be entitled to make written representations thereon to the
Zoning Hearing Board prior to final decision or entry of findings, and
the Zoning Hearing Board's decision shall be entered no later than 30
days after the report of the hearing officer. Excepting validity
challenges, where the Zoning Hearing Board fails to render the
decision within the period required by this subsection or fails to
commence or complete the required hearing as provided herein, the
decision shall be deemed to have been rendered in favor of the
applicant unless the applicant has agreed in writing or on the record to
an extension of time. When a decision has been rendered in favor of the
applicant because of the failure of the Zoning Hearing Board to meet or
render a decision as hereinabove provided, the Zoning Hearing Board
shall give public notice of said decision within 10 days from the last day
it could have met to render a decision in the same manner as provided
in Subsection (1) of this section. If the Zoning Hearing Board shall fail
to provide such notice, the applicant may do so. Nothing in this
subsection shall prejudice the right of any party opposing the
application to appeal the decision to a court of competent jurisdiction.
L. A copy of the final decision or, where no decision is called for, of the
findings shall be delivered to the applicant personally or mailed to him
not later than the day following its date. To all other persons who have
filed their name and address with the Zoning Hearing Board not later
than the last day of the hearing, the Zoning Hearing Board shall provide
by mail or otherwise, brief notice of the decision or findings and a
statement of the place at which the full decision or findings may be
examined, or may choose to mail a complete copy of the decision.
M. The Zoning Officer shall keep written files or meeting transcripts,
evidence presented, correspondence, applications, names and
addresses of parties, evidence of delivery by certified mail of notice and
§ 265-1403 WATER § 265-1403
256:517
§ 265-1404. Variances.
The Zoning Hearing Board shall have exclusive power to hear appeals for
dimensional and use variances from the provisions of this chapter.
decisions to all applicable parties, and other files which shall remain
the property of the Borough Council.
A. The landowner shall submit an application to the Zoning Officer
including a survey showing existing structures and the location and
detail of the proposed activity or structure for which the applicant
requires a variance; the required fee for a variance as outlined in the
fee schedule or schedules of the Borough Council and a completed
application with all required contact information as well as additional
information, if any, required by the Board.
B. The Board shall grant a variance only when findings of fact are
supported by all of the following where relevant in a given case and
therefore constitute an unnecessary hardship inflicted by this chapter.
(1) That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions,
including irregularity, narrowness, or shallowness of lot size or
shape, or exceptional topographical property and that the
unnecessary hardship is due to such conditions and not the
circumstances or conditions generally created by the provisions of
this chapter in the neighborhood in which the property is located.
(2) That because of such physical circumstances or conditions, there is
no possibility that the property can be developed in strict
conformity with the provisions of this chapter and that the
authorization of a variance is therefore necessary to enable the
reasonable use of the property.
(3) That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the
appellant.
(4) That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential
character of the neighborhood in which the property is located, nor
substantially or permanently impair the appropriate use or
development of adjacent property, nor be detrimental to the public
welfare.
(5) That the variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum
variance that will afford relief and will represent the least
modification possible of the regulation in issue.
C. In granting any variance, the Board may attach such reasonable
conditions and safeguards, as it may deem necessary to implement the
purposes of this chapter.
§ 265-1403 TARENTUM CODE § 265-1405
256:518
§ 265-1405. Special exception.
The Board is authorized to consider special exceptions.
A. Expansions and changes of nonconforming uses shall be evaluated as
per the following standards cited in Article X and the general standards
cited in this section.
B. The landowner shall submit an application to the Zoning Officer
including a survey showing existing structures and the location and
detail of the proposed activity or structure for which the applicant
requires the special exception, including representations of parking
and circulation; the required fee for the special exception fee as
outlined in the schedule or schedules of the Borough Council, and a
completed application with all required contact information as well as
additional information, if any, required by the Board.
C. Special exceptions for nonconforming uses shall be evaluated by the
following criteria at a minimum.
(1) The impact of any proposed use on the neighborhood of which it is
a part compared with the impact of the existing nonconforming
use. A proposed use shall not present a greater adverse impact as
compared with the existing use.
(2) The impact of an expansion of the nonconforming use and the
manner in which the expansion changes or redefines the impact of
the current nonconforming use.
(3) The extent to which a proposed expansion changes the scale of use
such that the use itself may be changed such that it does not
present an adverse impact on the neighborhood and district in
which it is located. The expansion shall be considered a natural
outgrowth necessary to the economic vitality and sustainability of
the current nonconforming use.
(4) The consistency of any proposed expansion with the current
character of a neighborhood or district.
(5) The change in parking required and traffic circulation associated
with any proposed expansion or change in use.
D. In granting any special exception, the Board may attach such
reasonable conditions and safeguards as it may deem necessary to
implement the purposes of this chapter.
E. Proposed additions shall conform dimensionally and otherwise to the
standards of the present ordinance, or shall otherwise require a
dimensional variance.
F. Appeals from the Determination of the Zoning Officer. The Board shall
hear appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer in matters
concerning the denial of a permit, a cease and desist order, and all
§ 265-1405 WATER § 265-1405
256:519
§ 265-1406. Validity challenges.
other matters outlined in § 909.1 of the Municipalities Planning Code
as amended. The aggrieved party shall make application to the Zoning
Officer for the appeal of the disputed decision. The application shall
include the fee as defined in the Borough's adopted fee schedule, name
and contract information, copies of the permit application, and any
additional details relating to the denial or order issued.
G. The Zoning Hearing Board recognizes its jurisdiction as defined above
and as additionally defined within § 909.1 of the MPC, as amended,
including the challenge of this chapter's validity within 30 days after its
initial adoption based on procedural defects associated with the
adoption process.
A. Where a landowner desires to challenge the validity of the chapter in
regards to the application of the ordinance to a property within the
Borough either under his ownership or other than his own, the
landowner shall submit an application for a validity challenge to the
Zoning Officer. The application shall include the section of chapter, of
which validity is challenged, the property to which the challenge
relates, the landowner's basis for challenge, and proposals by the
landowner concerning amendments that would cure the alleged defect.
Additionally, the required fee shall be submitted in accordance with the
Borough's fee schedule.
B. Upon acceptance, the Zoning Officer shall forward the application to
the Zoning Hearing Board for consideration within five business days of
receipt.
C. The Board shall conduct a hearing pursuant to public notice within 60
days of the application submission. The Board shall issue a decision
within 45 days of the close of the last hearing on the application.
D. The Zoning Hearing Board's decision shall be based on the following:
(1) The impact of the proposal upon roads, sewer facilities, water
supplies, schools and other public service facilities.
(2) If the proposal is for a residential use, the impact of the proposal
upon regional housing needs and the effectiveness of the proposal
in providing housing units of a type actually available to and
affordable by classes of persons otherwise unlawfully excluded by
the challenged provisions of the ordinance or map.
(3) The suitability of the site for the intensity of use proposed by the
site's soils, slopes, woodlands, wetlands, floodplains, aquifers,
natural resources and other natural features.
(4) The impact of the proposed use on the site's soils, slopes,
woodlands, wetlands, floodplains, natural resources and natural
features, the degree to which these are protected or destroyed, the
§ 265-1405 TARENTUM CODE § 265-1406
256:520
§ 265-1407. Floodplain regulations.
The Zoning Hearing Board shall hear any variance or special exception with
regard to § 265-1407, Floodplain regulations.
tolerance of the resources to development and any adverse
environmental impacts.
(5) The impact of the proposal on land uses which are essential to
public health and welfare.
E. If the Board fails to act on the landowner's request within the time
limits referred to herein, a denial of the request is deemed to have
occurred on the 46th day after the close of the last hearing. The request
shall also be deemed denied when the Board fails to act on the request
45 days after the close of the last hearing on the request, unless the
time is extended by mutual consent by the landowner and Board.
F. Where the Zoning Hearing Board rules in favor of the landowner, the
Board shall draft proposed amendments to the ordinance which the
Board, in its decision, believes will cure the validity challenge and
associated defects. Said amendments shall be forwarded to the
Borough.
§ 265-1406 WATER § 265-1407
256:521

ARTICLE XV
Zoning Amendments
§ 265-1501. Amendment petitions.
§ 265-1502. Landowner curative amendments.
A. A landowner or holder of equitable title to a parcel or parcels within the
Borough may request a change of zoning classification for said parcel(s)
or portion thereof. The applicant shall submit the fee required by the
Borough along with the amount of copies required by local resolution
and shall include the deeds to all properties, a metes and bounds
description of the area proposed to be reclassified if said area
represents a portion of the parcel(s) owned, proof of equitable title
where applicable, and a statement detailing the conformance of the
request to the Tarentum Comprehensive Plan's goals and objectives.
B. The landowner shall file an application with required fees as per
Borough resolution on forms provided by the Borough.
C. The Zoning Officer shall forward a copy of the application and request
to the Allegheny County Economic Development and the Planning
Commission and shall allow 30 days for comment. A copy shall be
submitted to the planning commission.
D. The Zoning Officer shall schedule a public hearing, advertised
according to public notice, 30 days or more after the submission to
County planning agency.
E. The Zoning Officer shall mail correspondence stating the date, time,
and purpose of the public hearing to all property owners of record
within the planning area, as identified in the tax records, within 200
feet of the lot lines of the subject parcel or parcels.
F. The Zoning Officer shall post the subject property or properties at
points noticeable to the general public and/or effected property owners
where the parcel does not border a public street.
G. The Planning Commission shall provide a recommendation to the full
Council, which after holding a public hearing or hearings pursuant to
public notice may approve or deny the request. The ordinance and map
amendments, if approved, shall be forwarded to the Allegheny County
Economic Development within 30 days of ordinance enactment.
A. Where a landowner desires to challenge the validity of the chapter in
regards to the regulations involving the use of his property, the
landowner shall submit an application for a curative amendment to the
Zoning Officer. The application shall include a description of the activity
or structure proposed in lieu of that permitted by thereon by the
chapter. A survey of the subject property showing existing structures
thereon shall be submitted. The application shall also include a
proposed amendment that the landowner presents as a cure for the
§ 265-1501 WATER § 265-1502
256:523
perceived defect in the chapter. Additionally, the required fee shall be
submitted in accordance with the local municipality's fee schedule.
B. Upon acceptance, the Zoning Officer shall forward the application to
the Planning Commission and local planning commission for
consideration at their next regularly scheduled meeting or if accepted
later than 21 days prior thereto, at the following regularly scheduled
meeting.
C. The Borough Council shall conduct a hearing pursuant to public notice
within 60 days of the application submission. The Borough Council shall
issue a decision within 45 days of the close of the last hearing on the
application that may include acceptance, denial, or modified
acceptance of the curative amendment. An acceptance or modified
approval shall not become effective, however, until it is formally
adopted by all three governing bodies within the planning area.
D. The decision shall be based on the following:
(1) The impact of the proposal upon roads, sewer facilities, water
supplies, schools and other public service facilities.
(2) If the proposal is for a residential use, the impact of the proposal
upon regional housing needs and the effectiveness of the proposal
in providing housing units of a type actually available to and
affordable by classes of persons otherwise unlawfully excluded by
the challenged provisions of the ordinance or map.
(3) The suitability of the site for the intensity of use proposed by the
site's soils, slopes, woodlands, wetlands, floodplains, aquifers,
natural resources and other natural features.
(4) The impact of the proposed use on the site's soils, slopes,
woodlands, wetlands, floodplains, natural resources and natural
features, the degree to which these are protected or destroyed, the
tolerance of the resources to development and any adverse
environmental impacts.
(5) The impact of the proposal on land uses which are essential to
public health and welfare.
E. Where the Borough Council decides to amend the chapter, the
procedures of this article and those otherwise outlined in the
Municipalities Planning Code shall apply.
F. If the Borough Council fails to act on the landowner's request within the
time limits referred to for Municipal Curative Amendments, a denial of
the request is deemed to have occurred on the 46th day after the close
of the last hearing. The request shall also be deemed denied when:
(1) The Borough Council notifies the landowner that it will not adopt
the curative amendment.
§ 265-1502 TARENTUM CODE § 265-1502
256:524
§ 265-1503. Municipal curative amendments.
§ 265-1504. Enactment of amendments; procedures.
(2) The Borough Council adopts another curative amendment, which is
unacceptable to the landowner.
(3) The Borough Council fails to act on the request 45 days after the
close of the last hearing on the request, unless the time is extended
by mutual consent by the landowner and Borough Council.
A. Where the Borough determines that the Zoning Ordinance or any
portion thereof is substantially invalid, each shall take the following
actions:
(1) Declare by formal action this chapter or portions thereof
substantively invalid and propose to prepare a curative amendment
to overcome such invalidity. Within 30 days following such
declaration and proposal, Borough Council shall by resolution
make specific findings setting forth the declared invalidity of this
chapter which may include:
(a) References to specific uses which are either not permitted or
not permitted in sufficient quantity.
(b) Reference to a class of use or uses which require revision.
(c) Reference to the entire ordinance which requires revisions.
(d) The Borough shall begin to prepare and consider a curative
amendment to this chapter to correct the declared invalidity as
per the resolution.
(2) Within nine months from the date of the declaration and proposal,
the respective governing bodies shall enact the amendment to
validate, or reaffirm the validity of, its zoning ordinance pursuant to
the procedures required by this article and the Municipalities
Planning Code for ordinance amendments, in order to cure the
declared invalidity of this chapter.
(3) The Borough may not again utilize the above procedures and
associated protections offered by the Municipalities Planning Code
for a period of 36 months following the enactment of the curative
amendment.
A. Proposed zoning ordinances and amendments shall not be enacted
unless notice of proposed enactment is given in the manner set forth in
this section, and shall include the time and place of the meeting at
which passage will be considered, a reference to a place within the
municipality where copies of the proposed ordinance or amendment
may be examined without charge or obtained for a charge not greater
than the cost thereof. The Borough Council shall publish the proposed
§ 265-1502 WATER § 265-1504
256:525
ordinance or amendment once in one newspaper of general circulation
in the municipality not more than 60 days nor less than seven days
prior to passage. Publication of the proposed ordinance or amendment
shall include either the full text thereof or the title and a brief summary,
prepared by the solicitor and setting forth all the provisions in
reasonable detail. If the full text is not included:
(1) A copy thereof shall be supplied to a newspaper of general
circulation in the municipality at the time the public notice is
published.
(2) An attested copy of the proposed ordinance shall be filed in the
County Law Library or other county office designated by Allegheny
County.
(3) In the event substantial amendments are made in the proposed
ordinance or amendment, before voting upon enactment, the
governing body shall, at least 10 days prior to enactment,
readvertise, in one newspaper of general circulation in the Borough
Council, a brief summary setting forth all the provisions in
reasonable detail together with a summary of the amendments.
B. Zoning ordinances and amendments may be incorporated into official
ordinance books by reference with the same force and effect as if duly
recorded therein.
§ 265-1504 TARENTUM CODE § 265-1504
256:526
ARTICLE XVI
Severability, Repealer, and Adoption
§ 265-1601. Severability.
Should any section or provision of this chapter be declared by a court
of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the
validity of this chapter as a whole or any part thereof, and the parts of or
sections remaining, shall remain in effect as though the part or sections
declared unconstitutional had never been a part thereof.
§ 265-1602. Repealer.
Enactment of this chapter shall act as a repeal of Ordinance No. 85-2,
the Tarentum Borough Zoning Ordinance and Map, and all subsequent
amendments thereto.
§ 265-1603. Adoption.
The Tarentum Borough Zoning Ordinance and Map, Ordinance No. 2 of
2011, duly ordained and enacted at a regular meeting of the Borough of
Tarentum, a full quorum being present, the first day of January, 2011.
§ 265-1601 WATER § 265-1603
256:527
Appendix
Chapter A271
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
§ A271-1. Grant of franchise.
A. In consideration of the continuing faithful performance and observance
of the conditions, reservations and agreements hereinafter contained,
the right is hereby granted to Comcast Cablevision of Westmoreland,
Inc. (hereinafter referred to as "Comcast"), a Pennsylvania corporation,
its successors and assigns, for a period of 15 years from the date hereof,
to erect, maintain and operate equipment and facilities for reception,
transmission and distribution of radio and television signals and audio,
visual, electric or electronic signals or impulses by any feasible
equipment within the Borough of Tarentum, Allegheny County,
Pennsylvania (hereinafter referred to as "borough"), and any extension
or expansion thereof and to locate, construct, renew, maintain, replace
and operate the facilities required therefor, in, on, under, over, along,
across and upon the streets, sidewalks, alleys, bridges, highways and
other public ways or places in the borough. At the expiration of 15
years, this franchise shall continue from year to year unless 90 days
prior to the expiration of any term either the borough or Comcast shall
notify the other party in writing that there shall be no further renewal.
These rights shall be exercised in accordance with the laws of the
Unites States of America, of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and
the ordinances, rules and regulations as shall be established from time
to time by the borough, as well as in conformity with rights presently
enjoyed by such utilities as the same now exist in the borough.
B. There is hereby further granted to Comcast, its successors and assigns,
subject to ordinances, rules and regulations of the borough, the right,
privilege and authority to lease, rent or in any other manner obtain the
use of towers, poles, lines, cables and other equipment and facilities
from any and all holders of public licenses or franchises within or
partially within the borough and to use such towers, poles, lines, cables
and other equipment and facilities. It is the intention that all other
holders of public licenses and franchises within the borough shall
cooperate with Comcast to allow Comcast's joint usage of their
equipment and facilities whenever possible and wherever such usage
does not interfere with the normal operation of such holders of public
licenses and franchises so that the equipment and facilities constructed
by Comcast may be minimized.
C. All equipment and facilities of Comcast with this borough may also be
used for the reception, transmission and distribution of radio and
television signals and audio, visual, electronic or electric signals or
impulses to or from areas outside of the borough.
§ 265-1603 TARENTUM CODE § A271-1
A271:528
§ A271-2. Equipment and facilities.
§ A271-3. Use of poles; indemnification.
D. During the fifth and 10th years of the term of this franchise, the
borough and Comcast may meet to review system performance. If after
such review the borough believes that Comcast is not in compliance
with the requirements of this franchise, it may direct Comcast to
correct the areas of noncompliance in accordance with the procedures
set forth in § A271-11.
A. All equipment and facilities installed by Comcast pursuant hereto shall
be located, erected and maintained so as not to endanger or interfere
with the lives of persons or to interfere with any new improvements the
borough may deem proper to make or to unnecessarily hinder or
obstruct the free use of the streets, sidewalks, alleys, bridges, highways
and other public ways or public places of the borough and shall be in
accordance with the ordinances, rules, regulations as shall be
established from time to time by the borough.
B. All installations shall be of a permanent, durable nature and shall be
installed in accordance with good engineering practices and shall
comply with all existing and future regulations, ordinances and laws so
as not to interfere with the right of the public or individual property
owners or other licenses and public utilities.
C. In the event Comcast is required to open or disturb any pavement,
sidewalk or surface, Comcast shall, at its own expense and only in the
manner approved by the borough, replace and restore all pavement,
sidewalks or surfaces so disturbed to as good condition as before said
work commenced and shall do so only under rules and regulations as
shall be established from time to time by the borough.
D. No equipment or facilities shall be erected by Comcast upon any
streets, sidewalks, alleys, bridges, highways or public ways or places
under the jurisdiction of the borough unless permission is first obtained
from the designated official of the borough in accordance with
ordinances, rules, regulations as shall be established from time to time
by the borough; provided, however, that such permission shall not be
unreasonably withheld.
E. In the event that a change is made in the grade of public streets,
sidewalks, alleys, bridges, highways or other public ways or places
which shall necessitate the removal or relocation of any equipment or
facilities of Comcast, Comcast shall make such changes in its facilities
at its own expense.
F. Comcast shall comply with a request for service in any area of the
borough with a minimum density of 15 homes per linear mile.
§ A271-1 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § A271-3
A271:529
§ A271-4. Insurance coverage.
A. Comcast shall grant the borough or its agents joint use of any and all
poles owned by Comcast for any proper municipal purpose to the extent
that such use does not interfere with Comcast's use and enjoyment of
its equipment and facilities. All equipment or facilities of the borough
on such poles shall be constructed and maintained at the sole expense
of the borough, in manner satisfactory to Comcast and in accordance
with Comcast's specifications.
B. The borough shall indemnify and hold harmless Comcast from all
claims, demands, actions, judgments, costs, expenses, liabilities and
damages of any kind whatsoever arising out of the use by the borough
of said facilities. The borough shall not be liable to Comcast for any
damages to the system that may occur as the result of some municipal
activity unless such damages are occasioned to the system as the result
of the negligence of an officer, agent, servant or employee of the
borough.
A. Comcast shall, at all times, keep in effect the following types of
insurance coverage:
(1) Workmen's compensation upon its employees employed or
performing services within the borough.
(2) Property damage liability insurance in the amount of $100,000 and
personal injury liability insurance in the amount of $300,000 as to
any one person and $300,000 as to any one accident.
B. Comcast shall indemnify, protect and save harmless the borough from
and against losses and physical damage to property and bodily injury or
death to persons, including payments made under any workmen's
compensation law, which may arise out of or be caused by the erection,
maintenance, presence, use or removal of Comcast's equipment or
facilities within the borough or by any act of Comcast, its agent,
employees and shall carry insurance in the above-described amounts to
protect the borough from and against all claims, demands, actions,
judgments, costs, expenses, liabilities and damages arising or resulting
directly or indirectly from or by reason of such loss, injury or damage.
Comcast shall also indemnify, protect and save harmless the borough
from any and all claims in law or in equity that the franchise herein
granted is illegally granted by the borough and shall pay all legal
expenses incurred by the borough in defending any claim that the
borough acted illegally in granting the franchise.
C. All insurance required shall be and remain in full force and effect for
the entire life of the rights granted hereunder. Said policy or policies of
insurance shall be approved by the Solicitor for the borough and the
policy or certificate therefor shall be deposited with the borough.
§ A271-3 TARENTUM CODE § A271-4
A271:530
§ A271-5. Inspection and regulation fee.
§ A271-6. Promulgation of charges and regulations.
D. Comcast shall indemnify, protect and save harmless the borough from
any losses to the borough arising out of Comcast's failure to secure
consents from the owners or licensees of any programs where consents
are required under applicable copyright laws, and Comcast shall repay
to the borough any damages and expenses which the borough shall be
compelled to pay by reason of such failure.
A. During the term of this franchise, Comcast shall pay to the borough as
an inspection and regulation fee a sum equal to 5% of Comcast's gross
receipts within the borough. Gross receipts shall include all monthly
charges for basic services, expanded basic service and premium and
pay-per-view programming, guides and ad sales but shall not include
moneys received for installation charges, reconnections, inspections,
leased channel revenues, repairs or modifications of any installation or
local, state or federal taxes or any other income derived from the
system. Such payments by Comcast to the borough shall be in lieu of
any other license tax or similar inspection fees.
B. Comcast shall file with the borough by the 20th day of the month
following the close of each quarter a statement showing the
subscription receipts as defined herein. The borough shall have the
right at any reasonable time to inspect the books of Comcast relative to
customers' services and fees received; provided, however, that the
borough shall not make public disclosure of any information gained as a
result of such inspection without prior written consent of Comcast.
C. Comcast shall provide one free initial installation of each school, library,
municipal building and fire hall within the service area, making no
charge whatsoever, either for installation or monthly rentals.
D. Comcast shall file with the borough a map showing the location of lines
and facilities and shall provide supplements showing extensions of such
lines and facilities annually if requested by the borough.
A. Comcast shall have the right to charge and collect compensation from
its subscribers for services rendered hereunder, including, without
being limited to, monthly or other periodic service charges and
compensation for connecting, reconnecting, inspecting, modifying,
repairing or servicing any installation; provided, however, that copies of
its subscription agreements and schedules of charges shall be filed with
the borough. The charge for multiple dwellings or commercial
establishments shall be on a negotiated basis with such customers.
B. Comcast shall have the right to make all rules and regulations
governing its services, provided that the same are uniform and not
inconsistent with the terms hereof and of other municipalities in this
service area.
§ A271-4 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § A271-7
A271:531
§ A271-7. Publication expenses.
Comcast shall reimburse the borough for expense incurred by it in
publication of this ordinance within 30 days after the borough shall furnish
Comcast with a written statement of such expense.
§ A271-8. Assignment of rights.
Comcast shall have the right to assign its rights and privileges hereunder,
subject to the terms and conditions herein imposed, such assignment to
become effective only upon the assignee's filing with the borough a written
acceptance of the rights and privileges hereby granted, subject to the terms
and conditions herein imposed.
§ A271-9. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
ordinance is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct
and independent provision and such holdings shall not affect the validity of
the remaining portions herein.
§ A271-10. Maintenance of system.
Comcast will keep the system free of interference to television receivers
and will provide all the necessary precautions to prevent interference; and
in compliance with this ordinance, will repair and maintain the system in a
trouble-free condition at no cost or charge to the subscriber or the borough.
§ A271-11. Failure to comply.
A. Should Comcast at any time fail to comply with any of the material
terms and provisions of this franchise, the Borough Secretary shall
notify Comcast in writing, setting the nature and fact of such
noncompliance as she believes has occurred. If, within 30 days
following receipt of such written notification, Comcast has not
furnished evidence that corrective action has been commenced and is
being actively pursued or evidence that the alleged default did not
occur, the Borough Secretary shall give written notice of not less than
20 days of a public hearing to be held before the Borough Council. Said
notice shall specify the violations alleged to have occurred.
B. If, after considering the Borough Secretary's request for termination of
the franchise and hearing all interested parties, the Council determines
that material violation has not occurred, the proceedings shall
terminate. If the Council determines that the noncompliance of
Comcast was with just cause, it shall direct Comcast to cure the default
within a reasonable time.
C. In the event the Council determines that material violations exist and
that Comcast has not corrected the same or has not commenced and is
§ A271-7 TARENTUM CODE § A271-11
A271:532
§ A271-12. Filing of acceptance.
This franchise shall not become effective unless Comcast shall file its
acceptance of the terms hereof within 30 days.
§ A271-13. State or federal law.
It is the intention of the borough that to the extent any provision of this
ordinance is superseded or preempted by any applicable state or federal
law, that the latter shall prevail.
Chapter A272
PENSION PLAN COMMITTEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Pensions — See Ch. 46.
diligently pursuing correction, the Council may revoke and terminate
this franchise.
D. No revocation or termination shall be effected unless the Council, at a
regular or special meeting at which all interested parties including
Comcast have been heard, shall have adopted a resolution setting forth
the reasons for the termination.
E. Comcast shall not be declared at fault or be subject to any sanction
under any provision of this franchise in any case in which performance
of any such provision is prevented for reasons beyond Comcast's
control.
§ A271-11 PENSION PLAN COMMITTEES § A271-13
A272:533

ARTICLE I
Police Pension Committee
[Adopted 6-21-1999 by Res. No. 99-7]
§ A272-1. Committee established.
Tarentum Borough hereby establishes a Pension Committee for its Police
Pension Plan, effective July 1, 1999.
§ A272-2. Committee membership.
The Pension Committee shall consist of one member of the Borough Council,
one representative of borough management and one active member of the
Pension Plan.
§ A272-3. Duties.
The Pension Committee shall meet periodically to review plan operation,
including, but not limited to, benefits, investment of funds and legislative
issues related to the plan.
§ A272-4. Reports.
The Pension Committee shall report to the Borough Council at least
annually with the status of the plan, including, but not limited to, plan
investment performance, actuarial soundness of the plan, legislative issues
related to the plan and plan costs.
§ A272-1 PENSION PLAN COMMITTEES § A272-4
A272:535

ARTICLE II
Nonuniformed Employees' Pension Committee
[Adopted 6-21-1999 by Res. No. 99-8]
§ A272-5. Committee established.
The Borough of Tarentum hereby establishes a Pension Committee for its
Nonuniformed Pension Plan effective July 1, 1999.
§ A272-6. Committee membership.
The Pension Committee shall consist of one member of the Borough Council,
one representative of borough management and one active member of the
Pension Plan.
§ A272-7. Duties.
The Pension Committee shall meet periodically to review plan operation,
including, but not limited to, benefits, investment of funds and legislative
issues related to the plan.
§ A272-8. Reports.
The Pension Committee shall report to the Borough Council at least
annually with the status of the plan, including, but not limited to, plan
investment performance, actuarial soundness of the plan, legislative issues
related to the plan and plan costs.
§ A272-5 PENSION PLAN COMMITTEES § A272-8
A272:537
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No. 96-8 9-9-1996 Traffic and parking
regulations amendment
Ch. 250
Ord. No. 96-9 12-9-1996 Traffic and parking
regulations amendment
Ch. 250
Ord. No. 96-10 12-9-1996 Garbage and rubbish
collection amendment
Ch. 210, Art. II
Ord. No. 96-11 12-9-1996 Tax levy NCM
Ord. No. 96-12 12-9-1996 Metered water rates
amendment
NCM
Ord. No. 97-1 10-13-1997 Electrical rates
amendment
NCM
Ord. No. 97-2 12-8-1997 Police Pension Plan
amendment
Ch. 46, Art. I
Ord. No. 97-3 12-8-1997 Tax levy NCM
Ord. No. 97-4 12-8-1997 Metered water rates
amendment
NCM
Ord. No. 97-5 12-8-1997 Garbage and rubbish
collection amendment
Ch. 210, Art. II
Ord. No. 98-1 2-16-1998 Repayment of debt NCM
Ord. No. 98-2 3-16-1998 Sidewalks amendment Ch. 216, Art. III
Ord. No. 98-3 3-16-1998 Street openings and
excavations
Ch. 216, Art. IV
Ord. No. 98-4 6-1-1998 Traffic and parking
regulations amendment
Ch. 250
Ord. No. 98-5 6-1-1998 Traffic and parking
regulations amendment
Ch. 250
Ord. No. 98-6 7-15-1998 Increase indebtedness NCM
Ord. No. 98-7 6-21-1998 Traffic and parking
regulations amendment
Ch. 250
Ord. No. 98-8 12-28-1998 Tax levy NCM
Res. 99-7 6-21-1999 Pension Committees Ch. A272, Art. I
Res. 99-8 6-21-1999 Pension Committees Ch. A272, Art. II
§ A272-8 TARENTUM CODE § DL-1
A272:538
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No. 99-1 6-21-1999 Intergovernmental
cooperation agreement
NCM
Ord. No. 99-2 12-27-1999 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. I
Ord. No. 99-3 12-27-1999 Tax levy NCM
Ord. No. 00-1 1-17-2000 Metered water rates
amendment
NCM
Ord. No. 00-2 11-20-2000 Brush, grass and weeds Ch. 92
Ord. No. 00-3 11-20-2000 Property condemnation NCM
Ord. No. 01-1 1-29-2001 Traffic and parking
regulations amendment
Ch. 250
Ord. No. 01-2 1-15-2001 Metered water rates
amendment
NCM
Ord. No. 01-3 1-29-2001 Tax levy NCM
Ord. No. 01-4 3-7-2001 Pensions: nonuniformed
employees amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 07-09
Ord. No. 01-5 7-16-2001 Metered water rates
amendment
NCM
Ord. No. 01-6 Number not used
Ord. No. 01-7 12-17-2001 Metered water rates
amendment
NCM
Ord. No. 01-8 12-17-2001 Garbage and rubbish
collection amendment
Ch. 210, Art. II
Ord. No. 02-1 1-7-2002 Tax levy NCM
Ord. No. 02-2 2-18-2002 Electrical rates
amendment
NCM
Ord. No. 02-3 4-15-2002 Police Pension Plan
amendment
Ch. 46, Art. I
Ord. No. 02-4 10-21-2002 Fire insurance Ch. 123
Ord. No. 02-5 10-21-2002 Street openings and
excavations amendment
Ch. 216, Art. IV
Ord. No. 03-1 12-16-2002 2003 real estate tax NCM
Ord. No. 03-2 2-17-2003 Traffic and parking
regulations
amendment; residential
parking districts
amendment
Ch. 250, Arts. III
and IV
Ord. No. 03-3 3-17-2003 Tax assessment
limitation program
Ch. 225, Art. IX
Ord. No. 03-4 3-10-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 265
§ DL-1 PENSION PLAN COMMITTEES § DL-1
A272:539
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No. 03-5 3-17-2003 Residential parking
districts amendment
Ch. 250, Art. IV
Ord. No. 03-6 6-16-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 265
Ord. No. 03-7 6-16-2003 Specific properties
required to connect to
sanitary sewer
NCM
Res. No. 03-8 6-16-2003 Police Pension Plan
amendment
Ch. 46, Art. I,
Editor's Note
Only
Ord. No. 03-8 7-21-2003 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
Ord. No. 04-01 1-5-2004 Tax levy NCM
Ord. No. 04-02 3-15-2004 Trash, rubbish and
garbage collection
rates
NCM
Ord. No. 04-03 3-15-2004 Uniform construction
code
Ch. 99
Ord. No. 04-04 5-17-2004 Traffic and parking
regulations amendment
Ch. 250, Art. III
Ord. No. 04-05 7-19-2004 Police Pension Plan Ch. 46, Art. I
Ord. No. 04-06 Sheriff sales Not adopted
Ord. No. 04-07 7-19-2004 Brake retarders Ch. 250, Art. V
Ord. No. 04-08 7-19-2004 Unauthorized posting
of signs, notices and
placards
Ch. 207, Art. I
Ord. No. 04-09 8-16-2004 Property maintenance Repealed by Ord.
No. 10-05
Ord. No. 04-10 10-18-2004 Water rates NCM
Ord. No. 05-01 1-17-2005 Tax levy NCM
Ord. No. 05-02 1-17-2005 Intergovernmental
agreement: police
protection
Ch. 35, Art. II
Ord. No. 05-03 2-21-2005 Taxation: emergency
and municipal services
tax
Repealed by Ord.
No. 07-08
Ord. No. 05-04 4-18-2005 Animals: regulation of
ownership and control
of dogs and cats
Ch. 88, Art. I
Ord. No. 05-05 6-20-2005 Incurrence of debt NCM
§ DL-1 TARENTUM CODE § DL-1
A272:540
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No. 06-01 5-15-2006 Traffic and parking
regulations amendment
Ch. 250, Art. III
Ord. No. 06-02 5-15-2006 Peace and good order:
excessive police calls
surtax
Ch. 179, Art. I
Ord. No. 06-03 Yearly permits required
for landlords of rental
properties
Not adopted
Ord. No. 06-04 Number not used
Ord. No. 06-05 6-19-2006 Cable television
franchise granted to
Salsgiver
Communications, Inc.
NCM
Ord. No. 06-06 Number not used
Ord. No. 06-07 10-16-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 265
Ord. No. 06-08 11-20-2006 Realty transfer tax Ch. 225, Art. X
Ord. No. 07-01 1-15-2007 Tax levy NCM
Ord. No. 07-02 1-15-2007 Water use amendment Ch. 256, Art. II
Ord. No. 07-03 1-15-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 265
Ord. No. 07-04 3-19-2007 Streets and sidewalks:
trees and vegetation
Ch. 216, Art. V;
239, reference
only
Ord. No. 07-05 3-19-2007 Attorney's fees for
recovery of municipal
liens and claims
Chs. 97, Art. I;
225, Art. VI,
footnote only
Ord. No. 07-06 5-21-2007 Property maintenance
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 10-05
Ord. No. 07-07 6-19-2007 Traffic and parking
regulations amendment
Ch. 250, Art. III
Ord. No. 07-08 11-19-2007 Local services tax
amendment
Ch. 225, Art. II
Ord. No. 07-09 11-19-2007 Pensions: nonuniformed
employees
Ch. 46, Art. II
Ord. No. 07-10 12-17-2007 Tax levy NCM
Ord. No. 07-11 12-17-2007 Solid waste: garbage
and rubbish collection
amendment
Ch. 210, Art. II
Ord. No. 08-01 3-17-2008 Traffic and parking
regulations amendment
Ch. 250, Art. III
§ DL-1 PENSION PLAN COMMITTEES § DL-1
A272:541
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No. 08-02 3-17-2008 Electrical rates
amendment
NCM
Ord. No. 08-03 4-21-2008 Vehicles and traffic:
tow-away zones
amendment
Ch. 250, Art. II
Ord. No. 08-04 Number not used
Ord. No. 08-05 8-18-2008 Taxation: local
economic revitalization
tax assistance (LERTA)
exemption
Ch. 225, Art. XI
Ord. No. 09-01 1-19-2009 Tax levy NCM
Ord. No. 09-02 2-16-2009 Electrical code
amendment
Ch. 111, Art. I
Ord. No. 09-03 4-20-2009 General obligation note NCM
Ord. No. 09-04 8-17-2009 Riverview Memorial
Park
Ch. 200
Ord. No. 09-05 8-17-2009 Traffic and parking
regulations amendment
Ch. 250, Art. III
Ord. No. 09-06 Number not used
Ord. No. 09-07 Number not used
Ord. No. 09-08 Number not used
Ord. No. 09-09 11-16-2009 Outdoor storage Ch. 175
Ord. No. 10-01 1-18-2010 Tax levy NCM
Ord. No. 10-02 1-18-2010 Street vacation NCM
Ord. No. 10-03 9-20-2010 Electric Department
Rules and Regulations;
rates
Ch. 111, Art. II
Ord. No. 10-04 9-20-2010 Police Pension Plan
amendment
See Ch. 46, Art. I
Ord. No. 10-05 10-18-2010 Property maintenance Ch. 190
Ord. No. 11-01 1-17-2011 Tax levy NCM
Ord. No. 11-02 9-19-2011 Rental units Ch. 198, Part 1
Ord. No. 11-03 9-19-2011 Denial of occupancy
permits for certain
rental dwellings
Ch. 198, Part 2
Ord. No. 11-04 11-2011 Street vacation NCM
Ord. No. 12-01 1-16-2011 Tax levy NCM
Ord. No. 12-02 1-16-2011 Zoning Ch. 265
§ DL-1 TARENTUM CODE § DL-1
A272:542
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No. 12-03 10-15-2012 Metered water rates
amendment
NCM
Ord. No. 13-01 1-21-2013 Tax levy NCM
Ord. No. 13-02 1-21-2013 Traffic and parking
regulations amendment
Ch. 250, Art. III
Res. No. 13-01 3-18-2013 Tree Stewardship
Committee
Ch. 75
Ord. No. 13-03 7-15-2013 Police Pension Plan
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 13-04
Ord. No. 13-04 8-19-2013 Police Pension Plan
amendment
See Ch. 46, Art. I
Ord. No. 13-05 9-16-2013 Traffic and parking
regulations amendment
Ch. 250, Art. III
Ord. No. 14-01 1-20-2014 Tax Levy NCM
Ord. No. 14-02 1-20-2014 Water Rates NCM
Ord. No. 14-03 9-15-2014 Building Construction:
Floodplain
Management
Amendment
Ch. 95, Art. III
Ord. No. 15-01 1-19-2015 Tax Levy NCM
Ord. No. 15-02 3-16-2015 Stormwater
Management
Ch. 214
Ord. No. 15-03 5-18-2015 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 250
Ord. No. 15-04 9-21-2015 General Obligation
Bond
NCM
Ord. No. 16-01 3-1-2016 General Obligation
Bond
NCM
Ord. No. 16-02 9-6-2016 Property Maintenance
Amendment
Ch. 190
Ord. No. 17-01 2-7-2017 Sale of Property NCM
Ord. No. 17-04 12-29-2017 Solid Waste: Solid
Waste
Ch. 210, Art. III
Ord. No. 17-05 12-18-2017 Police Pension Plan NCM
Ord. No. 17-06 12-29-2017 Tax Rate NCM
Ord. No. 18-01 5-3-2018 Theft of Services Ch. 228
§ DL-1 PENSION PLAN COMMITTEES § DL-1
A272:543
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No. 18-02 5-3-2018 Streets and Sidewalks:
Street Openings and
Excavations
Amendment
Ch. 216, Art. IV
Ord. No. 18-03 7-7-2018 Property Maintenance
Amendment
Ch. 190
Ord. No. 18-04 11-15-2018 Stormwater
Management
Amendment
Ch. 214
Ord. No. 18-05 12-27-2018 Tax Rate NCM
Ord. No. 18-06 12-27-2018 Intergovernmental
Agreement
NCM
Ord. No. 18-07 12-27-2018 Electric Service Ch. 109
§ DL-1 TARENTUM CODE § DL-1
A272:544